Theresa May and Camilla, Duchess of Cornwall are among figures backing a campaign to encourage survivors of sexual and domestic abuse to come forward for help through the NHS. The campaign, backed by a £20m boost to specialist services, comes on the first day of Sexual Abuse and Sexual Violence Awareness Week. NHS England (NHSE) said the campaign was intended to highlight the support offered at dozens of sexual assault referral centres (SARCs) in England. The service is also creating two new clinical lead roles for domestic violence and sexual assault. NHSE said the 24-hour centres offered confidential specialist, practical, medical and emotional support to anyone who has been raped, sexually assaulted or abused, no matter when it happened. May, whose government introduced the domestic abuse bill that finally passed into legislation last year, said survivors needed to know “the NHS is there for them”. “Sadly incidents of domestic abuse and sexual assault increased during lockdown and the extra funding for services for victims of abuse and sexual violence is much needed,” the former prime minister said. “Dedicated domestic violence support for the NHS and integrated care systems is particularly welcome as local medical care plays an important role in identifying abuse and supporting victims.” Camilla has highlighted the issue of domestic abuse for a number of years and NHSE said she would visit a centre this week to meet survivors of sexual assault to hear more about their experiences and the care they receive through SARCs. A short video raising awareness of the help offered by specialist centres has been released as part of the campaign, which is supported by organisations and charities including the Survivors Trust, SafeLives and the Male Survivors Partnership, a NHSE said that despite official figures showing that domestic abuse and sexual assault had increased in the pandemic, the number of people receiving help from SARCs halved after the first lockdown compared with 2019. Laura Currer, the chair of the national NHS England sexual abuse and assault services lived experience group, said: “I know from experience how hard it can be to seek help in these situations, but after I was assaulted I will never forget the kind, caring and compassionate staff at SARCs who were there to hold my hand during one of the worst moments of my life. “They explained the whole process to me, and gave me the space and autonomy over my body that my attackers had taken away, and I will be forever grateful. “I urge anyone who needs support, no matter when it took place, to come forward – you are not alone, and the wonderful teams at SARCs are there to help 24/7.”Brick Lane author Monica Ali has said it felt like an “obliteration of the self” when people were confused that she chose to write a novel about what might have happened if Diana, Princess of Wales had not died in a car accident, rather than about “brown people”. The novelist said she became depressed when her 2011 book Untold Story was met with “bafflement”. She told The Big Issue: “I think I was really naive in thinking that I could write about whatever I wanted, like a white male writer can.” Ali, who is of Bangladeshi and English heritage, gained national attention in 2003 with her debut novel, Brick Lane, which was shortlisted for the Booker prize and detailed the immigrant milieu of east London. Her fourth and most recent novel, Love Marriage, follows a 10-year gap in which Ali said she suffered a “catastrophic” loss of confidence. She told the magazine: “Ten years ago I stopped writing. And then I got depressed. … And the depression made me less able to write and so it became this downward spiral. I lost my confidence.” Ali said writing about “such a wide variety” of subjects following the publication of Brick Lane “confused people”. “The response was bafflement. I remember one critic saying about Untold Story, ‘a curious marriage of author and subject matter’. People would ask ‘Are you trying to get away from something?’ To me the question they really seemed to be asking was ‘Are you trying to get away from brown people? Are you trying to get away from your ethnicity?’” Ali said. “I understand that it confused people but … my mum’s white, my father’s Bengali, I was born in Dhaka but I’ve lived here all my life. So, I felt I was being entirely true to who I am. It’s taken me a lot of therapy to understand that, for me, that reaction felt like a kind of obliteration of the self,” she added. “That sounds like hyperbole, but actually, I’m not exaggerating; this idea that I have to choose to be one thing or the other – it’s existential. I’m not one thing or the other, I’m both. And I’m glad to be both. So, I think that critical reaction made me feel things which went very deep, which led to the loss of confidence and depression and all of that.”The clue for 11 across is normal. All other clues consist of two cryptic clues, side by side. The two solutions they generate are to be entered side by side in the grid but cyclically, starting anywhere in the designated space. All 26 of the letters A to Z appear once around the perimeter of the grid. Across 8 combined/atavism COMB  ED + A&lt;1/VAST(anag)&gt;M(erican) 9 reckoned/dullest RE  D + DU  ST 10 popinjay/Austria POP/IN/JAY + AUSTR(a/l)IA 11 television set TIES NOVEL TIES (anag) 12 Longfellow/sever LONG/FELLOW + VERSE (anag) 13 holdalls/Trojans H  ALLS + JAN(uary) in SORT (anag) [Paris was one] 14 vied/asseverated VI  D(eo) + ASS/EVE/RATED Down 1 equivocal/treble EQUI(d)/VOCAL + TRE(m)BLE 2 fall flat/lazy eye FALL(autumn) FLAT + I (hom) after LA  Y 3 disavow/somewhat OVID WAS (anag) + SO/ME/WHAT 4 advisable/rasher AS BAD VILE (anag) + double def 5 textile/baroness T(rilby)/EX/TILE + BAR  S 6 matrons/El Dorado MA + SNORT (rev) 7 disprove/listing D(etective)I(nspector)/S(pecial)PRO/V(ic)EThe legacy of The Invisible Man is open-ended. The 1897 tale by HG Wells is a thrilling read, but its lasting impact is less as a story than a concept. Where the novella gave us an arrogant scientist roaming unseen across the Sussex downs after violent attacks on the locals, subsequent adaptations have repurposed the idea of invisibility for their own ends. In Leigh Whannell’s 2020 screen version, the invisibility of Oliver Jackson-Cohen in the title role becomes a metaphor for his coercive control over Elisabeth Moss as his abused partner. Like many a gaslighter before him, he does not need to be seen to be obeyed. For actor-turned-playwright Philip Correia, the vanishing act is an analogy for social invisibility. Played by a brooding Daniel Watson, Simon Griffin is a young Northumberland man heading to a secure unit in Morpeth, thanks to a history of fire-raising. “No one in authority had known anything about Simon Griffin,” says one of his assessors. He has been excluded from school and excluded from society. Behind his illiteracy lurks an awesome intellect, but he is invisible to the world even before turning transparent. His psychiatrist Sara Kemp has the opposite problem. Played by a spirited Kate Louise Okello, she is “too white to be black, too black to be white,” and feels forever visible. She wants Griffin to be seen for what he is but, as the case becomes notorious, finds herself in the spotlight instead. All this is resonant stuff, but rather than drive the action, it mostly sits on top of it. Apart from a vicar who believes the poor are responsible for their own misfortune, we don’t see anyone actively excluding Griffin. Nor does anyone racially discriminate against Kemp. We only have their word for it. It’s not just that Anna Girvan’s production, in which every character is unaccountably bad-tempered, is stuck in the psychiatrist’s room when it could be exploring the theatrical possibilities of invisibility. It’s also that, despite the questions of a public inquiry, a TV news reporter and Kemp herself, Griffin and his motives remain elusive – see-through to the last. • At Northern Stage, Newcastle, until 19 February, and touring until 26 March. Available online 10-19 February.The Miami Dolphins have appointed San Francisco 49ers offensive coordinator Mike McDaniel as their new head coach. McDaniel will replace Brian Flores, who was fired on 10 January and has since filed a lawsuit that alleges the NFL “is racially segregated and is managed much like a plantation”. McDaniel, who identifies as multiracial, is now one of only four minority head coaches in the NFL along with the Pittsburgh Steelers’ Mike Tomlin, the Washington Commanders’ Ron Rivera and Robert Saleh of the New York Jets. McDaniel is the first person of color to land a head coaching job in this cycle. The 38-year-old McDaniel did not play football at any significant level and studied history at Yale before interning at the Denver Broncos. He slowly worked his way up the NFL ladder, becoming the 49ers’ offensive coordinator in January 2021. McDaniel is seen as one of a number of innovative young coaches in the NFL, and the 49ers reached the NFC conference game this season, beating the No 1 seed Green Bay Packers along the way. McDaniel helped develop Deebo Samuel into a dual threat as a receiver and rusher, and the player was named an All-Pro this season. “He’s one of the smartest coaches I’ve been around,” said 49ers coach Kyle Shanahan of McDaniel last month. “… He’s been huge to our team and huge for me throughout my entire career.”Political interference in research grants poses an “existential threat” to universities, the Australian National University vice-chancellor has warned. On Monday Prof Brian Schmidt said he was “dismayed” that the education minister had interfered in the awarding of Australian Research Council grants before Christmas, and took aim at both major parties for backing the power to override independent recommendations. On Christmas Eve the acting minister, Stuart Robert, revealed that the government had nixed six grants for proposed research relating to climate activism and China, prompting a widespread backlash from academics. In his state of the university address, Schmidt said there had only been “four known occurrences of political interference” in the Australian Research Council grant process – three of which were in the last three years. “As things stand, both major parties agree it is appropriate for the minister to wield this power,” he said. “Political interference has bipartisan support. I see this as an existential threat to Australian universities. “My strong view, a view held by many university leaders, whether they say it out loud or not, is Australia needs an apolitical system to allocate research funding and a review of the Australian Research Council.” Schmidt said political interference “can corrupt knowledge and slow down its creation” argued that academic independence is “one of democracy’s key advantages over other forms of governments”. “[It] allows us to pursue ideas across a broad spectrum of possibilities. We don’t just focus on what is known or thought relevant or acceptable at the time.” Schmidt asked: “What would our society be like when the study of history, politics and literature has to reflect the views of the minister of the day? “Where would we be if we hadn’t been working on climate mitigation strategies for the past 30 years while the merchants of doubt sowed their seeds? “What if we hadn’t invested in understanding the foundational properties of messenger RNA when it seemed just a dalliance with no practical benefits?” A petition with nearly 1,500 signatories, including those of high-profile authors JM Coetzee, Michelle de Kretser, Alexis Wright and Amanda Lohrey, has called for Robert “to reinstate the defunded projects and commit to legislating the complete independence of the ARC from government interference and censorship”. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning In 2018 the Coalition government vetoed 11 grants in the humanities approved by the Australian Research Council on topics including legal secularism, and gender norms in China. In the speech Schmidt revealed that the ANU had run a surplus in 2021 due to a “better than expected result” because of one-offs including insurance payments, government research support and investment gains, alongside a “substantial amount” from unfilled positions. He committed to fill the positions, despite acknowledging this would result in deficits in 2022 and 2023. “We are still likely to need to take on debt over the coming years but I remain confident we will not have to make any more cuts,” he said. “We are leaner, but not meaner.”Facebook has lost a major battle with the Australian regulator over the Cambridge Analytica scandal, after a court dismissed the social media giant’s claim that it neither conducts business nor collects personal information in the country. The Office of the Australian Information Commissioner (OAIC) is suing Facebook, now Meta, for breaching the privacy of more than 300,000 Australian Facebook users in the Cambridge Analytica scandal, exposed more than four years ago by the Guardian. Throughout the 2010s, consulting firm Cambridge Analytica harvested the personal data of millions of Facebook users without their consent using a personality test app called This is Your Digital Life. The information was then used predominantly for political advertising, including to assist the Brexit campaign and Donald Trump. Only 53 people in Australia installed the This is Your Digital Life app, according to court documents, but it was able to harvest the data of about 311,127 people. The OAIC was slow to launch a case against Facebook for the privacy breaches compared with other jurisdictions, announcing proceedings in 2020 in the federal court, where it alleged “serious and/or repeated interferences with privacy in contravention of Australian privacy law”. It sought to sue the parent company Facebook Inc, based in the US, and its Irish subsidiary, Facebook Ireland Limited. Facebook Inc has since attempted to have the case against it effectively thrown out, arguing it does not carry out business or collect or hold personal information in Australia, so it cannot be sued under the country’s privacy laws. The full bench of the federal court on Monday threw out the argument, describing parts of Facebook’s case as “divorced from reality”. It found the social media giant’s installation of cookies on the physical devices of Australian users was enough to show it was carrying out business in Australia. “There is a readily available inference that Facebook Inc installs cookies on devices in Australia on behalf of Facebook Ireland as part of its business of providing data processing services to it,” justice Nye Perram said in his reasons. “Further, it is clear that Facebook Ireland’s use of cookies (installed and removed by Facebook Inc) forms an important part of the operation of the Facebook platform. “It is not an outlier activity. It is one of the things ‘which makes Facebook work’.” The court also rejected Facebook’s argument that such a finding would “open the floodgates”, by assuming any website that is accessible in Australia is carrying on business in Australia. “The menace of opened floodgates from which Facebook Inc was commendably keen to protect the Australian legal system, is in my view very much overstated,” Perram said. The court was also scathing of a comparison by Facebook of its business to the process of sending mail by post. Facebook said that what had happened in this case was that its datacentres had transmitted digital signals to user devices, and that this transmission had brought about a change to the digital state of those devices. This was likened to the act of sending a letter from overseas to Australia, which prompted its reader to do something that had an economic impact. This, the company said, could never be construed as the sender having conducted business in Australia. “The problems with this submission are first that it proves far too much, and secondly that it is, with respect, divorced from reality,” the court ruled. “It proves too much because it has the consequence that no computer-based activity in one jurisdiction can ever amount to more than an effect in computers located in another.” The full bench’s decision confirms an earlier ruling made by federal court justice Thomas Thawley and follows an appeal by Facebook. The OAIC said in a statement that it welcomed the court’s decision and now looked forward to the hearing of the case proper. Meta said it was reviewing the ruling and had no immediate comment.The Māori party of New Zealand has called for a “divorce” from the crown and removal of the British royal family as New Zealand’s head of state. The call came on the 182nd anniversary of the signing of the treaty of Waitangi, or Te Tiriti o Waitangi, New Zealand’s foundational legal document. “If you look at our founding covenant as a marriage between tangata whenua [indigenous people] and the crown, then Te Tiriti is the child of that marriage. It’s time [for] tangata whenua to take full custody,” Māori Pāti co-leader Rawiri Waititi said. “This won’t mean the crown is off the hook. If a couple gets divorced, you don’t lose responsibility for your child. This will be an opportunity to reimagine a more meaningful and fulfilling partnership,” he said. The treaty guaranteed Māori the crown’s protection of their land rights. But in the 100 years that followed its signing, Māori lost more than 90% of their land through a mixture of outright confiscation by the crown, private or government sales, and land court practises that did not recognise collective ownership. Past pushes for New Zealand to become a republic has struggled to gain momentum. Polling from Colmar Brunton in 2021 found a third of New Zealanders wanted to cut ties with the monarchy, while 47% did not and 20% did not know. The prime minister, Jacinda Ardern, has said she is a republican, and in 2021 she said she believed New Zealand would become a republic in her lifetime – but that she would not take action on it during her term. Speaking at the announcement of governor general Cindy Kiro, Ardern said she had had “never sensed urgency” from the public to make it happen. “I’ve been very clear that despite being a republican, I’m not of the view that in the here-and-now … this is something New Zealanders feel particularly strongly about,” she said. “I don’t know that I’ve had one person actually raise with me generally day-to-day the issue of becoming a republic. This government has prioritised those issues that we do see as a priority. But I do still think there will be a time and a place; I just don’t see it as now.” The call for removing the Queen as head of state is a shift in policy for the Māori party, which in 2017 objected to calls for a republic from within Labour. “Removing the Queen as our head of state removes the treaty of Waitangi and Māori rights in this country guaranteed to us under our nation’s founding document,” then-leader Te Ururoa Flavell said at the time. “Given our colonial history and the systematic stripping away of Māori land, rights and resource, any talk about cutting ties with the Queen, or establishing a republic is an extremely naive move.” Under current leadership, the Māori party holds two seats in New Zealand’s parliament, and is pushing for constitutional reform in New Zealand, including the establishment of a Māori parliament. “The only way this nation can work is when Māori assert their rights to self-management, self-determination and self-governance over all our domains. Our vision is for constitutional transformation that restores the tino rangatiratanga [full sovereignty] of tangata whenua in this country,” co-leader Debbie Ngarewa-Packer said.A lifetime of hard work, sacrifice and dedication had culminated in the realisation of a childhood dream, and Jakara Anthony was not quite ready to call it a day. “It’s 5am here and I have not been to bed yet, so it has been a big night,” Australia’s latest Olympic hero said, hours after winning her country’s first gold medal of the Beijing Games. Her barnstorming victory in the women’s moguls wrote a new chapter in the annals of the country’s sporting history, as the 23-year-old blitzed the rest of the field over two days of competition to break Australia’s 12-year Winter Games gold medal drought. Anthony, who placed fourth on her Olympic debut four years ago in Pyeongchang, dominated the competition on the slopes of the Zhangjiakou mountains. She led through every round before scoring 83.09 points in the six-woman super final to ensure she entered an exclusive club. Only Steven Bradbury, Alisa Camplin, Dale Begg-Smith, Torah Bright and Lydia Lassila had previously won gold at a Winter Olympics – the last two victories coming as long ago as the 2010 Vancouver Games. Anthony’s win also marked the first time in history that Australia has won more than one medal on the same day of Winter Olympic competition, after Tess Coady picked up a bronze in the women’s snowboard slopestyle earlier on Sunday. “It’s been very, very exciting,” Anthony said after celebrations went through the night. “Actually I haven’t really slept so it seems like the same day. It’s all still sinking in but I was so grateful to be able to celebrate with my team last night and share the experience with Tess, both getting podiums on the same day. It’s all really sinking in.” Lassila – one of Australia’s greatest Winter Olympians, with a gold and bronze in the women’s aerials to her name – was in tears alongside Camplin – Australia’s assistant chef de mission at these Games – as she paid tribute after the final to Anthony’s resilience and skill. “It was wild, wasn’t it. Because all six of the girls in the super final put down very respect able and solid runs,” Lassila said. “It was a great contest. She did not crumble. She did not falter. She did exactly the same run that she has been doing all week. She just controlled the contest from start to finish. That is what you call pure dominance. It is just so beautiful when you get to witness it like this. It has been a bloody 12-year drought and I’m glad it’s over.” Anthony had switched off from the distractions of social media to better prepare for her tilt towards gold in China, but with the medal safely pocketed, she was able to log back in on Monday – to a deluge of congratulatory messages. “Scrolling through I haven’t had time to read them but there is an enormous amount of messages of support,” she said. “Amazing to see how many people have gotten behind us and are reaching out to show their support. I’m pretty flattered, it’s incredible.” Camplin, also a mentor to Anthony as well as winner of Australia’s second-ever Winter Games gold in 2002, said it was a “special moment”: both for Anthony, and for a nation not used to its athletes standing on the top step of the podium. “She’s just an absolute champion” Camplin said. “She’s worked so hard for this. So steely under pressure. I’m just so incredibly proud. We’ve had amazing people along the way – people that came before me, after me. It sets the standard and also [builds] a lot of love. “There’s a real family magic in this team right now. We really care about each other; it’s not just about the skiing. It’s about being good people and being there for each other through thick and thin, knowing you’re safe no matter what the outcome of the day. It just allows people to fly.” Anthony, from the Victorian coastal town of Barwon Heads, began skiing at the age of four. She made her World Cup debut at 16, before taking her Olympic bow at 19, four years ago. Taking inspiration from teammate Britt Cox, who competed at the Vancouver Games aged just 15, Anthony began to dream of Olympic gold. A silver medal at the 2019 World Championships and three World Cup golds followed, before she came fourth at the 2021 World Championships to set up a run for gold in Beijing. “It was my childhood dream come true and that is something so special,” she said. “I was so lucky to be able to share that with my team there and have everybody back home watching it and it was just an incredible experience. “It has taken a lot of work and there have been a lot of really tough times, but the processes that we have put in place and have really committed to solidifying have really shown to come through with the goods.”When they let you through the security gate at the Neighbours studio, something magical happens. It’s not finding out the food at Harold’s is real, though it is. And it’s not realising the Erinsborough High quad is also where they filmed Prisoner, though that’s true too. No, stepping into that Nunawading studio is a wormhole to a simpler time, where no one has a real job, drama is just drama, and the people next door have become good friends. As anyone who’s spent even five minutes believing Jesse Spencer was their soulmate knows, Neighbours has spent nearly 40 years teaching us how to feel. Ramsay Street is where we met and lost Stingray, Drew Kirk and Helen Daniels, and where Billy and Anne held hands for the first time. On our small screens we watched Margot Robbie blossom, Harold Bishop get swept out to sea and Toadie churn through a confusing number of beautiful wives. And didn’t we all feel it when Susan finally slapped her serial cheat good-for-nothing husband across the face? The news that Neighbours is likely to stop filming this year if Network Ten can’t find another backer, after the UK’s Channel 5 announced it is axing the show, is devastating. As teenagers in Australia in the 90s, knowing we were months ahead on our soaps was one of the few joys we had. I had an English penpal and all she wanted from me were Neighbours spoilers and Caramello Koalas. I held those Erinsborough secrets so tight. I wasn’t about to let her in on Karl meeting his lovechild or Hannah Martin getting a hot pixie cut. Neighbours was an international currency, vital in connecting us with distant friends and relatives. And I’m not ready to let it go. Working at Neighbours was my dream job. I had literally written on a piece of paper “DREAM JOB” in capital letters and then underneath, “Work on Neighbours”. I’d been watching it since I was in primary school, when Daphne woke from a coma to croak, “I love you too, Clarkey,” before carking it. Every night I raced through dinner so I’d be in front of the TV in time for the beloved theme music. By some cosmic intervention, I got my dream job, spending my days filming behind-the-scenes videos for the show and arguing with fans on Twitter. It was heaven. For two years I drove through that security entrance and into another world. And almost every day, the tour bus came through and unloaded a new batch of British tourists who’d been waiting for this moment their entire lives. They were more excited about it than their own wedding days. They clambered out of their seats, sometimes in tears, shrieking at everything they saw: “That’s Sheila’s backyard! That’s the gazebo where Kate was shot! That’s where Toadie’s third wedding exploded!” For me, it was like seeing it afresh every time. I had a new appreciation for these stories, each one cutting to the heart of what it means to be human, what it is like living in a cul-de-sac that’s surely cursed. What has this show been but reckless, beautiful chaos to remind us we’re alive? We’ve had evil triplets, localised tornadoes, retrograde amnesia, light plane crashes, hotel fires, identity theft, surrogacy, affairs, bombs, explosions and lawyers. Neighbours is where we realised people could go on cruises and never come back, long before Covid made it true. It’s always been different from Australia’s other, beachier soaps. There were no gangs or outlaws, and rarely a bikini. When characters went missing presumed dead on a school camp, it felt as though it could have been any one of us. Erinsborough wasn’t flashy: it was your suburb, where the school principal was also your best mate’s dead dad’s widow who was once in love with a priest. You know? It was the simplicity of being part of a community. The quintessential Australian way of life. The last time I left the Neighbours studio, I cried. I drove to Pin Oak Court, the real-life street where the houses are, and got out of my car. I did one loop of the dead end, and another. I sat in the middle of the road and the security guard who stops people from breaking into the houses looked at me and he didn’t kick me out. He just nodded. It hadn’t been my dream job – it was the backdrop of my whole life. So, maybe Neighbours’ time is up. Or maybe this is just the time before the bomb explodes and Lou’s Place is obliterated, destined to be restored to even greater heights. On our tellies for another 40 years, teaching us how to feel.Nations think nothing of directing their rage at women, particularly non-compliant women. This is because they still think they own them. Recently that rage was directed at Grace Tame, a young activist and 2021 Australian of the Year, for failing to perform the required etiquette around the hallowed presence of power, the Australian prime minister. As is often the case with women, the nation and the government both misunderstood Tame’s moment and how it symbolises women’s state of rage right now. When the Australian government resumes parliamentary sittings this week, it will find itself in a stand-off with Australian women. It has already been in this impasse for some time, and as it has with almost every social issue, it lurches from disorientation to impetuousness to performative compliancy and then back to its signature approach to women: belligerence. In its few moments of clarity, the government thinks that the battle with women is one of attrition. All it has to do is wait us out or stare us down. Eventually we’ll be distracted by the host of other social justice issues that society deems is the burden of our gender: in our Covid context these are aged care homes, access to health services, care of the vulnerable and inclusion of the marginalised in our decision-making as we deal with an ever-evolving pandemic. Anyone who doesn’t think that women carry the overwhelming burden of responsibility in these areas need only look at who are the foot soldiers at the frontline. For this impasse to be resolved and for that rage to have any redemptive value, it must have a tangible outcome that empowers women. Right now, that outcome must be the Australian sex discrimination commissioner Kate Jenkins’s Set the Standard report. The report found a culture of inequality, bullying and sexual harassment and detailed the litany of gendered practices that disempower and diminish women in the Australian parliament. To reform that existing toxic culture requires the adoption of all 28 recommendations outlined in the report. The government has in fact committed to the Jenkins recommendations, announcing in December its intention to implement the report’s first two recommendations before parliament sits this week. On Friday, it announced a multiparty leadership taskforce had been established to oversee the implementation of the recommendations and had met for the first time on Thursday. The taskforce had apparently discussed making a statement of acknowledgment, which was the first recommendation of the Jenkins review, and the establishment of a parliamentary committee. It is crucial to ensure that the government follows through with its commitment to implement all of the commissioner’s recommendations even as it fails to fully comprehend the stand-off it’s in with women. The government’s political stratagem of media managing women’s issues only further enrages women. It is impossible to tally all the actions that have produced the impasse we’re in. There are decades of neglect, failure to protect, and refusal to provide the policy context or deploy programs to facilitate and create the social conditions in which women can thrive. And yet, for all that has happened: the sexual harassment allegations, the harassment of female parliamentarians, the alleged rape and white-anting of former Liberal staffer Brittany Higgins, the denigration and undermining of Tame as she time and again questioned the prime minister’s stated commitment to furthering the status of women. One cannot help but wonder if the government’s choices are less a failure of understanding and more a compulsion to silence women who exercise the power that they are given. It is not only that the government seems unable to understand that its relationship with women has changed; it’s angry. The entitlement synonymous with privileged white masculinity cannot be assumed any more. It cannot simply act in its self-interest. Commissioner Jenkins’s recommended reforms are often justified on officious grounds. She has stated that the recommendations aim “to bring parliamentary workplaces into line with the standards expected of all modern Australian workplaces”. But the report matters beyond that. It will protect the safety of women and the wellbeing of those in parliament and commonwealth parliamentary workplaces (CPWs). Significantly, its importance for ordinary women will reside in its ability to test in a demonstrable way whether those who govern us can live and work in an environment that does not subject women to violence and inequality as a matter of daily practice. Are those who are used to exercising power able to accept it has its limits? Are they able to conceive of women as absolutely their equals? If this sounds like hyperbole, note that Jenkins repeatedly brought attention to the misuse of power as being “one of the primary drivers of misconduct”, that interviewees stressed that those who engaged in misconduct were very often rewarded, and that lack of accountability and culture of entitlement and exclusion reigned. Parliament is not only a concentration of power, it is also designed to rely on a critical disempowered mass, and that mass is women. The report notes “the privilege of some groups of people, and the marginalisation and exclusion of others”. Parliament does not mirror the society it governs, it creates it in its own image; it privileges power, masculinity and racial homogeneity. Women’s rage represents how they will no longer be diminished nor languish unprotected on the periphery, and this impasse will not resolve until that rage is taken seriously. • Joumanah El Matrah is a PhD student at Western Sydney University. She is a former CEO, researcher, community worker and advocate for migrant and Muslim women’s issuesThe head of Brisbane’s Citipointe megachurch has told worshippers to lobby MPs about proposed religious freedom and sexual discrimination laws, after the church school’s failed attempt to introduce enrolment contracts with anti-gay and anti-trans provisions. On Sunday, Citipointe senior global pastor Mark Ramsey apologised to his Pentecostal churchgoers for any “confusion and pain that people felt this week”, before leading parishioners in a standing ovation for Brian Mulheran, the Citipointe Christian College principal, who has currently stood aside. Mulheran announced on Friday he would take “extended leave” after significant community backlash against his attempts to force families to sign the contracts. Guardian Australia has learnt Mulheran’s decision to stand aside came after he was confronted by a group of the college’s senior teachers, who demanded he leave the school immediately or face the prospect of significant staff resignations. The contracts, which were abandoned on Thursday, described homosexuality as “immoral”, listing it alongside bestiality and pedophilia, and said students would only be enrolled on the basis of their biological sex. The following afternoon, senior teachers confronted Mulheran about his handling of the issue and other underlying concerns about the direction of the school. They warned that if he was still at the school on Monday, a significant group of teachers would resign. The situation remains fraught and it is understood at least three teachers have already quit. Several families, including some teachers, have withdrawn their children from the college. A group of concerned school parents say Mulheran – who could still return to the school after his leave – must now formally resign. Adding to parent and teacher concerns is the way the Pentecostal church has responded to the situation. Citipointe Christian College is not a standalone entity – it is constituted as a ministry of the church and its parent organisation, the Christian Outreach Centre/International Network of Churches. Video of Sunday’s sermon shows Ramsey praise Mulheran from the pulpit, prompting parishioners to stand and applaud for 40 seconds. “I want you to know today that pastor Brian Mulheran is one of the kindest, (most) caring people on planet Earth,” Ramsey said. Ramsey also addressed the contracts. He apologised for any “confusion and pain that people felt this week”, and said the church would seek to “reword” its statement of faith, which was the source of the anti-gay and anti-trans statements included in the abandoned enrolment contract. He said the aim of a new statement would be “keeping truth, but explaining it better”. “Please be assured that the way this is being handled, though you might not understand all of it, is the very best way forward for pastor Brian, our Christian community and our college,” Ramsey said. “We’ve been asked the question why we would we issue an amendment to the enrolment agreement that says the college will only enrol a student on the basis of gender that corresponds with their biological sex. “Well, it’s biblical truth.” He then encouraged worshippers to “engage with your members of parliament” around religious freedom and sex discrimination laws. After a week of intense media scrutiny, Ramsey started his sermon with a joke. “I just want to start by saying that Citipointe church is no longer Brisbane’s best kept secret,” Ramsey said. He later said “the majority” of parents at the school agreed with the long-held traditional Christian doctrine and it was one of the reasons they choose the college over another school. “We believe faith groups must be able to align with their faith.” One teacher who contacted Guardian Australia on Monday said Ramsey’s sermon had only served to reinforce concerns within the school community. “I’ve just got no confidence that the church is taking this as seriously as it needs to,” the teacher said. Ramsey and Mulheran could not be contacted for this story. In withdrawing the contracts last week, Mulheran said in a statement that he deeply regretted that some students felt discriminated against because of their sexuality or gender identity. “As stated previously, the college does not and will not discriminate against any student because of their sexuality or gender identity.”French president Emmanuel Macron believes he can deliver “a historic solution” to the Ukraine crisis ahead of his arrival in Moscow for talks with Russian president Vladimir Putin. After a flurry of diplomatic activity that included talks with US president Joe Biden this weekend and three phone calls with Putin, Macron will land in Moscow on Monday seeking a “de-escalation” of the tense standoff on Ukraine’s eastern borders. Russia has denied planning to invade Ukraine but has tens of thousands of troops near its neighbour’s borders, prompting the US to order about 3,000 extra troops to bolster Nato’s eastern flank in Poland and Romania. The White House believes Moscow has assembled at least 70% of the firepower it needs to give Vladimir Putin the option of a major military operation by mid-February. The US national security adviser, Jake Sullivan, said on Sunday that an invasion could take place “as soon as tomorrow”. However, Macron told the Journal du Dimanche newspaper on Sunday that Russia’s objective was “not Ukraine, but a clarification of the rules … with Nato and the EU”. It was therefore “urgent to advance towards a new order which our Europe needs profoundly and which rests on the cardinal principle of sovereign equality among states”, he told the paper. He said his dialogue with Putin would probably be enough to prevent military conflict breaking out despite the pessimistic assessments in many western capitals. “The intensity of the dialogue we have had with Russia and this visit to Moscow are designed to stop that happening,” Macron said. “Then we will discuss the terms of de-escalation. We have to be very realistic. We will not obtain unilateral gestures, but it’s essential to stop the situation deteriorating.” Macron, whose diplomacy has been strengthened by France being the current holder of the European presidency, said he had “always been in a deep dialogue with president Putin and our responsibility is to build a historic solution” to the problem of European security. “I believe President Putin is available for this,” Macron said. The French leader, who faces a presidential election challenge from far-right candidates in April, will travel to Kyiv on Tuesday for talks with Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy. While Macron is in Moscow, the German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, will be in Washington for talks with Joe Biden on Monday, aiming to narrow differences between the US and German approach to the crisis. Berlin has been criticised by some Nato allies for not supplying Ukraine with weapons. “There are strict export criteria we are following on the export of weapons into crisis regions,” Scholz told the Washington Post on the eve of his White House visit, and pointed to other ways in which Germany was helping Ukraine, including $2 bn in economic aid over seven years. He also noted that his government was contributing to a Nato effort to reinforce the alliance’s eastern flank, with hundreds of troops deployed in Lithuania, fighter jets in Romania and plans to send more warplanes to the Baltic. There are still differences however between Washington and Berlin over the response if Russia attacks Ukraine. The US has said the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline from Russia to Germany would not open. Scholz’s government has not been as categorical and the chancellor said the situation required “strategic ambiguity”. “Please understand that I will not get into any specifics, but our answer will be united and decisive,” he said.” Amid a weeks-long military buildup, Moscow has said it could take unspecified military action if its security demands are not met. Those include a promise that Nato will never admit Ukraine, a demand the United States and Nato have called unacceptable. Western governments have promised to protect Ukraine’s sovereignty and Boris Johnson has warned Russia it would be a “tragic miscalculation” to invade its neighbour. US officials have warned that a full attack could lead to the swift capture of Kyiv and potentially result in 50,000 civilians killed or wounded, as well as up to 25,000 dead Ukrainian soldiers and 10,000 Russian ones. Millions could flee in a refugee crisis for Europe, they suggested. They said the Russian army had now positioned 83 “battalion tactical groups” near Ukraine, each with between 750 and 1,000 soldiers. The figure has risen from 60 battalion groups two weeks ago, they added. Ukraine’s former defence minister, Andriy Zagorodnyuk, said he did not believe a Russian invasion was inevitable. He said the remorseless Russian troop buildup was proceeding along textbook lines, but that the Kremlin’s intentions and strategy remained opaque. “We don’t see a political endgame here,” he said. “If Putin seizes Kyiv, there will be full-scale war. The Ukrainian army forces will fight. There will be enormous resistance for all time. Why would you do that? “Ukraine is not going to say: ‘Let’s join Russia.’ This is understood. Unless, of course, Putin is totally delusional and has his own understanding of reality. There will be blood, sanctions. Nobody needs that kind of international war in Europe right now.” However, the Ukrainian foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, sought on Sunday to play down “apocalyptic predictions” about an imminent Russian invasion, saying his country was strong and had unprecedented international support. Earlier on Sunday, Macron spoke Biden for 40 minutes to “share information about contacts made during the weekend” and for “good coordination” ahead of the Frenchman’s mission to Moscow. The White House said the two leaders discussed “ongoing diplomatic and deterrence efforts in response to Russia’s continued military build-up on Ukraine’s borders”.In a nation of great thinkers who preferred the clean air of ivory towers over the hubbub of the streets, Theodor Lessing stood out for digging his knuckles into the dust. The great brawler of early 20th-century German philosophy picked fights with those he dismissed as “self-hating” fellow Jewish intellectuals, challenged the towering man-of-letters Thomas Mann to a duel, and skewered the sacred cows of the Nazis, who brutally murdered him shortly after seizing power in 1933. After falling into obscurity for almost a century, a newly published annotated edition of his early writings introduces a new generation to Lessing’s witty and often waspish mind, including the target of his most obsessive gripe: urban din. As founder of Germany’s first anti-noise society, the Jewish-German philosopher and avowed socialist campaigned against organ grinders, coachmen cracking their whips and housewives beating their carpets, expounding his pet hate in a monthly pamphlet called “Der Anti-Rüpel” (“The Anti-Lout”). The noise of the city, Lessing wrote with characteristic acidity, was “the revenge of those working with their hands on those head-workers who laid down their laws”: a kind of aural narcotic that dulled the mind like alcohol or drugs and prevented urban dwellers from sharp enlightened thinking. Published on the eve of Lessing’s 150th birthday on Tuesday , with an afterword by editor Rainer Marwedel, the two-volume, 1,920-page anthology Culture and Nerves also reminds readers that the Hanover-born malcontent was not just the “noise philosopher” his critics liked to mock, but a sharp mind who managed to see through the fog of history with a clarity few of his contemporaries could match. “Lessing wrote philosophically about a wide range of issues,” said Marwedel, who has spent the last 40 years of his life researching Lessing’s biography and annotated edition of his work. “He’d write an essay about Kantian ethics one day, a column about the psychology of stage kisses the next: he was quite French in that way, and not your typical German ivory-tower philosopher”. Two threads run through Lessing’s diverse reflections: a deep philosophical pessimism inherited from his idol Arthur Schopenhauer, and a satirical style reminiscent of Heinrich Heine, in keeping with a Jewish-German literary tradition radically curtailed by the second world war. “For Lessing, insight was attained through suffering, and knowledge was pain”, Marwedel told the Guardian. Such a combative outlook on life could make him a prickly intellectual sparring partner: his book on the “Jewish self-hatred” of his contemporaries allowed that term to gain widespread currency. In 1910, he wrote a satirical screed that mocked the Jewish literary critic Samuel Lublinski using common antisemitic tropes, which in turn led novelist Thomas Mann to denounce Lessing as an “impertinent midget” in an essay of his own. Lessing responded with a telegram in which he asked, perhaps more in jest than in earnest, whether Mann would follow up his words with an armed duel, but the author of Buddenbrooks and The Magic Mountain declined the offer. Lessing’s prickliness could also make him immune to the delusions about German cultural superiority expounded by other thinkers of his age, however. “I have grown sceptical of the beauty and greatness of the German mind,” Lessing says in an essay on English drama, written at a time of growing resentment between the two nations, and reprinted in Culture and Nerves. “In England it is different. The average person there is more eccentric and unique than we are.” Europe’s supposedly enlightened cultural tradition, he would go on to write, had done little to protect the continent’s biodiversity: like a “cruel, merciless machine”, it had driven bears, wolves, moose and other species to extinction. In another essay, also written in 1930, the trained medic warned of the consequences of rainforest destruction and climate change: “Something is changing on our globe,” Lessing wrote. “There will be a change in the climate that will change many people’s ways of living, their professions and their work.” In the ultimate tour de force of his mocking eloquence and piercing foresight, Lessing portrayed the German president Paul von Hindenburg as a puppet of the ascendant National Socialist movement. Hindenburg, he wrote in an article for German-language Prager Abendblatt newspaper in 1925, was “a representative symbol, a question mark, a zero. You could say: better a zero than a Nero. Unfortunately history shows that behind a zero there will always be hiding a future Nero.” The article was as prophetic as it was scandalous: “For German anti-democrats, Hindenburg was effectively a placeholder for the kaiser, so to poke even gentle fun at him amounted to lèse-majesté,” said Marwedel. The scandal led to boycotts of Lessing’s lectures, his dismissal from teaching at Hanover’s Technical University, and eventually his death in exile: on 30 August 1933, a team of three Nazi-supporting assassins from the Sudetenland shot the philosopher through the window of his study in Marienbad, making him the first known victim of the Nazi regime in the Czech Republic. “If anything could be more shocking than the murder of Prof Lessing at Marienbad, it is the indecent joy with which the German press receives the news,” the Manchester Guardian commented on Lessing’s death at the time. “The misguided roughs who shot him were the tools of something bigger than themselves – the Nazi creed which glorifies the murder of political opponents.” Lessing’s spikes and bristles mean Germany’s visionary grumbler has been largely neglected by academia since his death. An open letter published shortly after the assassination, calling for donations to set up an institute in Lessing’s name and produce a complete edition of his writings, was signed by luminaries including Albert Einstein and Bertrand Russell but failed to collect sufficient funds. Marwedel said he had funded the research for the latest volumes largely out of his own pocket. He is currently seeking funding to complete an edition of Lessing’s entire works, amounting to at least nine volumes and 3,600 pages. • This article was amended on 7 February 2022 to correct a misnaming of Marienbad as Marienburg. Also, the main picture is from the Theodor Lessing estate, not Rainer Marwedel.Dog faeces and urine are being deposited in nature reserves in such quantities that it is likely to be damaging wildlife, according to a new study. The analysis found that the resulting overfertilisation of the ground with nitrogen and phosphorus by footpaths could reach levels that would be illegal on farmland. The scientists reached their conclusions by counting dog numbers over 18 months in four nature reserves on the outskirts of Ghent in Belgium. They said the situation would be similar across Europe, which is home to about 87 million dogs. Dogs are fed at home and then excrete nutrients while on walks, leaving an annual average of 11kg of nitrogen a hectare and 5kg of phosphorus, the research estimated. That is a similar level of pollution known to be transported through the air from farming, industry and traffic fumes, which ranges from 5kg to 25kg of nitrogen, meaning the impact of dog faeces and urine is significant. Many dog walkers think that leaving their pet’s excretions in nature will not do any harm. But most ecosystems are naturally low nutrient environments and overfertilisation reduces biodiversity by allowing a few thriving plants, such as nettles and hogweed, to drive out others and the wildlife that depends on them. “We were surprised by how high the nutrient inputs from dogs could be,” said Prof Pieter De Frenne of Ghent University, who led the research. “Atmospheric nitrogen inputs from agriculture, industry and traffic rightfully receive a lot of policy attention, but dogs are entirely neglected in this respect.” The researchers estimated the illegal levels of nitrogen and phosphorus in situations where dogs must be kept on leads and can only stray 2 metres either side of a path. “Those levels are quite staggering, as our study concerned nature reserves,” he said. “Of course, there are a lot of beneficial effects [to walks in nature], both physically and psychologically, for owners and their dogs but the drawback is bringing in significant amounts of nutrients.” De Frenne said the level of dog ownership is very similar in many countries in western Europe, so he saw no reason why the situation would be different elsewhere to that in Ghent. British charity Plantlife has warned that nitrogen pollution is “one of the greatest threats to our wild plants, lichens and fungi, yet little is being done to tackle it”. The research, published in the journal Ecological Solutions and Evidence, counted more than 1,600 dogs during 500 nature reserve visits, at all times of day and all days of the week. They combined this data with the known levels of nitrogen and phosphorus excreted by dogs to estimate the total nutrients deposited. The scientists had recorded whether the dogs were on leads or not and when this was taken into account, 126kg/ha/year of nitrogen was deposited by paths and 4kg/ha/year over the rest of the nature reserves. If the dogs were all kept on leads, the amount jumped to 175kg/ha/year by paths, with a similar rise in phosphorus. Picking up and taking away all the dog faeces removed almost all the phosphorus, but only half the nitrogen, because dog urine contains significant nitrogen but little phosphorus. “Urine is, of course, difficult to take away,” said De Frenne. Previous research found that high nutrient levels can persist even three years after dogs are banned. “An important first step is making dog owners aware of this fertilisation effect,” De Frenne said. “I think many people will just pick up the faeces.” But the urine would remain and he said managers of nature reserves with sensitive ecosystems could consider banning dogs, which already happens in some places to protect birds and other wildlife. Rob Stoneman, director of landscape recovery at The Wildlife Trusts, UK, said: “Nature reserves are special places for nature conservation, where wildlife and fragile habitats are protected. Obviously poo is a part of nature, but dog poo contains nutrients which can damage the ecology of vulnerable habitats. Wherever you walk your dog, it is important to pick up, bag and bin poo, to ensure the continued protection of these wild areas for us all to enjoy.” De Frenne said the next steps for the research could involve soil analysis to check the estimates made in the current study and extending the analysis to pet cats.The contrived nonchalance with which federal ministers are attempting to ignore or belittle the ruckus caused by an outbreak of text message frankness is an indicator of how seriously the matter is being taken. And so it should be. Senior people within the embrace of the Liberal and Nationals parties have said nasty things about Scott Morrison, then someone within that same embrace has made the insults public. The texts used the type of language you might expect around the front bar at closing time. Calling the prime minister a “psycho”, “horrible, horrible” and a “hypocrite” is not what US Republicans in another context would classify as civil discourse. There is a brutality within the messages and their paths to public awareness which cannot be ignored or belittled. Deputy Nationals leader David Littleproud acknowledged on ABC radio on Monday that party MPs would have a “candid conversation” about leader Barnaby Joyce’s role in the text tumult but then argued only press gallery journalists were “excited” by the issue. And it is instructive to note what the prime minister’s office has done, as opposed to what ministers may be saying. When the Sydney Morning Herald last Friday afternoon revealed it had the contents of the Barnaby Joyce text, the prime minister’s office moved swiftly into a damage minimisation strategy. It marshalled a cringing apology from Joyce and a statement of saintly forgiveness from Morrison, and arranged an early Saturday morning Joyce press conference to get his contrition on TV and radio news services. Much out of character – and not just for apologising – Joyce readily accepted being told what to do, because he knew he and the government were in trouble. That Friday evening, the PMO gave the updated package of statements to the Australian – not the SMH – possibly in the belief the package would receive a treatment more comforting for the government. This was not the reaction of a government which would like you to think the two sets of texts are a bit of a yawn – of interest only to reporters thriving on the sweepings of politics, not the issues of substance. It’s important to put the incendiary texts into perspective. The messages and their unflattering assessments of Scott Morrison by colleagues are a variation of the old practice of passing notes in school. Instead of the class show-off getting a pasting with sniggering and insults, it is the prime minister, but the similarities are rife. The contents of the messages were from the heart and probably at least marginally accurate, and were a form of reprisal or revenge within a restricted circuit of consensus. It was never intended for the subject of the terse evaluations to know about them. And it’s that point which highlights the importance of revelation of the two sets of text messages – one allegedly between former NSW premier Gladys Berejiklian and an unidentified senior Liberal, the other from deputy prime minister Barnaby Joyce and intended to be passed on to former Liberal staffer Brittany Higgins, and leaked by a third party not yet named. Like those scribbled classroom notes and associated sniggers they were not meant to be shared with the subject of the comments. Other prime ministers have suffered from unwanted assessments. Paul Keating didn’t go to much trouble hiding his nickname for Bob Hawke of “Old Jelly Back”, which spread without the need for SMS technology. Former Liberal treasurer Peter Costello occasionally had descriptions of John Howard the former Liberal prime minister might have considered unkind. The difference here is that there already is a substantial queue of people who have looked at Morrison’s character and come to the opinion there are large shortcomings. They are indictments the ALP is collecting in its bid to make character a significant election issue. It’s one thing for the French president to call Morrison a liar, and Labor’s Anthony Albanese can say what he likes with barely a nod from the electorate. However, when two senior figures who have worked with Morrison for years quite separately conclude “he can never be trusted”, as Joyce put it, the character analysis is given weight. It becomes the prism through which Morrison’s election promises are viewed and has the capacity to distort them. Distrust spreads quicker than Covid. The fleeting notion that this scandal could see Scott Morrison toppled should be dismissed. The government is in enough trouble from the uncertainty roused by the pandemic to add to disruption with an abrupt leadership change just months from an election. One thing Scott Morrison can be trusted to do: he will continue to keep Peter Dutton out of the prime minister’s office. Malcolm Farr is a political journalistThe prime minister, Scott Morrison, says there is still a chance to legislate a commonwealth integrity commission before the election, after the attorney general suggested the government would run out of time to do so. Establishing a federal anti-corruption commission in this term of government was a key pledge made by the prime minister before the last election, with a draft of the bill released in November 2020. But with just seven parliamentary sitting days before the budget, the attorney general Michaelia Cash indicated in an interview with the Australian Financial Review, that the government would not have enough time to fulfil the election pledge. Speaking at a press conference on Monday, Morrison suggested Cash was referring to the current sitting fortnight, and dismissed suggestions the government had broken an election promise. “The term is not completed yet,” Morrison said. When asked if that meant he believed the bill could be passed before the election, Morrison said: “we’ll see”. The moderate Liberal MP Jason Falinski is calling for the government to push ahead with the introduction of its proposed federal integrity commission to “start the debate”, warning that independents hoping to claw seats off government MPs would campaign strongly on the issue. “I am really disappointed that we are not going to put legislation to the parliament,” the Sydney MP told Guardian Australia. “I understand we are squeezed and have got a crowded parliamentary agenda, but I still think we should have brought it to the fore for debate. “I doubt there is enough time to pass it – although there could be – but there is certainly enough time to start the debate on it.” Falinski said independents running against incumbent government MPs – including Sophie Scamps in his north shore seat – were campaigning against the Coalition on the integrity issue, and this would bolster their cause. “They already are, and this will give grist to their mill,” he said. But after the CIC consultation draft bill drew criticism for the softness of its approach, some MPs were pushing for the government to toughen the proposed model to include public hearings and broaden the commission’s powers. Despite Cash insisting that the government remained on track to introduce the bill last year, revised legislation was not signed off by cabinet, leaving the government to defend its existing bill as the preferred model despite not yet introducing it. The issue came to a head when the MP for Bass, Bridget Archer, crossed the floor to support an independent bill being introduced by Helen Haines. Archer criticised the government for its failure to bring the bill to parliament, saying it was her strong view that “this is the most important thing we need to do” in this term. Parliament sits for just seven days before budget week, with the Senate only sitting for three days before a week of Senate estimates next week. Haines said the concession from Cash confirmed that “integrity is not a priority for the Liberal National Government”. “For three years they have delayed, distracted and dragged their feet after promising to implement a federal integrity commission, and now that promise is broken,” Haines said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “What the Government does prioritise is the ability to spend taxpayer money for political purposes, without proper scrutiny. That is what we will see again in the upcoming budget and election campaign.” Haines said the only way for a federal integrity commission to be established in this term of parliament was with the support of the crossbench and with government MPs crossing the floor. “I know the majority of MPs who do value integrity are ready to vote on my Bill. “Liberal and National MPs who value integrity will get no chance in this parliament to vote in favour of an integrity commission bill drafted by their Government. There will be consequences at the ballot box for MPs who talk a big game on integrity but take no action in parliament.”In the crown of the tall beech tree at the corner of the lane, two pairs of rooks are perching close together. While not adding much warmth, the last of the afternoon sun, as it creeps beneath the western bank of cloud, at least brings some colour to their plumage and the bare branches around them. The main rookery is just over a mile away – a noisy, crowded roost in a collection of pines – and in recent years I have noticed a number of rooks apparently scouting for other accommodation. From an adjacent tree, a much smaller jackdaw sits above last year’s nest, regarding the newcomers without recognisable enthusiasm. The hollow way through which the lane rises across the hillside is dank and edged with the gurgling of field drains emptying slowly into the stream. The colours here are muted, bare soil and wet leaf litter dominate the palette, while a few bright ivy leaves stand out where they rise against lichen-covered trunks. Another tree has fallen in the high winds since the new year – folding across the path and leaving a gap in the field boundary like a broken tooth. In the top corner of the field by the old quarry, chains of fresh molehills swirl across the pasture – made during the creation of the shallow burrows into which their earthworm prey will fall. Worm activity is temperature dependent, so perhaps the moles are getting a good harvest in this warm winter. No signs of early spring have appeared yet in the quarry, even where the trees are partly sheltered from the prevailing westerly wind by the steep back wall. Both oak and ash stand skeletal against a sky softened by cloud and encroaching mist. As quickly as it had emerged, the sun slides behind another bank of cloud and the temperature drops markedly. As the light fades, the sky turns the same colour as the hammered lead cap of the gatepost by the stile. I clamber over the cold, wet wood with exaggerated caution, and blackbirds begin their evening calls as I regain the lane. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryThe Nine Network’s multi-million dollar deal to secure an exclusive interview with the family of Cleo Smith failed to put the program in the top ratings spot on Sunday night, although the 60 Minutes episode did win its timeslot. The network spent weeks teasing the 60 Minutes exclusive with Cleo’s mother Ellie Smith and her stepfather Jake Gliddon, which cost it $2m. The program took out the top spot for its 8.40pm slot, with 750,000 viewers, but lost out overall to Seven News (1.095 million viewers), Nine News (827,000) and Married At First Sight (825,000). Nine defended the program’s ratings, saying it was the most-watched 60 Minutes episode this year. “We are very pleased with the result and the content of the 60 Minutes interview which was compelling as Tara Brown spoke to the parents of Cleo Smith for the first time,” a Nine spokesperson said. “The show won its timeslot and performed in the key demographics and on 9Now – a record streaming audience for the program meaning last night’s episode as a total number was an increase on the equivalent episode last year, and this is what we look to, we are all extremely pleased.” The ratings from OzTam showed that within the Smith family’s home state of Western Australia just 67,000 viewers tuned in, the same number to watch ABC’s Vera in the state that evening. 60 Minutes has a long history of paying for interviews, with disgraced wellness blogger Belle Gibson paid $75,000 for appearing on the show in 2015, according to court documents. That episode pulled 1.073 million metro viewers. Sunday night’s “world exclusive” was led by reporter Tara Brown, who was unable to fly to WA to conduct the interview. Terence Darrell Kelly, 36, has pleaded guilty to taking four-year-old Cleo from the Blowholes campground in Point Quobba where her family were camping. Cleo’s disappearance sparked a major police investigation that led detectives to a property in Carnarvon, minutes from Cleo’s family home. “She was sitting on the bed and we ran up to her and she was like ‘hi mum’, like nothing had happened,” Smith told 60 Minutes. The reuniting scene at Carnarvon, about 900km north of Perth, was one of joy. “I still don’t think she really understood what happened in general, you know, being so young.” Since getting home Cleo doesn’t like closed doors and sleeps with the lights on, and has woken up screaming with “nightmare after nightmare”, her mother said. “Still to this day we don’t know the full story,” she said in her first media interview. “She has blocked out a lot as to what’s happened. She went into survivor mode and pushed it very far away.” Officers broke in and found Cleo alone in a room, physically unharmed and playing with toys. “We’ve got a long way to go and so does she,” Smith said of the family’s recovery. “She (Cleo) is probably going to be dealing with this for the rest of her life.” Kelly is yet to answer other charges and more details of the kidnapping are expected to be outlined when he faces Perth district court on 25 March. With additional reporting from Australian Associated PressNipsey Hussle’s family is planning to open “The Marathon Clothing store No 2” in Los Angeles this year, fulfilling a longtime dream of the late rapper. Samiel Asghedom, Hussle’s older brother, said his family had purchased commercial property in the Melrose arts district in LA and will open The Marathon store No 2 there for the popular clothing brand. “This second location is a dream that Nipsey always had, and it’s important that his kids are able to see his plans fulfilled,” said Asghedom, 39. The original store at Crenshaw Boulevard and Slauson Avenue, is closed but will remain a site where fans can visit and pay tribute, he said. The surrounding commercial lot that the family owns will eventually be transformed into a community space offering free music lessons for youth, modeled after an impactful program Hussle completed as a kid. The Melrose avenue shop, which is being remodeled and does not have a launch date yet, is just one piece of Asghedom’s efforts to carry on his brother’s legacy in LA. Last year, the Guardian revealed that the Los Angeles police department and city officials had targeted the family’s flagship south LA store on Slauson Avenue through a secretive surveillance program and failed eviction attempt. Fulfilling Hussle’s dreams for The Marathon The Marathon clothing store launched formally in 2017, cementing Crenshaw and Slauson as the corner synonymous with Hussle’s name. The project had been years in the making. Hussle had always had big ambitions. In one interview, the artist recalled being eight or nine years old and dreaming of being a professional musician signed to a label by the time he was 12. Success didn’t come that early, but Asghedom recalled his brother writing songs as a young teenager, and at one point collecting old computer parts from auctions and building a PC for himself so he could record music. As a teen, Hussle started trying to make money at the lot on Crenshaw and Slauson by selling CDs out of his trunk. Across the street, Asghedom and his business partner, Stephen Donelson, used to sell clothing outside of a Louisiana Fried Chicken, though LA police department (LAPD) officers would frequently shut them down – sometimes, handcuffing them and seizing their merchandise. “We were like damn, you’re not doing this to nobody else selling food on the corner. We are trying to do something legit. And they were like, ‘No it’s not legit until you’ve got a location and pay taxes and pay rent like everybody else.’” The brothers opened the Slauson Tees store in 2006, on the corner where Hussle had first sold CDs out of his car. The brothers’ businesses went through multiple iterations, until they launched The Marathon Clothing in 2017. Before its grand opening, though, Hussle had considered whether to move The Marathon Clothing to Melrose, another popular shopping area near West Hollywood where he thought they might have fewer conflicts with police, Asghedom said. “We were almost swayed to just abandon it and open somewhere else – we knew it would work,” Asghedom said. “But Hussle was like, ‘Let’s just go ahead and bite the bullet and take whatever comes with it. The first Marathon clothing store has to be open on Crenshaw and Slauson.’” The shop was a huge hit, though the LAPD presence on the corner intensified, according to the family and police records. As LA officials attempted to force the landlord to evict the store in 2019 – claiming it was a “nuisance” and site of gang activity – Hussle and his business partners instead bought the property from the owners. Soon after, Hussle was killed outside of the store. There has since been an outpouring of support for the brand online, Asghedom said, and the new store will offer a brick-and-mortar destination while carrying out Hussle’s vision for a Melrose shop. Asghedom said it was important to also continue his brother’s legacy at Crenshaw and Slauson, and do it in a way that was not commercial. The family’s long-term vision for the original location is to build a youth center, reopen the Steve’s Barber Shop as a place to give free haircuts to youth, and to have some kind of museum or public site that commemorates Hussle: “We want a place where tourists and fans can come to pay homage versus a place that was all about sales.” Hussle’s participation in a free music production program for youth in the Watts neighborhood had been transformative, Asghedom said, and Hussle wanted to replicate that in his neighborhood. “Everybody out of that program, including my brother, ended up pursuing a successful music career,” he said. “Just a little effort and a little resources directed toward the youth can really make a big impact … So a youth center would be the best thing we could put there, in the vein of what Hussle stood for: something to inspire the youth and teach them skills that they can use to be productive and legitimate when they become adults.” David Gross, Hussle’s business partner who helped him buy the lot, said that taking ownership of the lot was “profound and poetic” for Hussle and his drive to champion community entrepreneurship: “Whatever we do, it will be an enduring piece of Nipsey’s legacy and what he meant to the neighborhood … it will be there after I’m long gone.” Gross is also reopening Vector90, the south LA co-working space he and Hussle founded in 2018, which has been closed since the pandemic. The future of his unreleased music There have also been ongoing rumors about Hussle’s unreleased music, including a recent announcement that new tracks would be released as an NFT, which Asghedom said was unauthorized and the family has since shut down. But there are unreleased tracks, he said: “It’s quality, classic stuff. People are going to be really excited about it. There’s a lot of music that nobody has heard, all of it dope.” Hussle had a very specific vision for Victory Lap, his debut (and final) studio album released in 2018, which meant that some tracks didn’t make the final cut: “There were records we knew could’ve been a radio smash,” Asghedom said. “We’d say, ‘You gotta put that on the album,’ but he was like, ‘Nah, fuck the sales, fuck commercial success that this record could get. This record doesn’t fit Victory Lap. The album concept has to have a flow and a cadence and I want Victory Lap to be perfect.’” But Asghedom said he didn’t want to release the records as a “second album”: “For us, there will always only be one album: Victory Lap. That’s what Nip put out, and we don’t want to go around compiling new music and saying this is a second album.” His hope is to release new music as part of the soundtrack to a documentary, to help tell the story of his brother’s life. Asghedom said his family had been humbled by the outpouring of love for Hussle, seen in murals across LA and in the way so many people reference his story: “People from all walks of life have shown their love and respect for Nip: reporters, book writers, actors, doctors, lawyers, athletes, everybody … They understood what Nip was trying to do and the mantra and the movement of the Marathon. That’s what Nip wanted – to inspire people. I think that was his genius.”There is a literary and cinematic device that usually signals the protagonist has entered a world that may look normal but is in fact slightly off. A clock might start moving backwards; a ball might be thrown in the air and keep rising, disappearing into the sky. The main character in Christopher Nolan’s Inception, for example, moves between reality and complex dream worlds. When he can no longer tell the difference between the two, he uses a small silver spinning top as a reality check. If it loses momentum and stops spinning, he is awake. If it continues to spin, he is asleep, lost in an uncontrollable nightmare. Since news of No 10’s parties started being leaked to the press, many of us have become that anxious man, desperately waiting for the spinning top to slow down and topple over: for Boris Johnson to resign; for his party to finally boot him out; for some sign that we are not living in a world where the rules no longer apply. Every time speculation about the 54 letters required to trigger a no-confidence vote has intensified, or a senior Tory has broken cover and condemned Johnson, or a report has confirmed partying during lockdown and “failures of leadership”, the spinning top has slowed, as it has seemed certain that not another day could pass with Johnson still in office. But it’s been weeks now. To be precise, it’s been more than two months since the first news broke of Johnson attending a party. Since then, there have been reports of the prime minister crying and broken, apologising to people in the halls of Downing Street like a drunk punter in a nightclub toilet after a bad breakup. Anonymous sources and their eager handlers brought us such final pronouncements as “it’s over”, “the letters will be in by 5pm”, describing Johnson as “downcast and defeated”. All this may not have necessarily implied a swift departure, but what it certainly didn’t suggest was that, only days later, this same man would be accusing the opposition leader of failing to prosecute Jimmy Savile and implying the Labour frontbench took drugs. The likelihood is that all these events amount to a slow bleed, rather than an immediate fall. Johnson’s renewed fight (if the reports that he was flagging are to be believed) is the frantic flailing of a man on the ropes. But it’s a hell of a slow bleed. Something always seems to stem it. A fortunately timed defection of one Tory MP to Labour snatched the no-confidence letters back. A Metropolitan police investigation, also well timed, filed down the teeth of Sue Gray’s report. A belligerent Vladimir Putin appeared to threaten (again, what timing!) an invasion of Ukraine. Yet there are only so many excuses one can make before one realises it’s not a series of last-minute lifesavers that have prevented Johnson’s departure; it’s the ecosystem that allows him to remain. In this ecosystem, the norms that once tied action to consequence have been severed. For years now, the Conservative party has honed a political programme in which lying – and the styling-out of lies – is central to how the party runs business. From the false claims MPs made about the windfalls that Brexit would deliver to the NHS, to denying the reality of national PPE shortages, the guiding principle among Tory MPs has been to lie first and avoid questions later. If truly cornered, they switch to a strategy of attacking and undermining – judges, the media, human rights lawyers, the EU, the civil service, Tory party members themselves who don’t toe the line. Johnson’s appointment as party leader was a victory for a 2016 vintage of politics that combined aggression and relentless dissimulation. And it has worked. With Johnson as its battering ram, the government has managed to make it through the highest Covid death toll in Europe, several corruption scandals and a barely scrutinised Brexit deal. To achieve this sort of licence, all the chips were put on one man with one style of leadership. But what happens when that style, that man, becomes the liability? Well, you look for alternatives and you muster some moral courage to do the right thing. But Johnson and party impunity, both so diligently promoted over the past few years, mean it is nearly impossible to reverse course without blowing up the entire operation. And so what should have been a straightforward and swift matter of political principle that ended in Johnson’s resignation has become something else entirely. Kremlinology and political calculations fill the moral void as MPs and advisers try to figure out the cost to their own careers. It’s no coincidence that the two most high-profile MPs to criticise Johnson – the failed Brexit secretary David Davis and the former prime minister Theresa May, whose Home Office was responsible for the Windrush scandal – have already cashed in their chips and absconded with their own legacies intact. In the meantime, Johnson gets what he wants, which is to live another day, then another, and another, as the rest mull over the question: how to restore gravity without bringing the entire party crashing down in the process? Who, apart from Johnson, can cheerfully bluster through the disasters of Brexit and pandemic mismanagement, and lie with such effortless conviction? If your product is a con, you need a conman. This is why it is taking so long. This is why rejoicing in the latest harms to Johnson’s reputation feels more like a nervous, drawn-out affair than a relief. In theory, yes, there is a limit to what any politician can get away with in a democratic society. In theory, yes, what goes up must come down. But in practice, when an entire government has been built on fantasy and false promises, restoring the codes of reality is costly. It must be done slowly and carefully, as the party and modern conservatism steer away from Johnson and Brexit populism. But towards what? While they figure that out, Johnson remains, even as a dead man walking, and the silver top continues to spin. Nesrine Malik is a Guardian columnistJennifer Beals is talking to me by Zoom from … “Do I have to say?” she asks. Not really, I tell her. “I can tell you there’s a blizzard outside and it’s really beautiful.” Her reticence, which lasts about 30 seconds, is because she is in New York, filming a yet to be announced new season of Law &amp; Order. You could imagine her taking a friend’s secret to the grave; she is very cagey about where she lives, tending to call herself “nomadic” and describing her home as “the middle of nowhere” (in reality, somewhere near Los Angeles). Commercial discretion, though? Not so much. It is creepy to go on about how young actors still look, as though that were a goal in itself, but Beals, 58, is so unchanged – since she first played Bette in The L Word in 2004; since Devil in a Blue Dress in 1995 – that my brain thinks it is making a mistake. She definitely, positively starred in Flashdance in 1983, her breakthrough role after a tiny part in My Bodyguard three years earlier, yet that can’t be right – it was 40 years ago! It is like walking past someone you think you knew at school, then realising that it can’t be them because this person is 21. She grew up in Chicago, her Irish American mother a primary school teacher, her African American father a shop owner who died when she was nine. Beals was bookish, not a stage school kid, and it is not obvious how she landed the role of the welder turned dancer Alex in Flashdance when she was 18. She was still at Yale, studying American literature, and had to defer for a term. It wasn’t part of a grand plan, put it that way. “I didn’t even feel like I wanted control or impact,” she says, “I wanted joy, full stop. It was completely pleasure principle: ‘This is fun. I enjoy this. And I can feel myself expanding – it’s really exciting and totally terrifying.’” Flashdance was massively successful. It is an interesting film to watch now, partly because it is brilliant, but also because the intensity of the objectification is so 80s. Possibly because she had not one but four body doubles, and maybe because she went straight back to college afterwards, Beals never seemed to be defined or boxed in by her sex-symbol entry point. Now, she has entered a franchise with a fractionally longer Hollywood pedigree than her own, as Garsa Fwip in The Book of Boba Fett, a spin-off of The Mandalorian – itself, of course, a spin-off of Star Wars. It takes a while to get your ear in to her natural register, which is playful, very literary and full of bathos. “It’s so exciting to be part of the lineage,” she says of Boba Fett. “It feels like a calling, like there’s some reason that the universe has decided that you’re going to enter into these stories.” Later, talking about the roles she has longed for, she says: “Sometimes, I can taste a part in my mouth. I know that part is mine. It’s like a sword-in-the-stone scenario. This is mine. I’m coming to claim it. That’s all I’m asking. Let me put my hand on the hilt and I will show you this sword is mine.” Half of her is deadly serious, half is definitely joking. You can hear her academic hinterland not so much in her references – everyone has heard of King Arthur – but in her insistent ambiguities and cool irony. On the one hand, she is hard-boiled about Boba Fett. “It’s a business thing: studios and networks are trying to find something that is a sure-fire hit, so they’re appealing to nostalgia.” From an audience perspective, “obviously, during the pandemic, there’s a desire for comfort”. She wouldn’t say it was all Covid-driven, though: “When have studios ever been interested in taking a risk?” But there is nothing hard-boiled about her attachment to Star Wars, which she describes in a self-mocking cascade. “I remember seeing Star Wars; I was 14. They were talking about the Force and I thought: yes. This is what I’ve been looking for.” The films chimed with her amorphous spiritual fervour. She has said if she wasn’t an actor, she would be a Buddhist nun. It is a joke, but is it? “I was never that kid practising an acceptance speech in the mirror, holding an award. I was the kid who wanted to know, who was God? What is God? That was my obsession. I mailed away for catechism lessons from an advertisement in the back of the Silver Surfer comic, but that wasn’t what I meant. Then I started collecting Bibles. Then I moved on to tarot cards. My mom was just horrified. Cut to two years from now – I’ll have started a religion based on Star Wars.” Beals’ trademark may be ludic ambiguity, but on politics she is deadly serious. Boba Fett slots into a career-long determination to foster diversity, in terms of who is telling the stories and which stories get told. “I look to tell underrepresented stories, and sci-fi is such a wonderful way to explore those ideas – to explore those on the outside, redefining their power, finding their path and perhaps even lighting a way for others.” Just before the pandemic, Beals reprised a different role – not perhaps the one for which she is most famous, but the one with the most committed fandom: Bette, the alpha art dealer in The L Word, light years away from Beals’ serene real-life personality. “If I just played who I was, I would play somebody who lived in a cave most of the time. I’m not sure how many roles like that there are.” The show was first aired in 2004. I suppose the elevator pitch would have been “Friends except they are lesbians”. That proposition alone, nearly 20 years ago, was radical. Beals remembers: “When we were about to shoot the pilot, I was in a restaurant with my husband [the Canadian businessman Ken Dixon]. I leaned over to kiss him and it dawned on me at that time: if two women had been kissing, it would have been seismic in its effect on people.” It turned out to be impossible to break those conventions on sexuality without breaking a whole host of conventions on race, class, parenthood and society. The L Word is technically sitcommy, warm, human and funny, but, stripped of the cliches of the format, it became something much more searching and original. It returned in 2019 as The L Word: Generation Q, bringing in transgender and non-binary characters, the writing recognisably subtle and fearless, the arcs and dilemmas novel. “We took the three characters from the original iteration and tried to usher in the newer stories of this new generation. It’s so fascinating – an entire generation said: ‘Your words are not commensurate with our experience. Therefore, we will change the words.’ Whereas, in the past, people would have just tried to squeeze themselves into those words. In my generation, you were this, or you were that, and there was nothing in between. As many Rocky Horror Picture Shows as you saw, as many different people as I met, I was still in this very binary mindset. This generation blew that to smithereens and it’s really exciting.” She hesitates, as if weighing up whether to say something a bit schmaltzy, then goes for it: “I really think they’re the hope for the planet.” That show was also the first time Beals “came into contact with so many extraordinary activists who were thinking politically. That started to shift my perception, and I understood how important it was to become involved, to move the needle a little bit.” She is now involved with a range of charities and campaigning organisations, from GLSEN – which fights harassment of LGBTQ+ students – to more general movement-building against Donald Trump. The L Word’s original showrunner was Ilene Chaiken, who is known for being ahead of her time (she executive-produced The Handmaid’s Tale, having fought to make it for years). The L Word was as groundbreaking on race as it was in its approach to sexuality – it featured thorny, challenging conversations between the biracial Bette and her white partner, Tina (played by Laurel Holloman), about whose sperm to use for their prospective child and what that meant for identity. This was, bear in mind, a time when entire dramedies could be set in New York with barely a black character. In terms of representation, it feels as though TV and film have changed a lot. “When I was a young girl, I didn’t see myself represented,” Beals says. But there is a rather chilling detail from Devil in a Blue Dress, the neo-noir film that also starred Denzel Washington, in which Beals played Daphne Monet, who was biracial but passed for white. It is a trope she returned to 20 years later for The Last Tycoon, a series based on the F Scott Fitzgerald novel, in which she played Margo Taft, a movie star, again passing for white. Monet was one of Beals’ sword-in-the-stone parts, but originally the studio felt that – since she had been Flashdance-famous for 10 years – too many people already knew she was biracial and it would signpost the twist. I suggest that this was discrimination – or attempted discrimination – that surely couldn’t happen today, or if it did, they sure as hell wouldn’t admit to it. “Who knows?” she says. “I don’t know. I’m in the forest most of the time. How do I know what the world is? I can tell you what the trees look like.” Be cautious with this, I think is her implication: things haven’t moved on as far as it might seem. At times, whether as an honorary gay icon, a successful biracial actor or a campaigner, she has been a lightning rod for bigots. “I’ve had my letters from klansmen, believe me,” she says. “I could always navigate it. I don’t know if that’s just because I was conditioned to navigate it. But I always could. It just made me determined to work even more.” There is something else driving her, a belief in the importance of storytelling so deep that it blurs or even erases the line between her self and her work. “Every single thing is narrative. Our understanding of things is a narrative. It’s the narrative of who’s in power. It’s the narrative of the person in the bodega down the street. What is the story that I’m telling myself? Am I telling myself the story that my teachers told me that I was? Am I telling myself the story that my parents told me that I was? How do I come to the narrative that serves my highest good?” Aside from being in Law &amp; Order, Beals is producing a number of projects, only one of them nearly ready to be talked about. It is a film that circuitously began with an idea about social media that she and another producer, Tom Jacobson, commissioned two YA novelists to write as a book, which “did very well and got a bunch of prizes”. She is poised, always, between the drive to create more, different, better stories, narratives that meet the demands of the age, and her Buddhist/wood-nymph desire to “stay in the cave and enjoy the forest. But it has some meaning, me working. So I might as well.” The Book of Boba Fett is streaming now on Disney+Starstruck 10pm, BBC Three Rose Matafeo’s whip-smart, gender-swapped Notting Hill-style romantic comedy returns. As we rejoin the almost-couple Jessie and Tom, there are hints of commitment but they’re generally spiked by Jessie’s insecurity and Tom’s diffidence. The writing has a good handle on the sense of stasis that can attach itself to rootless twentysomethings adrift among the excitement and impossibilities of London. And the couple’s attraction and confusion always plays out in plausibly human and relatable ways. Phil Harrison No Return 9pm, ITV Kathy (Sheridan Smith) sees her family holiday become a nightmare when her son Noah (Louis Ashbourne Serkis) is arrested for sexual assault. As golden-hued footage of swimming pools gives way to the tense sound of fizzing electronica, this tense drama leaves you guessing. Is Noah guilty, or has he been framed? Alexi Duggins 60 Days with the Gypsies 9pm, Channel 4 Host Ed Stafford buys a caravan and spends 60 days trying to live on various Traveller sites to understand their lives. Should he side with Travellers whose lifestyle might be criminalised by an forthcoming act of parliament? Or will he sympathise with the locals who rail against the antisocial behaviour he finds? The answer lies somewhere in the middle. AD Boobs 10pm, Channel 4 “How can we take back ownership of our breasts?” In this thoughtful documentary, Summer Camp singer Elizabeth Sankey sets out to battle the male-influenced way breasts are discussed. It’s full of revealing interviews with women, plus the kind of disturbingly misogynistic 80s film/TV portrayals of boobs that beckon your palm to your forehead. An insightful, wry take on the topic. AD Euphoria 10.05pm, Sky Atlantic After a disastrous intervention, Rue (Zendaya) is on the run from everyone: family, friends, the cops. Just as it becomes too much, the actor, both tragic and exasperating, manages to draw you back in. It’s a credit to Euphoria’s young cast that the show can get away with this much melodrama. Henry Wong Imagine … Marian Keyes: My (Not So) Perfect Life 10.35pm, BBC One Alan Yentob meets Marian Keyes, the queen of “chick lit” – not that the throwaway term does her justice. Keyes is as warm and engaging as her darkly funny books while she talks about what she’s learned in life, from working as a waitress to becoming one of the finest storytellers around. Hannah Verdier Film choice You’re Next (Adam Wingard, 2011), 9pm, Horror Channel Thanks to the commercial success of last year’s Godzilla vs Kong, Adam Wingard now firmly has his feet under the Hollywood table. But whatever he chooses to do next, it’s unlikely to better the panache of his 2011 breakout hit You’re Next. The joy of this cheap, grimy slasher movie is in how lightly it wears its premise. In any other hands, a story like this – about intruders in animal masks systematically offing a group of semi-likable victims – would be a gruesome sludge of a thing. Wingard, though, fills the movie with endless wit, black humour and wild invention. Beautiful. Stuart HeritageOn Monday night, the moon serves as a signpost for one of the ultimate naked-eye astronomy challenges. Uranus, the seventh planet of the solar system, hovers at the very limit of naked-eye visibility. To stand any chance of seeing the planet, which orbits 19 times further from the sun than the Earth, you will need to be under the darkest sky you can possibly find. For most of us, a pair of binoculars will be needed. The planet spends the entire year within the confines of Aries, the ram. It will become slightly brighter in early November this year, when it draws close to Earth, so consider this a practice run. The chart shows the view looking south-west from London at 18.00 GMT Monday evening. The moon is a waxing crescent. With 42% of its visible surface illuminated, it is rapidly approaching its first quarter phase. The light from the moon will wipe out any chance of seeing Uranus with the naked eye on Monday night, but it does provide a signpost to be remembered for other nights. From the southern hemisphere, binoculars will definitely be needed because the planet is currently at a much lower altitude.First came soya, nut and then oat but the new challenger to the plant milk crown is the humble spud as potato milk arrives on UK supermarket shelves. Described as “deliciously creamy” and capable of producing the “perfect foam” for a homemade latte or cappuccino, the Swedish potato milk brand Dug goes on sale in 220 Waitrose stores this week. Sales of plant-based alternatives to milk are booming in the UK with the market now worth about £400m a year as Britons reduce their consumption of animal products. In recent years the buzz has been around oat milk, thanks to the success of rival Swedish brand Oatly, but in its recent food and drink report Waitrose predicted that in 2022 it would be “the turn of the potato”. Waitrose said that in 2021 its sales of plant-based milk were almost a fifth higher than in 2019 as alt-dairy entered the mainstream. Oat milk is the current bestseller, ahead of almond, soya and coconut, it said. Waitrose’s alternative milk buyer, Alice Shrubsall, said sales of the products had “gone from strength-to-strength over the past few years” adding: “Demand hasn’t slowed in this market and we’re seeing customers become more experimental with their alternative milk choices.” Emma Källqvist, the acting chief executive of Veg of Lund which owns the Dug brand, said its arrival on the high street was a “critical milestone” for the company. It is already available online on sites such as Amazon and Ocado. For many alt-milk fans the attraction is they offer a route to reducing the environmental impact of their diet due to the level of greenhouse gas emissions associated with traditional dairy farming. However, the Advertising Standards Authority recently banned a marketing campaign by Oatly, ruling that the green claims made were misleading. Made in the UK, Dug’s ingredients include pea protein and rapeseed oil as well as potato. It describes itself as “super sustainable” and has worked with CarbonCloud, a firm that calculates the climate footprint of foods, to assess its environmental credentials. Dug says its footprint is significantly lower than dairy milk. Growing potatoes is twice as efficient as oats and the crop uses less water than nuts like almonds, it says. Ophélie Buchet, global food and drink analyst at market research firm Mintel, says potato milk has the potential to displace oat as a more sustainable dairy-free milk alternative “without asking consumers to compromise on nutrition, price or taste”. However, the cost of potato milk will be key to its long-term success as the higher price of plant milks is the “number one” thing that stops consumers buying them, according to Mintel. Dug’s “barista” version costs £1.80 for a litre versus 90p for 1.1 litres of Waitrose’s cheapest own-brand cow’s milk. As well as price some shoppers also complain about the taste of plant milks. Potato milk is described as having a “neutral” flavour that means it can be mixed in tea and coffee, poured on breakfast cereal or used in cooking without overpowering the drink or dish. However, other reviews have painted a less flattering picture suggesting it has a “saline aftertaste”. Potatoes have a big hill to climb if they are going to challenge the supremacy of oat, now the biggest selling plant-milk, or dairy – cow’s milk is still a far bigger market, worth more than £3bn. Potatoes are a very “niche” ingredient representing on average less than 0.2% of plant milk launches, but high profile debuts like DUG could change that, adds Buchet.Despite all the precision he brought to bear on his intricate plots, Charles Dickens was a notoriously messy writer. His manuscripts are full of inky splodges, with barely legible alterations crammed in between scrawled, sloping lines. Worse still was his love of a type of shorthand dating from the 1700s. To this, he added his own chaotic modifications to create what he called “the devil’s handwriting”. Fond of puzzles and codes, the great Victorian writer used these time-saving hieroglyphics to make notes and copies of his letters and documents, reams of which he burned. Academics are still toiling to decipher 10 shorthand manuscripts that survived. Forget Wordle. This is the Dickens Code. And for a long time, it had seemed uncrackable. Last year, the stumped experts behind what is known as the Dickens Code project made a cry for help. They put out a call for amateur sleuths to enter a competition, the task being to transcribe one of these baffling documents: a mystery letter that has been kept for more than a century in a New York library. It is scrawled in blue ink on paper bearing the letterhead of Tavistock House, the London home where Dickens wrote Bleak House. When the competition opened last October with a £300 prize, the note was downloaded 1,000 times in three days. Participants were invited to use guides to brachygraphy, the now obsolete shorthand system that Dickens had adapted. In the semi-autobiographical David Copperfield, brachygraphy is described as a “savage stenographic mystery”. Competitors also had access to a notebook in which Dickens explained, with characteristic ambiguity, some of his own symbols. He used “@” for “about” and an angular kind of “t” to mean “extraordinary”. In the end, only 16 people, from all over the world, were able to submit solutions. None managed the entire thing. When Dickens sat down to compose the Tavistock letter, he would have been amused to consider that, almost 165 years later, it would be pulled to pieces, endlessly analysed and ultimately deciphered by, among others, a 20-year-old student from Ohio called Ken Cox. “I thought it was mind-boggling that there was something he’d written that nobody had read yet,” says Cox, a fan of puzzles, Dickens and even shorthand, who studies cognitive science at the University of Virginia. So what does the Tavistock letter say? Sadly, it is not notes for – or even part of – a long-lost short story, although there is hope that the other documents may include fiction. What it does reveal is a suitably convoluted tale of a canny businessman who has reached a fraught juncture in his love life and literary career, and is now leaning on his connections and the courts for help. “The decoders really have helped to cast light on this troubled period in Dickens’s life,” says Dr Claire Wood, lecturer in Victorian literature at the University of Leicester. Wood leads the decoding project with Hugo Bowles, professor of English at the University of Foggia in Italy. After a lengthy process of piecing the entries together and cross-checking with other sources, the pair have a transcript that is 70% complete. “I feel obliged,” the letter begins, “though very reluctantly, to appeal to you in person.” Three newly translated phrases were vital in understanding what comes next. One sleuth deduced that “HW” referred to Household Words, a periodical Dickens edited and co-owned with the publisher Bradbury and Evans. Another linked the symbol for “round” to All the Year Round, a new journal Dickens founded in 1859 and owned himself after falling out with Bradbury and Evans. In another breakthrough, one solver translated two scribbles as “Ascension Day”, a Christian feast that falls 40 days after Easter. This fascinated Wood and Bowles because Ascension Day in 1859 coincided with a period in which we know Dickens was attempting to incorporate Household Words into All the Year Round. Did the letter have something to do with this transition? These clues shed light on another letter, written in longhand fortunately, that is kept at the same New York library. It’s an apology to Dickens from the manager of the Times about a row that had erupted when Dickens asked the newspaper to print an advert alerting his existing – and potential new – readers to All the Year Round. It mentions another letter, one Dickens had written to John Thadeus Delane, editor of the Times. Until now, this letter was assumed lost. But we now know it was the Tavistock scrawl. So what did it say? It’s important first to understand where Dickens was in 1859. It was a tricky year for the writer, then 47, despite the fame he had earned with Bleak House and David Copperfield. A year earlier, his marriage had fallen apart amid salacious rumours of an affair with an actress. Dickens published a furious statement in Household Words, describing the rumours as “most grossly false, most monstrous, and most cruel-involving”. When he asked Bradbury and Evans to print the statement in Punch, which it also published, the company refused. Their relationship fell apart and the publisher declined an offer from Dickens to buy its share of Household Words. The fallout prompted Dickens to plan his own journal. But it was a risky move because, while successful, he was in financial trouble. He had a divorce, a rumoured mistress, and 10 children to pay for. “He was,” Bowles says, “a celebrity on the ropes.” Household Words, which Dickens launched in 1850, was a vital source of income and a shop window for his work. It had taken off in 1854 with the serialisation of his novel Hard Times. Dickens was desperate to hold on to his readers but Bradbury and Evans had other ideas. They wanted to keep Household Words alive without him – and sued to prevent him from giving the impression the magazine was closing. However, a judge ruled in Dickens’s favour: yes, he could announce the switch, as long as he said Household Words was being “discontinued by him” and not the publisher. A triumphant Dickens used this phrase in the advert intended for the Times, but a clerk rejected it. Unaware of the legal ruling, the clerk felt the advert gave the false impression that Household Words was indeed being shut down. “A cancelled advert in the Times came as a nasty surprise to Dickens,” Bowles says, “and needed to be rectified.” The Tavistock letter is, we now know, the writer’s desperate bid to rescue the situation by appealing to the editor, an acquaintance. Dickens refers to the advert “announcing that, after Ascension Day, Household Words will be discontinued by me … [It] was refused and sent back with a message that this particular was untrue and unfair.” He mentions the judge’s ruling approvingly, saying he can see no “sense or reason” for the rejection. The Times swiftly apologised and reinstated the advert. Dickens had won. All the Year Round, which he launched with the first instalment of A Tale of Two Cities, was a sensation. A year later, it serialised Great Expectations. Meanwhile, Bradbury and Evans failed to save Household Words. When they auctioned its title, Dickens snapped it up at a fraction of the price he had originally offered, churlishly adding the line “With Which Is Incorporated Household Words” to the cover of All the Year Round. The academics have been stunned to learn about Dickens’s ruthless business dealings – and amused by his legal double standards. “I mean, he’s usually scathing about judges,” Bowles says. “And here he is quoting the judge, naming him in the letter, and saying what a great guy he is for supporting him.” Yet Wood senses vulnerability too. “Dickens is riding high,” she says, “but also feeling these personal and professional pressures and trying to keep all the plates spinning.” The £300 prize was won by Shane Baggs, a Californian IT worker and code enthusiast, who solved the most symbols. “After getting mostly C grades in literature,” he says, “I never dreamed anything I’d ever do would be of interest to Dickens scholars.” Cox, who as a child wrote coded letters to friends after being inspired by a book about Britain’s wartime codebreaker Alan Turing, contributed solutions including the words “untrue and unfair”. He says: “When I turned it in, I thought I was on the right track. But then I thought they might get a ton of letters and be like, ‘Well, most of these are fine – but this dude’s just looks like the plot of Legally Blonde.’” The Dickens Code project, which is funded by the government’s Arts and Humanities Research Council, will run for another year. Wood and Bowles want to grow their band of sleuths to help transcribe more documents, some much messier than the Tavistock letter. One series of notes is headed Anecdote, in longhand. “Now,” says Bowles, excitement building in his voice, “I think that could be Dickens telling a story we’ve never heard.” • More details about the Dickens Code project here.Investment in financial tech firms in the UK grew sevenfold last year to $37.3bn (£27.5bn), according to KPMG, with London attracting more fintech funding than the rest of Europe, the Middle East and Africa (EMEA) put together. The investment total was boosted by 601 deals that were finalised in the UK in 2021, the financial services firm said, up from 470 the year before. London’s fintech boom was strengthened by the size of many of the deals, which included the $14.8bn Refinitiv deal completed in January 2021. Five out of the 10 largest fintech deals in the EMEA region were completed in the UK, it said. The report shows that while the UK sector is growing fast, it still only accounts for a fraction of the overall fintech sector. KPMG said that the total global fintech funding across the various sectors was worth $210bn – across a record 5,684 deals – in 2021. Payments continued to attract the most funding, accounting for $51.7bn in investment globally in 2021 – up from $29.1bn in 2020 – thanks to a continued surge in interest in areas such as “buy now, pay later”. Last month, the Telegraph reported that Downing Street had launched an audacious bid to lure the $45bn (£34bn) payments firm Klarna to the London Stock Exchange amid fears that high-growth companies were snubbing London for New York. Anton Ruddenklau, global fintech leader, KPMG International, said: “We’re seeing an incredible amount of interest in all manner of fintech companies, with record funding in areas like blockchain and crypto, cybersecurity, and wealthtech. While payments remain a significant driver of fintech activity, the sector is broadening every day.” In separate research also published on Monday, it emerged that the number of private equity-backed acquisitions of UK professional services firms went up 179% last year. Global law firm Mayer Brown found there were 53 such deals and said private equity (PE) funds had become increasingly interested in the sector as many professional services firms had improved their business models to create more stable income from retainer and other consultancy work. Major deals over the last few years have included spin outs of insolvency and consultancy arms of the Big Four accountancy firms. Of the 53 transactions in the past year by private equity funds, 28% were for communications firms. “Consultancy firms that have reliable streams of recurring revenue are very appealing targets for PE houses. PE funds are finding that recurring revenues don’t just exist in traditional areas of professional services like accountancy, tax and legal, but also in newer sub-sectors like PR or digital consultancy,” said Perry Yam, a Mayer Brown partner.Unions have urged the government to do more to help low-paid workers weather the cost of living crisis, after research found the number claiming universal credit has more than doubled since the start of the pandemic to at least 2.3 million. The TUC said the 1.3 million increase in working universal credit claimants had been caused by households being pushed into financial hardship during Covid and called for a substantial rise in the payments and a higher minimum wage to head off a “perfect storm” of costs coming in spring. From 1 April, energy bills will rise on average by £700 to £2,000 a year and a few days later the chancellor’s 1.25% national insurance surcharge will start hitting wage packets. Unfixed mortgages will start rising in March, while food, rent and other prices have all been increasing at their fastest rate for 30 years. While the Treasury announced some support on Thursday to mitigate the squeeze, the TUC said that without further intervention, millions more working people would find themselves pushed below the breadline. Low-paid workers, mostly those with young children, are able to top up their incomes by applying for universal credit, and about 40% of all claimants are in work. The TUC said 12% of workers told researchers that they expected to struggle to afford the basics in the next six months, while 22% said they would find it hard to afford “more than the basics”. The analysis found that a fifth of workers have Christmas debts to pay off this year, a number that rises to more than a quarter for workers with children of school age. Frances O’Grady, the TUC’s general secretary, said ministers need to urgently raise universal credit payments to 80% of the living wage – which is set to rise to £9.50 in April. “The government must do far more to help struggling families get through the tough times ahead. The support package announced by the chancellor last week is woefully inadequate,” she said. “Universal credit urgently needs boosting and we need further action to reduce fuel costs for those battling to make ends meet. The best way to give working families long-term financial security is to get pay rising across the economy.” O’Grady’s call for the minimum wage to rise to at least £10 an hour will put her further at odds with the governor of the Bank of England, Andrew Bailey, who caused a storm of protest last week when he called on Britons to show wage restraint to stop inflation spiralling out of control. Bailey, who earns close to £600,000 a year, made the comments a day after the Bank raised interest rates to 0.5%, and warned household disposable incomes were on track to shrink by 2% this year, the biggest fall since comparable records began in 1990. In the face of the cost of living crisis, Rishi Sunak and Boris Johnson have come under pressure to scrap the national insurance surcharge, which Labour has called the “wrong tax at the wrong time”. On Monday the Federation of Small Business (FSB) added its voice to the calls to axe the increase, joining the likes of the Institute of Directors. The UK’s largest business group called for the surcharge to be ditched to reverse the 250,000 drop in the number of young people being offered apprenticeships. The FSB national chair, Mike Cherry, said: “By looking again at its approach to NICs, the government can make a real difference here – directly, by bringing down the immediate costs of taking an apprentice on, and indirectly, by freeing up more funds for recruitment and training at a moment when cash reserves are depleted.” Economic data released on Monday by the financial services firm Deloitte said consumer confidence fell to -11% during the last quarter of 2021 as consumers started to feel the squeeze. It came as the leading economic forecaster EY Item Club downgraded its prediction for UK GDP growth in 2022 to 4.9% from 5.6% in its November report.Cinema’s murderous children are legion, but Jodie Foster’s Rynn Jacobs in 1976’s The Little Girl Who Lives Down the Lane often falls among the forgotten. It was understandable given the especially prolific year she was having: memorable performances in Bugsy Malone, Freaky Friday, Echoes of a Summer and, of course, the behemoth of child star breakthroughs Taxi Driver. In fact, Rynn, more than any other character, emerges in the shadow of the child prostitute Iris Steensma (the role that landed Foster her first Oscar nomination) and becomes as much a casualty as a rather complicated double, no less worth seeking out. While there had already been Mervyn Leroy’s supremely successful The Bad Seed, The Innocents obviously, and even Mario Bava’s Kill, Baby … Kill! in the decades before, the 70s gave way to a fount of diabolical youngsters on screen. From The Exorcist to The Omen, the marked fascination with corrupted and, what’s more, grotesque innocents seemed to announce certain other prevailing anxieties about the future of the family as we then knew it. Already the Vietnam war had begun to haunt and transform a generation, and the sudden, prominent coverage of serial murders upended the presumed safety of the middle-class home. The Little Girl Who Lives Down the Lane, directed by Nicholas Gessner, at once belongs and yet feels alien to this spate of films, preoccupied with all manner of sinister threats to the nuclear family, none more treacherous than their own children, who so doggedly resist authority. Even now, after the film has grasped something of cult status, its genre – for all the pointed giallo influence – remains considerably knotty to define: part horror, part psychological thriller, part exploitation, part teen romance. Based on the 1974 novel by Laird Koenig, who then wrote the screenplay, the film follows the mysterious Rynn, a 13-year-old orphan living alone in a small Maine town. She is continually beleaguered by a revolving door of meddlesome neighbors: the cop Ron Miglioriti (Mort Shuman), with whom Rynn later becomes chummy; her overbearing landlady Mrs Hallet (Alexis Smith); and, most troubling of all, Hallet’s son Frank (Martin Sheen), a known pedophile who has managed to elude jail thanks to his powerful mother and hounds Rynn with his relentless attentions. They are all naturally curious about the whereabouts of her father, always conveniently locked away in his study or sleeping upstairs. Hers is a poorly veiled ruse, delivered with such persuasiveness that she often manages to convince them, against their own better judgment. But her peace is ever endangered by their hovering presence; no matter how inept or unwitting, they perpetually imperil her safety. She does finally meet a peer in the form of Miglioriti’s charming teenage nephew Mario (Scott Jacoby), an aspiring magician whose earnestness melts the otherwise remote, steely Rynn. Although she is alone, she never quite seems lonely until Mario arrives. But her precarious situation promises to be their undoing. The film originally opened to middling reviews and some – it turns out, revealing – controversy. Foster clashed with a producer during filming over the late inclusion of a nude scene, eventually performed by her then 21-year-old sister. It’s a jarring moment in a film where much of the tension, and indeed horror, is bound up in her one glaring vulnerability: her startling youth. For her part, Foster gives a remarkably (if unsurprisingly) sophisticated performance, preserving a childlike candor amid a cold and obstinate willfulness. She commands every frame, betraying traces of the formidable actor she would yet become. There are few, if any, echoes of Iris in her portrayal, but Rynn (wealth, class and thus, worlds apart) ends up parroting her condition anyway – the ever preyed upon girl child – though the nude scene both undermines and personifies (as do some leering contemporary reviews) the film’s otherwise cogent missive: few things pose more harm to children than those tasked to protect them. Doubly chilling then is how feckless these adults often are, for all the damage they threaten to wreak. Sheen embodies this most determinedly as Frank, all the more frightening for his artless menace: a blundering ghoul merely seeking opportunity. Interestingly enough, at this point Sheen was best known for Terrence Malick’s Badlands, where he himself played a killer teen, albeit under different circumstances. Here, the children are less calculated than they are resourceful. The act of “playing” becomes their only defense against pestering grownups, constantly intruding upon the home. And so in some ways The Little Girl Who Lives Down the Lane deserves this environment, where its dynamic suspense truly thrives. The Little Girl Who Lives Down the Lane is available on Amazon Prime in the US and UKTop story: Macron plots ‘historic solution’ Morning everyone. I’m Martin Farrer and these are the top stories this morning. Emmanuel Macron believes he can deliver an “historic solution” to the Ukraine crisis as he prepares to land in Moscow today for talks with Vladimir Putin on ending the standoff. Amid dire warnings from Washington that Russia could attack its neighbour “tomorrow”, the French president said he would use his previous “deep dialogue” with Putin to “de-escalate” the situation. The Russian leader did not want to invade, Macron told a French newspaper, but was merely seeking a “clarification of the rules” with Nato and the European Union. “It is our responsibility is to build a historic solution” to the problem of European security, Macron said. “I believe President Putin is available for this.” The mood music was more pessimistic in the US where national security adviser, Jake Sullivan, said that an invasion could take place “as soon as tomorrow”. The US thinks that Putin has amassed 70% of the firepower he needs to annex Ukraine, but the country’s former defence minister told the Guardian that Russia already had enough troops to seize any city in the country. Nevertheless, Macron spoke to Joe Biden for 40 minutes yesterday to “coordinate” his diplomatic mission, and German chancellor Olaf Scholz is heading to Washington to convince the US president he’s behind western efforts to face down Putin. * * * Johnson reset – Allies of Boris Johnson have insisted that the “grownups” are in charge in Downing Street after the prime minister tried to rescue his premiership by rebuilding his No 10 team. Guto Harri, the former BBC journalist who is Johnson’s new communications chief, said he was “proud to join a team of capable, grownup, professional and pragmatic people”, while MP Steve Barclay becomes chief of staff. They are likely to face another tough week, however, amid calculations that the number of Tory MPs calling for a no-confidence vote is close to the 54 required to trigger a ballot. More hostile fire is also expected from Johnson’s scorned former adviser, Dominic Cummings. Revelations could involve Johnson’s wife, Carrie, who responded to a bruising weekend of press coverage by saying she had been targeted by her husband’s enemies. * * * Peng ‘misunderstanding’ – Chinese tennis star Peng Shuai has given her first interview to an independent media organisation since she alleged on Weibo that a senior Chinese official she had been in a relationship with had coerced her into sex, saying it was an “enormous misunderstanding”. In the interview with French sports daily L’Équipe – overseen by a Chinese official – Peng said she had never accused former vice premier Zhang Gaoli of sexual assault and denied she had disappeared from public view afterwards. * * * Cancer delays – The numbers of cancer patients facing delays in seeing a specialist for the first time and starting their treatment have hit record highs in England, amid fears that pandemic-hit NHS services can no longer provide prompt care. Half a million people will have to wait longer than the supposed two-week maximum to see an oncologist this year, an analysis for the House of Commons library reveals. The disclosure comes as a new row over how quickly hospitals can clear the record 6 million-strong NHS backlog has forced ministers to delay publication of the long-awaited plan to tackle it. In another problem for the NHS, a report says children’s access to specialist mental health services in England remains “a postcode lottery”, with huge differences in spending and referrals depending on where families happen to live. * * * Ottawa emergency – The mayor of Canada’s capital declared a state of emergency last night as protesters opposed to Covid-19 restrictions continued to paralyse the centre of Ottawa. Residents of Ottawa are furious at the nonstop blaring of horns, traffic disruption and harassment by thousands of protesters – many of them truckers angry about vaccine mandates. Canada’s prime minister, Justin Trudeau, has ruled out calling in the military but Ottawa mayor Jim Watson said his emergency declaration highlighted the need for support from “other levels of government”. * * * Messy problem – Nature reserves are being deluged with dog poo and urine in such quantities that it is likely to be damaging wildlife. A study found that the resulting overfertilisation of the ground with nitrogen and phosphorus could reach levels that would be illegal on farmland. The scientists based their conclusions on work in Belgium, but said the situation would be similar across Europe, which is home to about 87m dogs. More than 12m of them are in the UK. Today in Focus podcast Dating fraudsters stole nearly £100m from lonely people in Britain last year. Lizzie Cernik reports on how these increasingly sophisticated scams work. Lunchtime read: Jennifer Beals – ‘I wanted joy. Full stop’ Jennifer Beals, the actor whose breakthrough role came in 1983 playing a welder who dreamed of being a dancer in Flashdance, tells Zoe Williams about her life of activism, why Gen Z gives her hope, and joining the Star Wars universe in her latest role in The Book of Boba Fett. Sport On the eve of the Winter Olympics, China promised the world a “streamlined, safe and most splendid” Games, but just two days into the event organisers are facing a litany of complaints from athletes and countries on multiple fronts. On the slopes, Mikaela Shiffrin’s bid for a record medal haul at the Winter Olympics got off to a rocky start on Monday morning when the American star missed a gate early in the first run of the giant slalom and was disqualified. Sadio Mané scored the winning penalty as Senegal beat Egypt 4-2 in a shoot-out after a 0-0 draw to win the Africa Cup of Nations. Eddie Jones’s decision to take Marcus Smith off at a crucial juncture in England’s Calcutta Cup defeat by Scotland was premeditated and a missed opportunity for the fly-half, according to his Harlequins coach, Tabai Matson. Non-league side Boreham Wood stunned Championship high-flyers Bournemouth with a 1-0 win that puts them in the fifth round of the FA Cup, while Steve Cooper’s emerging young Nottingham Forest side, inspired by Brennan Johnson and Djed Spence, hammered holders Leicester 4-1. Andy Murray will skip the French Open and the whole of the clay-court season as he plots his course through the rest of 2022. Business John Allan, chairman of Tesco, Britain’s biggest supermarket and largest private sector employer, has warned that he expects the economy to get worse in the coming months as the full impact of a 54% jump in energy prices flowed through. Food inflation could rise from around 1% currently to 5% by spring, he said. The FTSE 100 is looking like opening flat this morning while the pound is on $1.353 and €1.185. The papers Images of the Queen populate just about every front page this morning and many of the papers also led with their own takes on her pronouncement about Camilla taking the regal title. “Honoured my ‘darling wife’ will be Queen,” says the Express quoting Prince Charles, but the Mail reckons “Queen gave Camilla plan her blessing years ago”. The Sun’s splash head is “Busy Lizzie” in reference to the monarch’s reappearance in the public eye after some months recuperating. The Guardian has a picture of the Queen beaming down on sightseers in Piccadilly but it leads with “Half a million people face delays in seeing NHS cancer specialist”. The Telegraph also has a health lead with “Treasury blocks PM’s plan to clear NHS backlog”, as does the Mirror: “Be Blood Donor Hero”. The Times sticks to the Downing Street mess with “Johnson hits reset button with a new No 10 team” and the i reports that “PM in crisis: 100 MPs are ready to vote against him”. The FT leads on “EU prepares gas options if Ukraine crisis hits supplies”. In Scotland, prices are the main concern. The Record says “Food prices to soar by 5%” while the Scotsman has “‘Lives could be lost’ warning as cost-of-living crisis looms”. Sign up The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekendChildren’s access to specialist NHS mental health services in England remains “a postcode lottery”, with huge differences in spending and referrals depending on where families happen to live, according to a report. Overall, it said referrals of children and young people dropped as a result of disruption caused by the pandemic, at a time when more of them were struggling with mental health than ever before. The report by the children’s commissioner for England said that in 2020-21 a total of 497,502 referrals were made to child and adolescent mental health services (CAMHS) compared with 539,000 the previous year, as children became less visible to professionals such as GPs and teachers who usually make referrals. For those children accepted for treatment, the commissioner’s report said average waiting times fell from 43 days in 2019-20 to 32 days in 2020-21, though there were wide variations across England, and a third of children accepted on to waiting lists were still waiting for their treatment to begin. It is the commissioner’s fifth annual report on children’s mental health services in England, which looks at spending, access and waiting lists in 2020-21, based on data from NHS Digital and NHS England, and sheds light on the impact of the pandemic. Although referrals went down, demand increased, with one in six children suffering from a probable mental health condition, up from one in nine in 2017. As a result only about a third of children (32%) were able to access treatment, the report said. Spending on children’s mental health services went up 4.4% in real terms, but some clinical commissioning groups (CCG) chose to spend significantly less than others. The highest spend per child in 2020-21 was by NHS Isle of Wight CCG at £165, followed by Norfolk and Waveney (£152) and west London (£138). The lowest was Halton at £16 per child – down from £25 in 2019-20 – followed by Trafford and Redbridge, both at £41. Other data shows the proportion of children failing to access services because referrals were closed before starting treatment decreased to 24%, down from 27% in 2019-20 and 36% in 2018-19. Again there is wide variation, with just 8% of referrals in NHS East Sussex closed before treatment, compared with 41% in east and north Hertfordshire. Based on five key indicators, including spending on children’s mental health as a percentage of total financial allocation, mental health spend per child and total number of children’s referrals as a proportion of the under-18 population, Wakefield, Tees Valley and Heywood, Middleton and Rochdale were the top three performing CCGs. West Sussex, Coventry and Rugby and Oxfordshire were the lowest. The children’s commissioner for England Dame Rachel de Souza said increasing investment was making a difference. “More children have been accepted into treatment and for some children waiting times have reduced. However, there is still more to do. Some children are still waiting a long time for their treatment to begin, and many are still not accepted on to waiting lists. “There is still wide variation between local areas on what is being achieved. For example, the percentage of children waiting for treatment at the end of the year varied greatly between local areas: from as low as 14% in NHS Castle Point and Rochford and NHS Mid Essex, to 78% in NHS East Sussex.” Commenting on the findings, Mark Russell, chief executive at the Children’s Society said: “It’s clear many children need support following successive lockdowns, so it’s really concerning that referrals to CAMHS fell, with some children out of sight of professionals able to identify concerns. “Since then, following the first year of the pandemic, NHS Digital data shows there has been a surge in referrals, including for really severe mental health crises. Even before the pandemic, our research had highlighted a deeply distressing decline in children’s wellbeing, with potentially disastrous consequences. “While shorter waiting times to access treatment are welcome, the children’s commissioner’s analysis shows that far too many children are still being turned away.” The Department of Health and Social Care said the government was expanding healthcare services with an extra £2.3bn a year by 2024. “We recognise the impact the pandemic has had on everyone, especially children and young people who have faced disruption to their home lives and their education,” a spokesperson said. “That is why we have committed an additional £500m this year to support those most affected, including £79m for children’s mental health services.”The principal of a private Sydney school has defended its “statement of faith” that lists same-sex relationships and transgender identity alongside abusive relationships as “not acceptable to God”, saying critics had taken it out of context. Penrith Christian School attached its statement of faith to enrolment application forms for students, asking parents to indicate they had “read and understood” it. In a letter to parents on Monday following media reports, school principal Tracey Deal stood by the statement of faith, saying it had been taken out of context. “It is disappointing that the media have misunderstood and misinterpreted a small part of the Statement of Faith and inferred mistreatment of students” the letter read. The statement of faith, which is attached to the school’s enrolment application, must be “read and understood” as part of any prospective application, and gives parents an option to discuss the matter with the school. The school says the document “covers our present needs as to these fundamental doctrines,” before detailing its understanding of “fallen relationships”. “Adultery, same sex attraction, transgender identity, premarital sex, sexual acts between members of the same sex and abusive relationships, are all examples of relationships and behaviours which are not acceptable to God. “Sexual relationships should be exercised exclusively in a marital relationship between a male and female.” There is no indication what, if any, are the consequences for breaching the statement of faith. In the letter sent to parents, Deal stressed the document makes it clear it relates to “those who have been regenerated, justified and adopted into the family of God”. “This clearly indicates that what follows is intended to outline the expectations of mature believers,” the letter reads. “We ask parents to indicate that they have read and understand our statement, to ensure that you know our beliefs. We also invite you to contact us if there are any issues you want to discuss. This offer remains as an open invitation.” Deal declined to answer the Guardian’s questions, instead reiterating that the document had been taken “out of context”. “At present the school is focussing on supporting our students and school community following the recent media coverage that misrepresented our school and inferred conduct that simply does not occur,” she said. “As we have done since the school commenced, we will continue to focus ensuring that the school is a place where all students are genuinely loved and nurtured, a safe and secure environment.” It comes after the principal of Citipointe Christian College in Brisbane stepped down for a period of “extended leave” after criticism for issuing student enrolment contracts that included gender and sexuality clauses. The contract was later withdrawn, with the principal insisting that “the college does not and will not discriminate against any student because of their sexuality or gender identity”. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, said on Thursday that the government would work to amend the religious freedom bill to explicitly prevent students being expelled for their sexuality or gender. The contentious bill proposed by the government would also make schools with controversial “statements of faith” immune to any legal consequences. Jeremy Wiggins, executive officer at Transcend Australia, said the religious discrimination bill was “harmful” and would “give licence to faith based employers to discriminate at will.” “If a LGBTQ+ student is terrified to express who they really are to a parent, school friend or teacher for fear of being shamed or expelled then they will constantly be in a state of unnecessary fear, causing great distress and trauma.” The president of the Rationalist Society of Australia, Dr Meredith Doig, told the Guardian it was “appalling” that schools could discriminate based on sexuality and gender. “Schools like Penrith and Citipointe are just the tip of the iceberg. Their ‘biblically-based’ anti-LGBTI views will become much more commonly seen if the religious discrimination bill is passed.” Doig said it was essential at such important intervals in young people’s lives to accept their identities and not to judge them. “It’s hard enough dealing with all the social expectations as it is but to have those in authority tell you that the way you feel is unacceptable, that your emerging sexuality is an abomination in the eyes of God, must be truly horrible.” “We should be accepting these young people’s emerging identities, not judging them.”Garmin’s latest top-of-the-line Fenix 7 track-it-all adventure smartwatch introduces a number of new features, better GPS, longer battery life and improved tech – as well as a touchscreen to go with its buttons. Starting at £599 ($699.99/A$1,049), it can hit £1,000 or more if you pick the largest, most fancy version. But the new luxury device does give us a preview on what the firm’s cheaper sports watches may feature later in the year. The Fenix 7 comes in a range of sizes, weights, materials and with an optional solar-charging system, all of which have full mapping. The new model looks like a refinement rather than a revolution away from previous Fenix designs. The 7S is the smallest, sleekest version with a 42mm case and 1.2in screen, although it is still obviously a sports watch. The standard 7 and supersized 7X are larger, chunkier beasts but are still light and comfortable to wear. The new touchscreen makes the Fenix feel slicker and more modern. You can tap and hold on widgets on the watch face to jump straight to things such as a graph of your heart rate, battery power settings or notifications, or swipe through menus, screens and maps. For daily smartwatch functions it works very well. But touchscreens are unreliable during activities, don’t work well in the wet nor with gloves. Garmin has kept its excellent five-button control system and disables touch when you start most activities, to prevent accidental pauses of runs or similar. Because of the smart way Garmin has integrated the touch system with buttons, everything can be controlled via either method or both at the same time. It is genuinely great The transflective colour LCD screen looks the same as its predecessor – clear and easy to read in direct sunlight, with a backlight for the night. But the power-efficient technology doesn’t look as slick as OLED screens. Specifications Screen: 1.2, 1.3 or 1.4in transflective MIP LCD Case size: 42, 47 or 51mm Case thickness: 14.1 to 14.9mm Band size: standard 20, 22 or 26mm quick release Weight: 42 to 68g body only Storage: 16 or 32GB Water resistance: 100 metres (10ATM) Sensors: GNSS (GPS, Glonass, Galileo, BeiDuo, QZSS), compass, thermometer, heart rate, pulse Ox Connectivity: Bluetooth, ANT+, wifi Long battery life The watch can be used independently of a smartphone, unlike rivals, paired via Bluetooth to an Android or iPhone, or synced with a Mac or Windows PC using the Garmin Express app and included USB cable. But the watch has wifi to sync data straight to your Garmin account, download new apps, system and map updates, too. The Fenix 7 lasts for a very long time between charges. Connected to my phone for smart notifications, with full activity and health-tracking features active, including blood oxygen monitoring during sleep and three hours of running, the watch lasted over 15 days and nights. It should last up to 40 hours of running with GNSS or longer with some power-saving features turned on – long enough for practically any activity. Note the smaller 7S has shorter battery life or the larger 7X lasts longer, while solar models can add up to four days extra smartwatch use or eight hours of running, too, roughly double the Fenix 6 Pro solar. It takes more than 2.5 hours to fully charge the Fenix 7 via USB, hitting 50% in an hour. Health, fitness and tracking The Fenix 7 can track practically every activity under the sun, with well over 60 activities preloaded and more available from the Connect IQ store. They cover all the sport and adventure bases, including walking, hiking and running in its various forms, most things concerning a bike, swimming and various water sports, triathlons and other multisport events, skiing, climbing, strength and gym work. And even some ball sports. It has two meaningful improvements to Garmin’s best-in-class running tracking. The improved GNSS consistently gets a satellite lock faster outdoors and indoors, and produces much more accurate live pace estimations compared with its predecessor. The new real-time “stamina” measurement for running and bike-based activities is a live estimate of how much energy your body has left as a percentage, based on your fitness, sleep, activity, recovery and other factors the watch tracks during your day. Your potential energy goes down steadily as you run, while your current stamina shrinks faster when putting in more effort and recovers when taking it easier. If the bar hits zero it doesn’t mean you’re immediately going to shut down but it is likely you won’t have the energy for top performance. Combined, they allow you to better pace yourself, such as if you’ve started off too fast in a race or haven’t pushed it hard enough in training. It gives you instant information of how much you have left after each interval or whether you’ve got the energy for a proper sprint finish. Afterwards, you can see a chart of your stamina against distance, pace or the other metrics the watch records. Observations The Fenix 7X has a light that acts as a torch or as a running light at night, flashing red as your arm swings back and white as it goes forward, making you more visible to cars. The sapphire solar models have an additional “multiband GPS” feature, which increases tracking accuracy around tall buildings or vegetation by locking on to the newer “L5” frequency band of GPS as well as the usual “L1” band. The watch has Garmin Pay for contactless payments but few banks are supported in the UK. Sustainability The Fenix 7 is generally repairable. The battery is rated to last at least a few years of frequent charge cycles while maintaining at least 80% capacity. In lasting more than 15 days between charges, in theory, the battery would not need to be replaced for as long as 20 years. The watch does not contain any recycled materials. Garmin guarantees at least two years of security updates from release, but typically supports its devices far longer. Garmin offers trade-in schemes for some lines and complies with WEEE and other local electronics recycling laws. Price The Garmin Fenix 7 comes in a variety of sizes and models, starting at £599.99 ($699.99/A$1,049) for the standard 42 or 47mm models. Solar models cost from £689 ($799.99/A$1,199) and the top sapphire solar models cost from £779.99 ($899.99/A$1,499). Verdict The Fenix 7 is a powerhouse of a do-it-all, go-anywhere, track-anything adventure watch, that is very much the best in the market. It is an excellent follow-up to the Fenix 6 line that introduces meaningful upgrades, many of which are expected to flow down into Garmin’s numerous lines of less expensive, more focused products over the next year. The longer 15-day-plus battery life, faster performance, better GPS, a touchscreen and stamina metrics are great additions to the comprehensive tracking Garmin is known for. Most people will only use about 5% of what the watch is capable of but that 5% will be different for each person and each occasion. The Fenix 7 is an expensive, statement purchase. If you just run or cycle it will be overkill but if you have the cash, do lots of activities or just like the idea of being able to parachute into the middle of nowhere and still find your way home, this is the watch for you. Pros: tracks everything under the sun, very long battery life, optional solar charging, cross-platform phone notifications, Garmin Pay, full offline mapping, offline Spotify, Bluetooth, wifi, 100m water resistance, real buttons, accurate GPS/GNSS, choice of materials. Cons: expensive, big, limited Garmin Pay bank support, limited smartwatch features compared with Apple Watch/Galaxy Watch, no voice control, screen basic compared to OLED. Other reviews Garmin Fenix 6 Pro Solar review: the solar-powered super watch Garmin Forerunner 245 Music review: a runner’s best friend Venu 2 review: can Garmin make a good smartwatch? Samsung Galaxy Watch 4 review: Google smartwatch raises bar Apple Watch Series 7 review: bigger screen, faster charging, still the bestThe supply chain crisis over the last year has caused quite a splash for the book publishing industry – literally. In early January, a large shipping vessel coming from Taiwan was stalled in the mid-Atlantic, its arrival into the port of New York delayed by port congestion. Intemperate weather – huge waves and powerful ocean winds – knocked 60 containers overboard. Another 89 containers were damaged as the ship rolled in the waves. Inside the containers were two highly anticipated cookbooks scheduled for release this spring: Turkey and the Wolf by the New Orleans chef Mason Hereford and Dinner in One by the New York Times columnist Melissa Clark. “The good news is that there were no critical injuries, as can happen in these situations. But the bad news is the books might be in a cargo container at the bottom of the Atlantic Ocean,” Hereford wrote on Instagram, saying it was the “most hilariously 2022 thing to happen yet this year”. Both authors pushed back their books’ release dates to later in the year. The loss of the books to the stormy seas almost seems like too apt a metaphor for the strain and chaos the coronavirus pandemic has inflicted on the publishing industry as it struggles to cope with supply issues, paper shortages and a surge in demand. The effects of the crisis have been far-reaching: even Donald Trump has weighed in, lamenting to Fox News about delays in printing more copies of a photo book of his presidency, titled Our Journey Together, that is being printed by Donald Trump Jr’s publishing company. According to Trump, the book’s printer told him, “Well, we have one problem: We can’t get paper. We can’t get ink. We can’t get glue. We can’t get leather for the covers.” While these issues are new to Trump, the publishing industry has been experiencing difficulties in its supply chain for months, affecting the release dates and availability of new titles. Hachette UK’s chief executive, David Shelley, warned in December that supply chain problems were causing the “most extreme” challenges he had seen in his career. The strain on the book industry’s supply chain coincides with soaring demand for print books during the pandemic. Print book sales in the US were up 8.9% in 2021 compared with 2020, which was already up 8.2% compared with 2019. While increased sales is generally good for the industry, book printing capacity has diminished over the last decade. One large US printer closed in 2018, while two others have significantly downsized their book printing operations in recent years. “It’s been a long-term trend to see diminished capacity in printing,” said Brian O’Leary, executive director of the Book Industry Study Group, which has been analyzing the industry’s supply chain problems. “That loss of capacity has been an issue since 2018, well before the pandemic … but there has been continued consolidation and declining capacity.” Printers have not been able to keep up with the increased demand from publishers as investment in new printing machines is costly, and it is unclear whether demand for print books will continue to rise. Paper has also been harder to find, O’Leary said. Mills have cut back on producing paper for books and magazines, instead using pulp to make more cardboard, packing and other types of papers that are more lucrative. While buyers once had the upper hand in the paper market and could order as much paper as needed, paper mills now tell printers how much paper they can give them. The shortage of paper has, in some cases, visibly changed the size of books. Different grades of paper will determine the thickness of a book. One Twitter user in September posted a picture of two copies of Donna Tartt’s The Secret History, one significantly thinner than the second though both are the same price. Some books, especially those that require a lot of color like cookbooks and art books, are typically printed in Asia, where the cost of printing is cheaper. But like many industries trying to ship goods across oceans, delays abound. Large ports on both coasts have been clogged for months, with dozens of ships floating offshore waiting to dock and unload their containers. Containers have piled up on docks, leaving a lack of space and a shortage of containers, as there has been a shortage of truck drivers. Warehouse storage has also been scarce because of labor shortages in warehouses and companies stockpiling products to meet demand. Book publishers expect that this slate of supply chain problems will continue this year. “We have to anticipate some continuing disruptions in 2022. We’re working hard to improve our ability to receive and ship our books faster and [keep] more reliable schedules,” Hachette Book Group’s CEO, Michael Pietsch, said in a company-wide email last year. The clogs in the supply chain have been especially tough for independent booksellers across the country, who have had to encourage customers to be patient with titles that are out of stock or have delayed releases because of the supply chain. “It’s made things a little bit more stressful just because things are always changing last-minute now. A lot of books have very long publishing timelines, and we’re just seeing a lot of books getting their publication dates pushed back,” said Colleen Callery, marketing and communications manager at Books Are Magic, an independent bookstore in Brooklyn. Some books have had their release dates pushed back several times, which leads to “domino effects”, affecting pre-order campaigns and events. Callery said that customers have been patient, and the bookstore’s sales have not been affected, in some part because of campaigns encouraging readers to shop at independent bookstores. In a statement to the Guardian, Allison Hill, CEO of the American Booksellers Association, said that many independent bookstores saw an increase in demand over the last few years. “2020 and 2021 were challenging years for so many businesses, and independent bookstores were no exception, struggling with significant increases in costs and uncertainty, but their recent sales have been encouraging,” Hill said. Independent booksellers have started to change the way they order books, Hill said, predicting what new titles will be popular, investing in titles they want to promote and reserving copies in case stock runs low. Booksellers have also been recommending more backlist titles – books that are not considered new releases – to customers, encouraging them to buy books they already have in stock. At least it’s too late for those to get lost at sea.The first song I remember hearing My mum and dad met at a jazz club in Ilford, east London, so I grew up in a house full of jazz and 50s rock’n’roll. Aged four or five, I’d do an impression of Elvis singing Hound Dog, complete with the knees and shoulders. The first single I bought I remember going to this excellent independent record store, Kelly’s Records on Brentwood High Street, aged nine or 10, to buy Start! by the Jam. For a long time I thought George Harrison had taken the riff from Paul Weller and used it on Taxman, not the other way around. The song that’s my karaoke go-to Louis Prima has been playing in my head since I first saw The Jungle Book, so my absolute go-to is Just a Gigolo, although I do like to hammer out Walk by Foo Fighters. The song I inexplicably know every lyric to My 19-year-old daughter was visiting from university and playing music to my nine-year-old twins, and they caught me singing along, at full volume, to Chiquitita by Abba. I don’t know how I have that in my head, but it’s apparently there. The best song to play at a party There’s something about Get Lucky by Daft Punk that makes people’s bodies start moving. But if you’re trying to get people to leave, you need something like A Multitude of Angels by Keith Jarrett, which I adore but my wife Anna [Paquin] thinks is the soundtrack to her nervous breakdown. The song I last streamed Right now, it’s Verbatim by Mother Mother, who my daughter introduced me to. I’m a massive Pavement fan and she said: “There’s a lot of Stephen Malkmus to this.” They’re really cool. The song I secretly like, but tell everyone I hate We went through that awful time of our kids doing Pinkfong’s version of Baby Shark. There were times I’d be cooking and Anna would catch me humming the most annoying song in the world because it must have stuck in my head. The song I wish I had written I can play a tiny bit of guitar and piano, but when I listen to how many changes and extraordinary moments there are in Paranoid Android by Radiohead, I think: “I’ll never be able to do that.” The song I want played at my funeral My dad died a couple of years ago. He was a massive Dixieland jazz fan, so we played If I Could Be With You by Kenny Ball &amp; His Jazzmen. So I’ll have that, too. Krays: Code of Silence is out now on digital and DVD .Grief, says playwright Morgan Lloyd Malcolm, is an endurance test. “It feels impossible sometimes, but when you come through certain chunks of it, you feel really proud that you’re still standing.” Her new play, When the Long Trick’s Over, investigates various forms of endurance, and follows a swimmer from one side of the Channel to the other. Using the dual lens of grief and sport, she wanted to write her way towards understanding “what a human body is capable of”. By setting the show almost entirely in water – occasional flashbacks take place on land – Lloyd Malcolm handed her team an impossible task. “You could get a massive water tank and try to tour that round the UK,” she says doubtfully, “but that’s not going to work. So how do you create the sense that you’re swimming?” The HighTide production, directed by Chinonyerem Odimba and starring Stacey Ghent and Shenagh Govan, is currently in rehearsal. They are experimenting with aerial work and digital projection to create an illusion of the depth and breadth of the water between Dover and Calais. Lloyd Malcolm has long been fascinated by Channel swimming. Several times, she has been tempted to try it herself. When she wrote the play, named after a line from John Masefield’s poem Sea Fever, she was in the midst of loss. “My dad had died the year before,” she explains over Zoom. “I was doing a lot of open-water swimming, and it was really helping.” Both she and her dad loved outdoor swimming, and at the time she was writing the play, she was considering doing a Channel swim in his memory. “There’s something about returning to water,” Lloyd Malcolm says slowly, trying to pin down why it’s such a comfort. “It’s womb-like, the sounds of it, the feeling of being held.” But cold-water swimming has something particular to it, something sharp. “You get in and it feels” she sucks in her breath, “really intense and hard. Then it feels really good, and it gives you a rush. Being outside and being under the sky.” She shakes her head: “It just really helps.” Lloyd Malcolm is best known for her speculative history play Emilia, which reimagines the life of 17th-century poet Emilia Bassano. Starting out at Shakespeare’s Globe, the Olivier award-winning show rocketed to the West End of London, winning rave reviews and avid fans. “There’s a pre-Emilia and a post-Emilia in the way my career has gone,” she says, clearly still a little bowled over by the response to the show. “I wasn’t struggling before, but things weren’t really getting anywhere.” When the Long Trick’s Over was one of those plays long stuck in development. “I was pregnant with my youngest,” she says, figuring out how long ago she wrote it. “She’s about to turn seven.” She has made tweaks to the text, but its core is still embedded in that immediate grief she felt eight years ago. While her proximity to the pain has shifted, it is still there. “I don’t think you ever really let go of grief,” she says. “It hits you again and again.” Another form of long-term pain is brought into the story with the swimmer’s sister, who suffers from periods that hurt to the point of being unbearable. It’s something Lloyd Malcolm’s own sister deals with. “We’ve not been able to work out what it is,” she says, “and it’s devastating. We’re still so behind on how women’s health is treated. There’s this idea that periods are just something we should suffer through, when it can be hugely debilitating.” And so the show became a story of two sisters, one of them struggling to hold on through the pain, one of them struggling to hold on to the other. Lloyd Malcolm is quick to stress that the show is fun, too. For research, she talked to many Channel swimmers, and learned that they often make obscure lists in their heads as they swim; since the 21-mile feat can take between 12 and 24 hours, they need mind games to break up the monotony. In the show, her swimmer starts by listing her favourite 90s songs, which subsequently make up the show’s playlist. It might be eight years late, but Lloyd Malcolm believes that this is the right time for the play to be staged. “It’s dealing with all the stuff we’ve been dealing with in the last couple of years,” she says. “We’ve been enduring something for so long, we’re all exhausted. Hopefully it’s a bit of a hug of a play.” Perhaps it’s time to finally take on the Channel, too. “Every so often I think I’ll do it one day.” Later this week, she’s talking to a group at Brockwell Lido in south London who are planning on swimming from Jersey to France. “I’m going to try to do that this summer. So, she says, slightly nervously. “I’m edging my way towards it.” • When the Long Trick’s Over is at the New Wolsey theatre, Ipswich, 11-15 February and livestreamed on 14-15 February. Then touring.We need to know if we have a realistic claim against Norwegian Airways, to which we paid £2,676 for flights to America which are no longer possible to take. In August 2019, having saved up for years, we bought flights to Florida for a once-in-a-lifetime family trip to Disneyland. Covid hit and the airline cancelled. At the time, we were persuaded to take “points” rather than a cash refund, and told these could be used to rebook. In December 2020, we booked new Norwegian flights to Florida, paying a cash top-up. However, a month later Norwegian announced it would no longer be flying to the US, and the flight was cancelled. The points were returned to our rewards account, and the small cash sum refunded. Since then, I have been trying to get the airline to refund the cost of the original flights, but to no avail. When I agreed to take the points, it was on the understanding they would be used to buy new US flights. The points expire on 22 December this year. Can you offer us any hope? KD, by email In March 2020, when the airlines started cancelling flights, Guardian Money was strongly advising readers to hold out for cash refunds, often in the face of refusals by the airlines which were determined to offer vouchers instead. The biggest problem is that Norwegian Air UK – the bit of the company that sold you the original flight – has gone into liquidation, and is no longer flying to the US. Unusually, its parent firm, Norwegian Air Shuttle, is still honouring the rewards programme which, in effect, holds yours – and countless others’ – credit. It’s doing this to retain some goodwill. The company told me that when you agreed to take the points you, in effect, entered a new contract, and it is for this reason that it cannot give you a cash refund. Coby Benson, a flight lawyer at Bott and Co, describes the case as a “sad set of circumstances and a cautionary tale regarding accepting an airline’s vouchers”. As a result of the liquidation, he says, there is little prospect of a refund. He suggests contacting your credit card company, but you paid by debit card. I have come up with one possible solution, though. If you decide the points are worthless to you, there is nothing to stop you using them to book other people on Norwegian flights, and coming to a financial arrangement with them behind the scenes. Norwegian has confirmed the booker doesn’t have to fly. It must be worth a try. We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email consumer.champions@theguardian.com or write to Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Include a phone number. Letters are subject to our terms: gu.com/letters-termsNew greenfield housing developments are locking residents into car dependency, making everyday journeys impossible without a vehicle, a new report has found. Meanwhile, pledges for walking, cycling and public transport are often left unfulfilled. The group Transport for New Homes (TfNH) visited 20 new housing developments in England, finding that while those on urban brownfield sites generally lived up to sustainable transport pledges, greenfield sites were often far from shops and amenities, without public transport, cycling links or even pavements, and the homes themselves were seemingly designed around car parking. Surface transport is responsible for 22% of the UK’s greenhouse gas emissions, and the Climate Change Committee says reducing demand for car travel is key to meeting emission reduction targets. Campaigners say housing pledges in the “levelling up” white paper, launched last week, will do little to achieve this and that planning reform is urgently needed. The government aims to build 300,000 new homes a year to meet growing demand. The report, Building Car Dependency, which follows research from 2018, says greenfield housing “has become even more car-based” in recent years, adding hundreds of thousands of additional car journeys to our roads. Steve Chambers, a campaigner at TfNH, told the Guardian: “We have found places where you can’t do anything without getting into a car; you literally cannot do anything. There is nothing within walking distance, there’s nothing within safe cycling distance, and for work, for going to the shop; for everything you can imagine, you need to get in the car. “The impact of that is that houses are being designed around two and three parking spaces with tiny back gardens, no front gardens whatsoever, and that poor design obviously crowds out walking, cycling, and basically good homes.” “There isn’t even the most basic public transport in a lot of places. There isn’t even a bus route, which is clearly an issue.” The report did identify a few cases of greenfield developments with sustainable transport links, such as Hampton Park in Peterborough, Poundbury in Dorset and Derwenthorpe in York, but otherwise found “the internal road layout, the car access on to major roads with bigger junctions to take the traffic, the sheer quantity of residential car parking, all told the story”. During the pandemic, residents of such estates reported being unable to walk anywhere because the surrounding roads lacked footpaths. While car access was built first, TfNH say walkable elements such as a high street, a children’s centre or community facilities arrived after driving habits were formed. At Chapelford Urban Village, on a former RAF site north-west of Warrington, a new railway station finally opened in 2019, 15 years after the first homes were sold. “Quick wins” such as footpaths to nearby shops or park-and-rides failed to link up or led nowhere. In one case, shops adjacent to a retirement home were rendered inaccessible to less mobile residents by an ankle-high fence. Some front doors opened directly on to car parking spaces. In Cranbrook New Town, near Exeter, a road was too narrow for buses to reach a new bus stop. Exceptions were at brownfield sites like Bath Riverside and Trumpington Meadows in Cambridge, the former where “the public realm is shaped around walking” with car parking “limited and mostly out of sight”. Steve Gooding, chair of the steering group for Transport for New Homes, told the Guardian: “There’s no evidence coming through in the report that at scale we’re managing to deploy new housing in a way that really promotes the government’s parallel objectives of promoting active travel, public transport and alternatives to the private car. And unless we do that, then it shouldn’t surprise any of us that the car is going to be the default choice for the vast majority of trips that people make.” Among the report’s recommendations are that new housing is “recast around sustainable travel”, with compact, mixed-use developments such as European-style apartments above business premises. In addition, less parking per home would reduce sprawl and make use for pavements, green space and a network of Dutch-style cycle routes. Authors also want devolved powers for things like local rail and bus rapid transit systems, with funding diverted from road-building to provide walking and cycling links. Chambers added: “We’ve found everything from developers planning applications, through to the local plans of local authorities, right up to the National Planning Policy Framework have incredibly warm words about walking, cycling, public transport, and ‘creating vibrant walkable places’, and what we have shown through our visits and our documentary evidence, hundreds of photographs, it simply isn’t being delivered. “There’s no reason to believe that what’s presented in the levelling up white paper – which make no changes to the planning system, and crucially includes no new funding whatsoever – will have different outcomes.” Rosie Pearson, chair of the Community Planning Alliance, said: “Developers are building in the wrong place, with the wrong design and the wrong layout. This locks in car dependency from the outset, leading to persistent traffic jams, dangerous conditions for pedestrians and cyclists, and air pollution. It’s time for change.” A spokesperson for the Department for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities said: “We welcome this report and agree that new development should be less dependent on cars. By 2030, we want half of all journeys in towns and cities to be walked or cycled and are investing £3bn into bus services. “National Planning Policy is clear that significant development should give priority to pedestrians, cyclists and public transport, and we will be updating guidance later this year to promote street design that favours walkways and cycle paths over motor traffic.”When Robson Scott, a live music fan from Newcastle, went to his first gig in 2011, he remembers paying around £30 for a standing ticket to see Katy Perry at Utilita arena. Ten years later, he says, “for arena gigs of that calibre you’d usually be paying over £65.” That’s a rise that far exceeds the UK’s rate of inflation during that time, which was 2.6% per year, on average, or the equivalent of £8.90. A scan of current ticket prices for artists who are at the superstar level that Perry was in 2011, when she’d had a string of No 1 hits and had released her most successful album Teenage Dream a year earlier, confirms Scott’s experience. Standing tickets for Billie Eilish’s 2022 tour are around £75 for UK arena dates, for example, while Robson recently paid £89 for a standing ticket to see Harry Styles at Emirates Old Trafford. On top of the decade-long incremental rise, there is evidence of further price increases since the start of the Covid-19 pandemic. Weekend adult tickets for Green Man festival are up to £210 this year from £189 in 2019, while Latitude festival is charging £227, up from £202 in 2019. The world’s largest live music promoter, Live Nation, said in its latest quarterly financial results that strong demand enabled “improved pricing”, and that the average amphitheatre or major festival ticket price had seen double-digit growth from the last pre-pandemic year. What’s driving the increase? Greg Parmley, CEO of industry trade body LIVE, points to rising costs and shortages throughout the supply chain, which make putting on gigs and festivals more expensive than before. “From skilled crew right the way through to Portakabins and toilets, there are shortages across the UK that are driving up costs significantly. This is on top of the well-publicised wider inflationary pressures that are flowing through the economy,” he says. Music agent Natasha Gregory, who is working on the current Idles tour (tickets for which are priced just below £30, with booking fees on top), confirms what Parmley says: “Tour-related costs are through the roof at the moment.” According to Gregory, part of that is due to requiring extra staff for Covid-related checks and cleaning; tests and visas when travelling between markets (the latter due to Brexit); an increase in venue hire fees, and having to change plans or refund tickets as a result of the evolving Covid-19 situation. “Finally, no one has insurance for these shows, which is impossible to get against Covid,” she says. “If a tour has to be cancelled last minute, no one gets their money back. It’s a big risk for many bands, so you have to add more contingency costs.” Green Man festival owner Fiona Stewart says her costs have risen 34.5% since 2016 against a 20% rise in ticket prices. This year, “we’ve started to see real problems with sourcing goods and services,” she says, adding that Brexit has also exacerbated issues for festivals. “A lot of the big touring infrastructure, which Britain was a world leader in, has been completely decimated. Now, because you can only make two stops if you’re a British vehicle in any European country, all those companies are moving to Europe so everything we utilise to do with infrastructure has increased in price.” Stuart Galbraith, CEO of promoter Kilimanjaro Live, says that gig ticket prices are typically set by an artist, their agent and manager in collaboration with the promoter. Prices will take into account costs as well as supply and demand, so “if an artist chooses to go with a very high ticket price, that’s with their full knowledge,” he says. However, Adam Webb, campaign manager at FanFair Alliance, which was set up to challenge industrial-scale online ticket touting, says that demand can be distorted by the secondary ticketing market. In the US, so-called dynamic pricing is frequently used, which is where gig ticket prices change according to demand (much like flight and hotel prices). The problem with this, says Webb, is that prices are set according to what’s in the secondary ticketing market, too, which can include non-existent and speculative tickets being sold by touts for huge markups. This practice isn’t as rampant in the UK although Webb is starting to see it creep in – an example of which can be seen in the standing ticket prices for Coldplay’s forthcoming stadium shows, which have inflated from £85 face value to over £300 (and that’s for official tickets, not ones from secondary sites). Webb says: “As we’ve seen with numerous media reports [about] Viagogo in the UK, the big secondary websites appear to be rife with speculative listings. Consequently, using them as a benchmark for your pricing is problematic. Taking what might be a speculative listing and claiming it’s reflective of ‘demand’ or ‘market price’ is a distortion.” Aside from the effects of dynamic pricing, Kilimanjaro promoter Galbraith does expect to see a continued hike in average ticket prices over the coming years due to increasing costs. “They will increase by necessity,” he says. “We’ve just endured two years of begging the government for subsidy and we’ve done everything we can to keep everybody’s jobs and the industry going.” Suppliers offering equipment and services for live shows, including trucking, stages, security and toilets for outdoor events, he says, “are in a seller’s market and have to maximise their income for survival.” With the cost of living reaching its highest level in almost 30 years in December, when inflation jumped to 5.4%, while average wages have dropped, is there a risk of live music becoming elitist? “No, I don’t think there is,” says Galbraith. “There will always be hundreds of thousands of artists who want to maximise the number of people coming to see them for as little as possible. “You could accuse superstars of driving up their ticket prices, but that’s their choice, and I do think that, at a grassroots level, for many names who progress all the way up through theatres, arenas and stadiums, we will continue to see sensibly priced tickets.” Robson isn’t so sure: “Even with the inflated prices, I’m still going to go to gigs because music is what I live for. But working-class people are getting priced out of seeing the musicians they love.”When I was a student, there was a craze among a small group of my friends for a bestselling self-help book called Women Who Love Too Much by an American therapist whose name was Robin Norwood. We were all feminists, though at this point (it was the late 80s) the f-word was painfully unfashionable, and on our shelves was lots of seriously good – if then already slightly retro – theoretical stuff: Kate Millett, Janet Radcliffe Richards, Sandra Gilbert and Susan Gubar. Also, of course, Our Bodies, Ourselves by the Boston Women’s Health Book Collective, in its millionth (or so) edition. But somewhat to our embarrassment, it was Norwood’s book whose spine was the most cracked. What can I say? At 19, and away from home for the first time, all we really wanted to know was how to stop wasting so much of our time and energy on horrible men. The grandiloquently titled Sexual Revolution: Modern Fascism and the Feminist Fightback sounds more Kate Millett than Robin Norwood; it promises something serious-minded and galvanising, even if the word fascism does, in context, whiff just a little of Rick in The Young Ones. But as I read Laurie Penny’s “searing critique of male dominance”, it was Norwood of whom I thought. If the tone of this book is almost comically relentless – if Penny, whose pronouns are they/them, says something once, they say it 54 times – it’s also oddly reminiscent of a superannuated self-help manual, its assumptions seemingly based mostly on the experiences of its author and their friends, a focus group to whom every possible Bad Thing has happened at least once (so handy). Men? Oh, they’re in terrible distress; they’re forever emailing Penny to tell them just how toxic masculinity is. Women? Well, they’re in terrible distress too, only they’re fighting back. To sum up: “More women are asking if they might do something bigger with their lives than wear themselves out saving the world one man at a time.” For the reader, especially the reader who has never read a book or a newspaper, never watched any television or seen a film, Penny has all sorts of revelations. For instance: there are now more women in the “male workplace” than for centuries. Patriarchy, in case you don’t know, is a “power system based on male dominance” and consent “is not an object you can hold in your hand” (unlike some things Penny could – and does – mention). It should also be noted that there are currently a lot of authoritarians around: Bolsonaro, Johnson, Putin, Trump, Jacinda Ardern … No, not Ardern. Ha, I almost got you there, didn’t I? Actually, Penny doesn’t mention Ardern at all, nor even Angela Merkel. Anyway, moving on: things are grim because women are still judged far too much on their looks, ageism is very cruel, and male violence is just, like, everywhere. But don’t be disheartened. Penny has good news, too. Like them, we may eventually be able to overcome our addiction to “predators with pretty eyes and a vacancy for a secret side-piece”. We may even wind up loving ourselves instead of just waiting around “for a man” to find us lovable (for someone who identifies as gender-queer, and who therefore has some trouble with the word woman, which does not reflect their “lived experience”, Penny uses “man” with an abandon that is quite dizzying). Heterosexuality is – newsflash! – “in trouble”, but good sex is still possible, once you “stop looking to White supremacy and patriarchy to define its terms”. Penny enjoyed a fantastically sexy weekend in Berlin in 2018 – good clean (or not) fun of a kind no “pearl-clutching Promise Keeper or chatroom-addled crypto-fascist” is ever likely to experience. Most crucially of all, something is now – out in the world, I mean – fighting to break out, as if from a shell: something “wet and angry”, with “claws”. By this, I think Penny is referring to the ongoing activism that was stirred by #MeToo, but I suppose it is possible – I’m troubled by the word “wet” – that I’ve got this entirely wrong. Personally, my feminism is fiercer than it has been for decades. I don’t disagree that things are still appalling for women, and in some senses I believe they’re getting worse. But the reader waits in vain for Penny to offer solutions to the injustice they describe, for serious analysis of any kind. The best they can do is to suggest that affordable childcare might be of help. No shit, Sherlock. The chapter devoted to sex work is utterly enraging, and not only because Penny clearly knows so little about it (where are the interviews, the statistics, the thoughts of experts in this field?). Having painstakingly explained that many women enjoy sex – that they do not, contrary to the old myths, only endure it, the better to keep their men happy – Penny then accuses those women, feminists and others, who are critical of the sex industry of, yes, a sort of twisted envy, because why should some women get paid for what others have to do for free? I’m afraid I clutched my own pearls (inherited, I should say, from a grandmother who left school at 13) at this point. Having spent half of my life hoping for feminism’s revival – for it to be, if not fashionable, then proudly worn and meaningfully directed – it is lowering beyond words to see a serious publisher describe this ill-edited, ill-considered drivel as a manifesto for the cause. This isn’t feminism. This is a swizz. • Sexual Revolution: Modern Fascism and the Feminist Fightback by Laurie Penny is published by Bloomsbury (£20). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply • This article was amended on 7 February 2022, for consistency, to use the pronouns they/them for Penny throughout.Switch your bank account Moving the account you use for everyday spending is one of the easiest ways to make sure your money is being used in an environmentally friendly way. It’s often hard, or impossible, to find out exactly what the big banks are investing people’s money in, or supporting in other ways. So if you want to be sure your cash isn’t going towards financing industries or projects harming our world, seek providers who are explicitly backing green projects. Arguably, the UK’s most ethical current account provider is Triodos Bank, based in Bristol and part of a group founded in the Netherlands. It says it only finances organisations making a positive impact for people and the planet. Its current account, operated online and via an app, comes with a contactless debit Mastercard and offers an overdraft of up to £2,000. But there’s a £3 monthly fee, and no high street branches, so it won’t suit everyone. Of the high street banks, the Co-operative is the only one that has expressly prohibited support for fossil fuels, says Ethical Consumer, an independent, not-for-profit organisation that reviews companies and products. The Co-operative Bank calls itself “the original ethical bank,” but is now majority-owned by a group of hedge funds and fund managers, which may trouble some. Then there are app-based banks such as Monzo and Starling, which may well be “cleaner” when it comes to what they invest in and lend to because they are newer, smaller, and don’t necessarily have financial interests around the globe, but aren’t as transparent as a bank such as Triodos. “If you particularly want to switch to an app-only bank, Starling appears marginally more engaged than the others on ethical issues,” says Ethical Consumer’s website. Another option is a building society because they are owned by members, not shareholders. The biggest, Nationwide runs a number of current accounts. Meanwhile, some credit unions offer current accounts. To find one near you, go to findyourcreditunion.co.uk Moving your bank account is now quick and easy – the industry’s current account switch service has taken away a lot of the hassle. Sort out your savings A lot of the above also applies to savings accounts. The good news is, there’s much more choice. There are lots of building societies, including Ecology, which uses savings cash to fund environmentally friendly mortgages. It offers several accounts, including easy-access and regular-savings paying 0.1% and 0.8% respectively. Triodos Bank has a range of accounts including a junior cash Isa (for those saving for a child) currently paying 1.5%. Charity Bank lends to charities and social enterprises and has notice accounts paying up to 0.35%, and fixed-rate bonds paying up to 0.75%. Credit unions are another option. Don’t forget about National Savings and Investments (NS&amp;I) – its mission includes “providing cost-effective financing for government and the public good”. As well premium bonds it has a choice of savings accounts. Invest well There are a huge number of green/ethical/sustainable funds. Which you decide to put your money into will, to a large extent, come down to personal taste and how much risk you’re willing to accept. “With more choice than ever, and performance stacking up well against traditional funds, there’s little reason not to choose a sustainable fund for your Isa or other investments,” says Lisa Stanley, the co-founder of ethical money website Good With Money. Her site’ “good investment review” lets you see which funds get the highest green rating. For financial advisers, check out The Path Financial, BlueSphere and Castlefield, among others. David Macdonald at The Path Financial says: “It’s important to get under the bonnet and really ask some of the hard questions to make sure a provider is as green as they appear to be.” Use online tools If you are investing without an adviser, there are a growing number of apps, investment platforms and the like that offer ready-made green portfolios. Those that Stanley likes include Clim8 Invest, Circa5000 (formerly known as tickr), The Big Exchange (co-founded by The Big Issue), Wealthify’s ethical plans, and Moneybox’s socially responsible options. Meanwhile, Sugi helps you analyse the carbon impact of your current investments and offset your portfolio. There are also ethical investment platforms that allow people to invest directly in bonds or shares issued by charities and businesses. They include Ethex and Abundance. Move your pension There’s an estimated £2.6tn invested in UK pensions, and a chunk of it funds industries such as fossil fuels and weapons. But there are things you can do to make your retirement fund more eco-friendly. Most workplace pension schemes automatically put members into a “default fund,” which may, or may not be, very (or at all) green. But many offer an ethical or sustainable fund option, and staff can opt to pay some, or all, contributions into that. If it’s not clear what the deal is, talk to the trustees of the scheme. The good news is that during the last couple of years, a number of big UK workplace pension schemes have taken action – for example, by setting net zero carbon emissions targets for their holdings. This will see them moving away from investments in polluting companies. Go for a greener insurer Insurance can be tricky in environmental terms because there might be several companies involved in a policy. A comparison website can find youa provider, but the policy may be underwritten by a different company. Ethical Consumer says insurers with “better” climate change policies include Zurich, Axa and Aviva. The latter plans to be net zero by 2040. Stanley says: “On the smaller side, Naturesave offers home, travel and business insurance, donates 10% of its annual home and travel insurance income to charity, and plants a tree for each new policy issued.” Be aware that the Co-op sold its insurance underwriting business at the end of 2020. Green mortgages are go A growing number of financial firms are launching mortgages that incentivise buying or owning an energy-efficient home by offering borrowers more favourable terms than come as standard. That usually means either a slightly lower interest rate, or a cashback payment when the deal is taken out, or both. Some of these loans are restricted to people buying a new-build property. Lenders offering such deals include NatWest, Barclays, Nationwide and Leeds building society, with more coming on board all the time. Aside from the above deals, building societies are a better bet generally when it comes to mortgages due to the fact they lend mainly in the housing market rather than other more unethical sectors, says Ethical Consumer. Ecology building society specialises in home loans for properties and projects that have a positive environmental or social impact, such as certain self-build and renovation projects.The first time Richard Epstein went to his local ice-skating rink in Santa Fe, New Mexico, he was handed a free pair of skates. They had been left behind by a discontented customer. “I do things out of my comfort zone, and good things happen,” he observes. This wisdom was borne out last December, when Epstein, now 78, skated in his first exhibition. His wife filmed his routine, which he performed with his coach, Teri Moellenberg, then his eldest daughter posted it on Twitter, along with a note that Epstein has stage four prostate cancer. Nearly 3 million people viewed it. Epstein is somewhat baffled by the response, describing himself as “just an old guy going around in circles”. Often, when he drives to the rink, as he does three times a week, he reminds himself that good things follow discomfort. He always feels “a little anxious … Am I going to stumble? There is a risk of failure that I have to get over and work through – a barrier,” he says, beyond which lies “the feeling of being well, having accomplished something, feeling a little proud of myself”. As a child, Epstein was “really terrible” at sports. He still feels embarrassed that he couldn’t throw a ball straight. “I’m an active person but one of the world’s worst athletes. I don’t have this ‘used to be good’ mentality,” he says. What he does have is a long personal and professional history of embracing mistakes, and uncertainty. At high school, Epstein was streamed in “the medium track”. (“Don’t expect too much from these kids!” he giggles.) However, when he studied physics in college, the world and his own place in it began to make sense. “It gelled – it’s who I was.” A research physicist with stints at the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics and the Nordic Institute for Theoretical Physics, Epstein is now an unpaid research professor at the University of New Mexico. He has published 200 technical papers and worked for the past two decades on a refrigerator that can reach very low temperatures with no vibration. He hopes to reach “a major milestone” in this project in the next year. Somehow, he retains a “fading” sense of not fitting in. “I guess – to put things into some context professionally – I’m dyslexic. Totally poor memory,” he says. He has “mental scaffolding to compensate … It’s fun to find our individual approaches to make sense of the world.” He used to look back at his childhood self, and think that one day he would feel “relaxed and cool and comfortable in my own skin … I’m still waiting,” he says with a chuckle. Maybe ice-skating compensates for clumsiness in childhood? Epstein has also tried snowboarding, rock climbing and inline skating, all of which challenge balance. He insists he doesn’t mind falling, though these days he wears pads at the rink. Did the response to his exhibition video make him feel more connected? “It didn’t really make me feel: ‘Oh, I’m accepted now,’” he says. “I wasn’t really trying to relate to people – I was trying to relate to my daughters.” As a scientist, he has always committed to projects with uncertain futures, and worked fruitfully in that unmapped space. The word he comes up with to describe his scientific style (and perhaps he would say it applies to the rink too) is “bumbling”. “That’s my biggest skill,” he says, and, although this sounds modest, it does not speak of ineffectualness so much as a deep love of exploration uninhibited by fear of failure. Epstein enjoys how the ice “takes me out of my ordinary ways”. There’s “the wind blowing through my hair. It is a joy to glide and turn, to get on the inside edge of the skate – that feeling of a centrifugal force.” He is receiving treatment for chronic lymphocytic leukaemia as well as prostate cancer, and, while he experiences no “unpleasant symptoms or side-effects”, the illnesses are “a strong reminder of mortality”. For now, he hopes the refrigerator “could be a big deal”, and that he manages to perfect his “three turn”, so called because the blade carves a 3 into the ice. “That would be, to me, a very significant step forward.” Tell us: has your life taken a new direction after the age of 60?Donald Trump’s incendiary call at a Texas rally for his backers to ready massive protests against “radical, vicious, racist prosecutors” could constitute obstruction of justice or other crimes and backfire legally on Trump, say former federal prosecutors. Trump’s barbed attack was seen as carping against separate federal and state investigations into his efforts to overturn the 2020 election results and into his real estate empire. Trump’s rant that his followers should launch the “biggest protests” ever in three cities should prosecutors “do anything wrong or illegal” by criminally charging him over his efforts to overturn Joe Biden’s victory, or for business tax fraud, came at a 30 January rally in Texas where he repeated falsehoods that the election was rigged. Legal experts were astonished at Trump’s strong hints that if he runs and wins a second term in 2024, he would pardon many of those charged for attacking the Capitol on 6 January last year in hopes of thwarting Biden’s certification by Congress. The former Nixon White House counsel John Dean attacked Trump’s talk of pardons for the rioters as the “stuff of dictators”, and stressed that “failure to confront a tyrant only encourages bad behavior”. Taken together, veteran prosecutors say Trump’s comments seemed to reveal that the former president now feels more legal jeopardy from the three inquiries in Atlanta, Washington and New York, all of which have accelerated since the start of 2022. Trump’s anxiety was palpable when he urged supporters at the Texas rally to stage “the biggest protests we have ever had in Washington DC, in New York, in Atlanta and elsewhere,” should any charges be brought, a plea for help that could boomerang and create more legal problems for the former president. Dennis Aftergut, a former federal prosecutor who is of counsel to Lawyers Defending American Democracy, told the Guardian that Trump “may have shot himself in the foot” with the comments. “Criminal intent can be hard to prove, but when a potential defendant says something easily seen as intimidating or threatening to those investigating the case it becomes easier,” Aftergut said. Aftergut added that having proclaimed “his support for the insurrectionists, Trump added evidence of his corrupt intent on January 6 should the DoJ prosecute him for aiding the seditious conspiracy, or for impeding an official proceeding of Congress”. Likewise, a former US attorney in Georgia, Michael Moore, said Trump’s comments could “potentially intimidate witnesses and members of a grand jury”, noting that it is a felony in Georgia to deter a witness from testifying before a grand jury. Trump “is essentially calling for vigilante justice against the justice system. He’s not interested in the pursuit of justice but blocking any investigations,” Moore added. Trump’s angry outburst came as three investigations by prosecutors that could lead to charges against Trump or top associates all seemed to gain steam last month. A special grand jury, for example, was approved in Atlanta focused on Trump’s call to Georgia’s secretary of state, Brad Raffensperger, on 2 January last year, asking him to just “find” enough votes to block Joe Biden’s Georgia victory, a state Trump lost by more than 11,700 votes. Trump’s call for huge protests prompted the Fulton county district attorney, Fani Willis, who is leading the criminal inquiry, to ask the FBI to compile a threat assessment to protect her office and the grand jury that is slated to meet in May. Last month too, a top justice official revealed that the DoJ is investigating fake elector certifications declaring Trump the winner in several states he lost, a scheme reportedly pushed by Trump’s lawyer Rudy Giuliani for Vice-President Mike Pence could block Congress from certifying Biden’s win. To Trump’s chagrin, Pence rejected the plan. Further, the New York state attorney general last month stated in a court document that investigators had found evidence that Trump’s real-estate business used “fraudulent or misleading” asset valuations to obtain loans and tax benefits, allegations Trump and his lawyers called politically motivated. Ex-prosecutors say that Trump’s Texas comments are dangerous and could legally boomerang, as the prosecutors appear to have new momentum. “Our criminal laws seek to hold people accountable for their purposeful actions,” Paul Pelletier, a former acting chief of the fraud section at the DoJ, said. “Trump’s history of inciting people to violence demonstrates that his recent remarks are likely to cause a disruption of the pending investigations against him and family members.” Pelletier added: “Should his conduct actually impede any of these investigations, federal and state obstruction statutes could easily compound Mr Trump’s criminal exposure.” Trump’s remarks resonated especially in Georgia, where former prosecutors say he may now face new legal problems. Aftergut noted that Willis understood the threat when she quickly asked the FBI to provide protection at the courthouse, and he predicted that the immediate effect on the deputy DAs working on the case would be “to energize them in pursuing the case”. In a similar vein, Norm Eisen, a former diplomat and the States United Democracy Center co-chair said Trump’s call for protests in Atlanta, New York and Washington if prosecutors there charge him, “certainly sounds like a barely veiled call for violence. That’s particularly true when you combine it with his other statements at the Texas rally about how the last crowd of insurrectionists are being mistreated and did no wrong.” In addition, Congresswoman Liz Cheney, the co-chair of the House panel investigating the 6 January Capitol assault by Trump followers, has stated that Trump’s talk of pardons and encouraging new protests suggests he would “do it all again, if given the chance”. On another legal front, Aftergut pointed out that some Trump comments at the rally might help prosecutors at the DoJ expand their inquiry. He said: “Trump handed federal prosecutors another gift when he said that Mike Pence should have ‘overturned the election’.” Some veteran consultants say Trump’s latest attacks on prosecutors shows he is growing more nervous as investigations appear to be getting hotter. “Trump’s prosecutor attacks are wearing thin with the broad Republican electorate,” said the Arizona Republican consultant Chuck Coughlin. “He’s trying to whip up the base for his personal gain. This is another iteration of Trump’s attacks on the government.” From a broader perspective, Moore stressed that Trump’s multiple attacks on the legal system at the Texas rally represent “just another erosion of the norms of a civilized society by Trump. The truth has taken a back seat to Trumpism.”I have recently upgraded my living arrangements from a flat with an attic but no garden to a house with a garden but no attic. Unfortunately, in London my ideal set-up of a house with an attic and a garden costs around £28m, but moving to a place with no storage in the loft means I’m forced to confront a problem that has been nagging away at me for years – what to do with my old football programmes. Clearing the attic before the big move should be relatively easy. I have no sentimental attachment to the Nutribullet my brother-in-law bought me three years ago, I am quite content to throw the gigantic, mosaic-tiled mirror my partner was given by her best friend as a 30th birthday present into a disused canal and I can live without Christmas decorations. But throwing out hundreds of largely worthless football programmes from the matches I’ve attended since I was a child will prove more challenging. If I hadn’t got round to buying a programme for the friendly Wales played against Jamaica at Ninian Park in March 1998 would I regret it? No, of course not. Would I be angry at my younger self if I’d bought the programme on the night, checked that Merthyr-born defender Steve Jenkins did in fact weigh 78kg and then binned it as I left the ground, after the game had played out to an entertaining but goalless draw? No, and that is surely what normal people do with these things. But in 2022, with space in the new house limited and difficult decisions having to be made, can I throw it out? No, that’s out of the question, because holding on to that particular programme for this long makes it 24 years old, which means I am a de facto custodian of football history. It is a static problem, as at the beginning of this season my club Swansea City announced that matchday programmes would be digital only, conveniently accessible on your phone, free of charge. But that doesn’t solve the problem of what to do with the ones already in my possession. The ones from 2002-03, surely I’d want them, we were almost relegated from the Football League, what a memento of survival they provide! What about the ones from our Premier League years, which I initially only started collecting as I assumed our stay in England’s top flight would be fleeting? Well, once you start thinking like that you end up with 40 page keepsakes from games against Southampton you don’t even remember attending, unable to chuck them out in case Swansea never taste life in the top division again. And then of course there’s the programmes from games that happened before I was born – well the FA Cup semi-final against Preston at Villa Park in March 1964, that obviously goes in a frame, but the complete set of 1977-78 programmes that were bought for me at a car boot sale by a well-meaning friend’s mother? Well, they should be binned… but I’ve just noticed that each one has the advert: “Coal: A Big Industry With A Big Future” on the back page which makes them documents of social as well as football history, so yes – they’ll be going to the new house. Maybe my son can get rid of some of his Duplo or my daughter could reconsider her bike. When I first started going to football matches it was a treat, an enormous event, and buying a souvenir programme was a big part of the day. In the pre‑internet era they also served as reference guides, providing the final word in any argument: “You SEE? I TOLD YOU Mark Pembridge is the latest in a long line of South Walian footballers to be discovered by Luton scout Cyril Beech and that Dean Saunders is 5ft 8!” Programmes were mementoes from my first experiences of attending live sport, matches that would have been memorable no matter what happened on the pitch. But once you have attended hundreds of games and you are an adult with a car, a cork noticeboard in the kitchen and a mouthful of aggressive plaque, do the more recent ones pass the Marie Kondo test? Does looking at my programme for West Bromwich Albion v Swansea City from 2 February 2016 “spark joy?” Not really, although on opening a page at random, seeing the phrase “precious Premier League points are up for grabs in this battle between 14th and 15th” did cause my heart to race a little. What I’m actually doing by keeping them, is saving up joy for the future. 2016 still seems so recent, but as long as I hold onto it for long enough, Tony Pulis urging Baggies fans to “get behind the lads” will appear as quaint to me as the summary of referee Bo Karlsson, described in the programme for Wales v Germany in June 1991 as being “a bank clerk in real life”. I was performing at the Salford Lowry before Christmas, and a kind audience member added to my collection by leaving some 1960s Llanelli RFC programmes at the stage door. Unlike my father I’m not really a rugby man, and in recent years his memory has been blunted by Parkinson’s disease. As we looked through this treasure trove of lineups from Llanelli’s golden age, as well as some remarkably unimaginative adverts (“Do You Need Tyres? Visit Llanelli Tyres”), my father displayed an effortless, if unexpected capacity to recall every player who had turned out for his hometown club during his teenage years. The straightforward language of the “Llanelli Players On The Injury List” section sparked joy in us both (sample entry: “John Lugg: HAND STILL IN PLASTER”), but the sheer passage of time turned these initially unremarkable documents into something spellbinding. I can see why some clubs have moved this stuff online. Printed programmes already appear as antiquated as the typewriters they were once written on. But there are certain things you can’t do with an app.England led Scotland 17-10 with less than 20 minutes to go on Saturday but Eddie Jones’s side proceeded to unravel and succumbed to an opening defeat on the first Six Nations weekend for the third year in a row. Here are five key incidents from the dramatic finale at Murrayfield. Ford replaces Smith, 63min Try as he might, Marcus Smith found prising open Scotland’s defence a difficult proposition in the first half. All that possession, all that territory but Steve Tandy has built a robust defensive unit at Scotland and England, perhaps lacking a bit in cohesion – not to mention a heavyweight ball‑carrier of Manu Tuilagi’s ilk – were clunky in attack. Smith then took matters into his own hands, pinned back his ears and scored a fine try to seize the lead for England on 52 minutes. He added another penalty 10 minutes later – taking his points tally to 17 – but was then replaced with Eddie Jones turning to the experience of George Ford to see the game out. The head coach bristled at questions over the decision afterwards – “it’s a 23-man squad” – but it is hard not to perceive it as a mistake given how England unravelled thereafter. “I think when he went off it must have been premeditated because he was going really well,” his Harlequins coach, Tabai Matson, said on Sunday. “His opportunity to close out the game would have been great for him but it must have been premeditated.” Scotland penalty try and Cowan-Dickie sent to sin-bin, 66min As much as the question is what was Luke Cowan-Dickie thinking, perhaps it is more relevant to ask what was England’s hooker doing wide on the left and trying to compete for Finn Russell’s crossfield kick? That it was he challenging Darcy Graham for the ball shows how ragged England were after a break from the excellent Duhan van der Merwe and two pinpoint kicks from Russell, who had his dander up by that stage. Ben O’Keeffe, the referee, made the right call in that there is little doubt that Cowan-Dickie, having appeared to jump too early, slapped the ball out of play. England were seven points up at that stage, which calls into question their game management in allowing Cowan-Dickie to be so exposed. Jones said: “I think we put ourselves in a difficult position because we had a 17-10 lead, we had the run of the game and we let them get into our half and gave them easy possession … we ended up having a hooker on the winger on their kick, which resulted in the try and 17-all.” Marler fluffs a lineout, 68min At 17-17 and into the final 10 minutes it was always likely to be a mistake rather than a moment of magic that proved decisive. It is unclear whether Russell was mindful of the fact that England did not have a hooker on the pitch but his kick to give England a lineout deep in their own 22 was just what Scotland needed. Jones did not want to bring Jamie George on until there was a scrum because he preferred to keep three back‑rows on the field but that meant Joe Marler was required to take the lineout, which did not go five metres, handing Scotland a scrum from which they won the decisive penalty. “We do practise for those kind of situations,” said George, who was finally introduced for the scrum that followed Marler’s fluffed lineout. “Obviously the execution wasn’t quite right this time. It is very difficult for Joe coming into that situation, five metres from his own line. I don’t think he would have ever done that in an international game before.” Ford kicks penalty to touch, 78min England have pointed to how they created opportunities to win the match after going behind as a reason to be positive and on one hand it rings true. With three minutes to go Will Stuart won a penalty at the breakdown inside the Scotland half and towards the right touchline, with England trailing by three points. It was probably not in Ford’s range but it was for Elliot Daly, who began making his way over from the left when the penalty was awarded. It was a bold decision by Tom Curry, in his first match as captain, to go for the corner instead – had Daly landed the kick England would have pulled level and received the ball from the kick-off – and it did not look too clever when Ford found a pretty rank touch. Surely the left-footed Henry Slade, or Daly, would have been a better option. The error was compounded when Sam Skinner stole the ball at the lineout. George said: “I had nothing to do with it. We felt like we had the upper hand up front. Tom wanted us to go to the corner and at that point I’m all for it. But we couldn’t execute the lineout. We have got a great leadership group and great communicators. They have got full faith in the rest of the group and there’s a lot of experience in the rest of the group to help them. At the same time we are led by them and the direction they want to go.” England fail to strike with final play of match, 85min Ever the diplomats, England refused to point the finger at O’Keeffe for not awarding a scrum penalty at the last. “Dominance” was the word used – multiple times – however. The scrum was reset four times but George revealed he was unable to get his message across properly to O’Keeffe and Ben Youngs was ultimately told to “use it”. What happened thereafter will be just as frustrating for England because yet again there did not exactly appear to be ice running through their veins as they sought the decisive blow. Youngs carried the ball down the left side of the scrum before passing to Daly, who was isolated, and Scotland made the turnover. “I felt like we had dominance,” said George. “I felt like the Scotland scrum were probably just trying to contain rather than to make it an even contest, but they got away with it. I was trying to have a conversation with [O’Keeffe]. There’s a lot of pressure on him in that situation but I would have loved the opportunity to be able to speak to him.”A single streetlight glowed brightly in the darkening evening as I approached a small wooden door. As it grew closer, the silhouette of a familiar figure emerged. It wasn’t a man, but rather a faun, bowing down to shake my hand – and all at once I’d stepped into the pages of my favourite childhood books containing the fantastical world of Narnia. Yet this was no imagined place. It was, instead, a fittingly magical introduction to the lakeside (or, rather, loughside) village of Rostrevor, situated on the coast of Carlingford Lough in County Down. I was standing outside the Rostrevor Inn (pre-beer, I should add), at dusk, where a wall mural of the aforementioned Mr Tumnus – created by author CS Lewis, who based his fictional world in the wardrobe on this village and surrounding area – greets visitors. It took me a little by surprise, as until that point I’d been following in the footsteps of another equally thrilling character – though one that most scholars agree actually did exist – that of Ireland’s charismatic patron saint. The St Patrick’s Way is a 132km (82 mile) walking route, first planned 10 years ago, then officially opened in 2015 by the late artist Alan Graham who was inspired by his experience walking the Camino de Santiago in Spain. The idea, wrote Graham, was to link key sites relating to Patrick bringing Christianity to Ireland and, by doing so, create a pilgrimage “of many colours, feelings and memories to cherish”. It runs between the city of Armagh (64km southwest of Belfast), AKA the ecclesiastical capital of Ireland (more on that later) and ends at Downpatrick, the place where the saint is purportedly buried. I arrived at Rostrevor at dusk at the end of day three of this six-day trail. Along for the ride was my 11-month-old son, who, I figured, would never be too young to learn about the joys of a long-distance walk. So far I’d discovered that Patrick had banished snakes from the country, raised 33 people from the dead and – perhaps the most plausibly – taught the concept of the Holy Trinity to the Pagans using the shamrock. All these events felt as if they could easily have been lifted from the oft-theorised Christian allegorical tale of The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe, so it seemed fitting that part of this walk now also ran in tandem with the story of Narnia itself. Up until this point the trail had largely followed an existing cycle route on quiet country roads. Highlights had included Navan Fort – the site of a Celtic temple from the year 95BC, which is now a grassy mound said to be the birthplace of kings and queens (which, it must be noted, felt very Cair Paravel to a Narnia aficionado), and the twin hilltop cathedrals of St Patrick in Armagh – the simple stone Anglican one said to be the site where he built his first stone church in 445 and the imposing double-spired, grey Catholic number, built 1,400 years later. Then there was the towpath along the Newry Canal from Scarva to Newry – AKA the oldest summit level canal in Great Britain and Ireland, which, since its retirement as a trade route, has become something of a wildlife corridor featuring otters, mink, an abundance of birds, 19 species of butterflies, damselflies and dragonflies; and the views from Carlingford Lough of the nearby Cooley Mountains. Despite enjoying walking through the landscapes and pre- and post-Christian sites, as we began day four, our pilgrim passports filling up nicely with stamps – from 10 different outdoor locations along the route – I was hungry to feel terrain beneath my feet that wasn’t tarmac. This day’s section would see me head up into Kilbroney Park – known fondly in mountain bike circles for its many trails. We entered the woodland. Almost immediately the distinct scent of damp pine trees filled my nose, and the soft squelch of a muddy footpath sucked at my boots. As we climbed higher on the path I stopped to admire oak, cedar, beech and sycamore specimens. Eventually the trees thinned and we emerged on to a faint, boot-beaten trail on the flanks of the lower Mourne Mountains. “I have seen landscapes, notably in the Mourne Mountains and southwards which under a particular light made me feel that at any moment a giant might raise his head over the next ridge,” wrote CS Lewis of these peaks. As we broached the saddle between Rocky Mountain and Tornamrock I was inclined to agree. Though I’d been to the top of the Mournes before, I’d never seen them from this angle. There wasn’t another soul around, the cloud shrouded the higher tops like a pilgrim’s cowl, but as we descended my son shrieked in delight as it began to evaporate to reveal the pronged summit of Hen Mountain ahead. I stopped to feed him, and, looking at his cosy waterproof all-in-one, marvelled at how difficult this passage would have been for St Patrick back in the days before Gore-Tex and pre-bookable accommodation. Speaking of which, as the St Patrick’s Way didn’t spawn naturally as a pilgrim route like its Spanish equivalent, which meanders through handily placed towns and villages, but rather as a desire to link sites using existing footpaths, logistics can be an issue. As such I’d pre-booked a taxi to pick us up at Spelga Pass, splitting up this fairly remote 38km section, so that we could overnight in nearby Newcastle, before returning to the trail the next morning to pick up where we left off. Fish and chips were the easiest pilgrim feast to grab on arrival at the seaside town and, followed by an early night, I awoke to the view of Northern Ireland’s highest point, Slieve Donard, just peeking out from the mist. I took it as a good sign as it’s said a hermit’s cell lingers in the cairn of this mountain as well as the remains of a small chapel that was frequented by Donart, one of Patrick’s disciple-cum-Pagan converts. That day was one of the best: we summited the deliciously named Butter Mountain, where we caught a glimpse of the taller peaks, before descending into Tollymore Forest Park, where the proliferation of giant redwoods, old stone bridges, rocky outcrops, grottos, caves and stepping stones made me feel as if I had, once more, returned to Narnia. We only met one other pilgrim on the entire walk – a local woman called Donna, from Armagh who, with her friend, had begun completing short sections of it during lockdown. “Of course I was raised a Catholic,” she explained as she leafed through her well-used pilgrim passport, “but that’s not why I’m doing it. For me it’s about discovering my own country. But the walk itself is very calming and somehow spiritual.” The final stretch on my last day was calming, as Donna had described: a walk along the beach, passing through Murlough Nature Reserve, on what’s also known as the Lecale Way (which colloquially was once called the St Patrick’s Way as it was believed he travelled along the coast). With sore legs from hours treading on sand, and the last leg on tarmac through quiet farm roads, I ended my exploration in the saint’s footsteps, fittingly, at the place where he ended his life’s journey. Here a stone is simply marked “Patrick”. When we approached the adjacent St Patrick Centre, which marks the official end of the pilgrimage, we were greeted by a familiar figure once more – but this time it was the larger-than-life image of the man I had been following. Inside, I proudly swapped our fully stamped passports for “Compostelas” (pilgrim’s certificates) and mused how this pilgrimage as mum and son had been something of a baptism of fire. Exhausted (me) but elated (definitely him), we sat down to watch a short film on the history of St Patrick’s arrival to Ireland, first as a slave and then as a missionary, and his work including the many miracles and the banishment of all snakes. As a non-Catholic, the legends sounded like a tumultuous romp that even Hollywood might back away from for being too far-fetched. Much like friends stared in disbelief when I said I’d completed a long-distance walk with a baby on my back. Yet, now that I’ve done it, a part of me believes that in the land that spawned fauns, a talking lion and a white witch, all inside a wardrobe, anything is possible. Phoebe was a guest of Tourism Northern Ireland and ireland.com. Accommodation options vary from hostels to B&amp;Bs, pubs and hotels all along the route, apart from the section around the Mournes, where taxis are recommended to and from two nights’ accommodation in Newcastle. There’s a hostel in Armagh and Newcastle and the option to splurge at Killeavy Castle in Newry and the Slieve Donard Resort before your final section. For detailed maps and guidance about the different stages of the St Patrick’s Way check out Walk NI.Q In May 2018, I bought a property with a friend. His deposit was larger than mine although we split the mortgage equally. In the deed of trust that we signed we agreed a breakdown of ownership between us of 56% (him) and 44% (me) to reflect the uneven deposits. A year ago we had a bathroom renovation which I paid for with the agreement that we would change the percentage of ownership. Now that it’s complete we can’t work out a fair way to calculate what the new breakdown should be. Can you help? AB A I don’t think I can because I don’t think that paying for a bathroom renovation changes the ownership breakdown. If you had paid for an extension to be built or had a loft conversion done, it would make a difference. According to Andrew Boast, the co-founder of the house-moving experts SAM Conveyancing, “more living space, more value”. “Replacing a kitchen or bathroom,” says Boast, “doesn’t increase current market value” but it does improve saleability of a property and increases the chances that “full asking price is achieved”. That is not to say that your contribution to the property should not be taken account of. However, in order to do that it may involve revoking (to use a technical term) your current fixed deed of trust and replacing it with a floating deed of trust, also known as a commensurate share deed. A floating deed, says Boast, “provides joint owners of property a more accurate way to assess the beneficial interest in a property – the money you individually own – at a specific point in time based on your contributions towards the property”.The Cosby Show was more than just a hit sitcom. It was a sitcom for the whole family, achingly so. Cliff Huxtable wasn’t just a put-upon father of five or a deadpan granddad or an exasperated guardian. He was a sought-after obstetrician who brought even more kids into the show’s fictional world. The scenes of him in his office, consulting with expectant families, allaying the anxieties of pregnant moms, make an important point: for all of Dr Huxtable’s hopelessness at home, he was actually really good at his job, grounding his character while making the adults in the audience feel seen, too. We Need to Talk About Cosby, the buzzy Showtime documentary series that debuted at the end of January, ahead of Black History Month, views these scenes more skeptically, through the eyes of actor and artist Lili Bernard. In one Cosby Show episode she plays an expectant mother in an office consultation with the good doctor. On its face her scene seems sweet, perfectly innocent. But Bernard describes her on-set experience as emotionally distressful, painting Cosby as a tyrant who bullied her into delivering her lines just so. Her story speaks to a familiar on-set imbalance, the big shot who clashes with the small fry. But the more chilling reveal is that America’s Dad also allegedly drugged and raped her at the Trump Taj Mahal casino in Atlantic City, in 1990, according to her 2021 lawsuit. Herein lies the difficulty of cancelling Cosby for those of us who still consider his work to be worthwhile. It’s one thing to cancel his live performances and pending TV projects; those directly enrich him. It’s another to stop listening to his albums –especially the early stuff, where Cosby shows an R Kelly-like tendency to tell on himself in his Spanish Fly material. But before more than 60 women accused Cosby of sexual assault, The Cosby Show was a television institution in the prime of its I Love Lucy syndication phase. Which is to say you couldn’t channel surf without landing on the episode where Theo pierces his ear or Rudy gets sick or Cliff gives birth to a hero sandwich. Netflix’s acquisition of the series in the late-aughts was not only the start of a strategy of gaining subscribers by gobbling up classic TV, but also echoed the show’s transformational impact in the 80s. In my interview with We Need to Talk About Cosby’s director, W Kamau Bell, he concedes that part of the show’s genius was offering up five different Huxtable children for the kids at home to connect with. Rudy, the baby daughter in the Huxtable brood, was the character who hooked me, who had me setting alarms for 7pm on Thursday nights. And for as inspirational as the show’s seamless fusion of jazz and Black art and Black love and Black prosperity were, my main takeaway was Dr. Huxtable got to work from home. That was #goals. Later years brought an appreciation for The Cosby Show as team effort, the product of years of collaboration between actors and writers and costumers and the like. Those syndication deals were great for Cosby, sure. But they also sustained workers who might’ve had difficulty moving on after the show, especially the Black collaborators. But as the allegations against Cosby snowballed, it was only a matter of time before the show was ripped from the air and from streaming, never to be easily conjured again and affecting more than just the guy whose name was in the title. When Geoffrey Owens, the actor who played Huxtable son-in-law Elvin, was outed as a Trader Joe’s employee in 2018, it spoke to the profundity of a Cosby problem that appears to have no bottom. We Need to Talk About Cosby visits with Cosby Show contributors across the call sheet, from the overworked writers who were too removed to notice anything fishy to the stage manager who negotiated the line of models outside Cosby’s dressing room. While the docuseries steers clear of rendering judgment on folks who were just trying to keep their jobs, it does look harshly on Cliff Huxtable’s character wrinkles that once seemed innocuous – his aphrodisiac barbecue sauce, his job as a doctor who saw women in his basement office. It assumes a room full of writers didn’t have a hand in developing those ideas, or that New York isn’t littered with brownstone doctors offices. Besides, all TV shows turn cringey as our sensibilities evolve. A faithful reboot of the Honeymooners, with Ralph Kramden constantly threatening his wife with physical abuse, would never fly today. The Cosby Show is so much more complicated. In the same way you can draw a line from Will and Grace to the legalization of gay marriage, you can trace a path from the Huxtable brownstone to the Obama White House; you’d be well challenged to tell the history of Black progress in America and on television without a glancing mention of the Huxtables. You could say The Cosby Show is the product of the man’s better angels. But it also ruined the careers and lives of some of the women who did and didn’t appear on the show. It’s a sad story, no doubt, but not unique to Hollywood productions. The key difference here is we know the score. And now that The Cosby Show is dead and buried along with America’s Dad, the kid in me can’t help but wonder if we will ever truly reckon with all that was lost. We Need to Talk About Cosby airs on Showtime on Sundays with a UK date to be announcedAmid the roadside restaurants and bustling crowds in one of Kabul’s busiest markets, a 10-year-old girl is trying to sell plastic bags to shoppers squeezing past her. “If I don’t work, we will go hungry,” Shaista says. Shops in the Afghan capital are stacked with food, but her family cannot afford any of it. Each morning, Shaista buys a few shopping bags for 5 afghani (4p) each, then goes to the market to sell them for double that. As the UN predicts that 97% of Afghans could be living below the poverty line by June, the number of child labourers and beggars has tripled in Kabul, aid workers say. Many are fighting just to survive. Shaista is shivering in her thin plastic shoes. Temperatures have dropped below zero. The smells of freshly brewed green tea and warm bread from a nearby bakery linger in the air, but – unless someone donates a meal – Shaista will not be eating until dinner. Hundreds of children – some of them as young as four – work alongside her in the big market. Others are begging, with their cold small hands stretched out as they wander through the busy crowds. Afghanistan’s economic downfall has thrown its people into a hunger crisis. Almost 80% of the former government’s spending – including countless salaries – was foreign-funded. Aid made up 43% of Afghanistan’s GDP. When the Taliban took over the government in August, those development funds were quickly suspended. Children working on the street warm their hands over a kebab stall’s small fire More than $9bn (£6.6bn) of mostly private assets remain frozen in US accounts. The international community now engages carefully with the Islamic Emirate, as the Taliban regime is officially known, which is accused of killing dozens of former Afghan officials and banning women from public office. Shaista, the oldest of four children, makes up to 50 afghani (40p) on a “good day”. The responsibility weighs on her. “Every day, my mother buys bread with the money I make.” Navigating the huge market all day is scary. “I’d like to go to school,” she says. Zahra Habibullah, a mother of eight children, moved to Kabul from Kunduz after their house was damaged in an airstrike. Her eldest son, Noor, collects plastic and scrap metal all day – the plastic is used to heat the family’s small stove and the metal is sold Child labour has long been common in Afghanistan. Before the Taliban takeover, Unicef estimated that 60,000 children worked on Kabul’s streets, but those numbers have tripled in recent months, says Street Child’s country representative, Hamidullah Abawi, “with hunger and malnutrition being the main cause”. “Many have to acquire food for themselves and their families,” he says. “I have seen a significant change in the lives of Afghan children in recent months and it’s heartbreaking.” Four-year-old Khadjia sits in the snow on a Kabul street. ‘If we don’t make any money for food, we’ll go to bed hungry,’ says her mother, who took Khadija to work On the outskirts of the city, Noor Agha, 10, is the oldest of eight children in his family – and the only one working. In his neighbourhood of mud-brick homes and unpaved roads, he sorts through rubbish, looking for pieces of plastic to use for heating the stove, and scrap metal to sell. “I start when the sun rises and come home at night,” he says from his house – a room with a few mattresses stacked up in a corner and a stove used for cooking and heating. His mother has not been able to pay rent in months; the little money Noor makes goes on food. Samim, 6, holds a tin full of esfand, the seeds of wild rue, in Kabul’s Mandawi market. The seeds are traditionally burned to ward off the evil eye Zahra Habibullah, Noor’s 51-year-old single mother, brought her children to Kabul two years ago; after their home in the northern Kunduz province was damaged in an airstrike, she says. “We were right on the frontline and Noor was injured by shrapnel. After we lost our house, I decided it would be safer to live in Kabul.” But after the Taliban’s takeover, Zahra lost her job; her employer was struggling with his own finances and unable to keep staff. Children selling whatever they can to make some money, including biscuits, Taliban flags, plastic bags and nuts While food aid trickles into Afghanistan – the UN has announced an appeal for $4.5bn (£3.3bn) – the sudden sanctions have brought an inevitable economic crash. The cessation of development money, which paid the salaries of civil servants, doctors, teachers and labourers taking part in foreign-implemented cash-for-work schemes, has thrown millions into poverty. The future looks bleak, says the Afghan economist Haroun Rahimi. “The honest answer is that there isn’t a lot the Taliban can do either if sanctions continue – no government could, even if they have perfect policies. “Right now, they need money, as well as international recognition more than anything,” he says, adding that the scenario seems unlikely and that poverty could continue to rise. By the side of a dirty Kabul road, Khadjia sits on a plastic bag in the snow, a few brushes and shoe polish in front of her. She is four, says her mother, who sits metres away, and asked to remain anonymous. Fereshta works every afternoon in Kabul, cleaning shoes. ‘I work for bread,’ she said People rush past as the sun sets and temperatures fall. “We don’t have an alternative,” Khadjia’s mother says. “If we don’t make any money for food, we’ll go to bed hungry.” Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:Unless you have been hiding under a rock this year, you’ve heard of Wordle. It has been thrilling to see a puzzle’s popularity explode and dominate the national conversation. This doesn’t happen often! Today’s challenges are for those of you caught up in the craze. If you enjoy Wordle’s playful mixture of pattern spotting, logical reasoning and vocab-hunting, these puzzles will be right up your street. 1. Which country am I in? Each of the following words appears either in the middle or at the end of a country. For example, ACED is in Macedonia. What are the countries? If you get more than ten you are doing extremely well! 1. DIVE, 2. DONE, 3. GLAD, 4. HAIL, 5. HELL, 6. LAYS, 7. NAME, 8. OVEN, 9. RAIN, 10. RUNE, 11. SCAR, 12. SWAN, 13. TENS, 14. WAND. Tip: One is in South America, two in Europe, two in continental Africa, six in Asia and three are island nations. 2. Insert here. If you insert the letters ‘NS’ in the same position in the words PAY, SUET, TOIL, DEITY and COOLED, you get five new words: PANSY, SUNSET, TONSIL, DENSITY, and CONSOLED. For each of the following groups of words, can you find two letters to insert in the same position to form five new words? 1. JEER, VERY, JUICE, PEERED, POURING 2. BOW, DUDE, DIVER, RATION, DOUSING 3. JAY, DALE, FEES, MULES, FILING 4. BOO, FIR, CREED, CHAISE, WHILING 5. WAY, FILE, POET, DOING, BAREST 6. ORE, FILE, CLASS, OLIVE, MATING 3. Seven cars. Each clue below describes a 9-letter word that includes the consecutive letters CAR. Thus one of the words is CAR_ _ _ _ _ _, one is _CAR_ _ _ _ _ _, and so on until _ _ _ _ _ _ CAR. Find the words. 1. Coconut cookies 2. Cornfield denizen 3. Ink _____ 4. Study aid 5. Tossed out 6. Tram 7. Vacation missives All the puzzles are written by Vincent J. Matsko, and taken from his hugely enjoyable book The Puzzle Cabaret, which is full of many innovative maths, logic and word puzzles. Vincent is a maths educator, puzzle designer and mathematical artist, and brings a cross-disciplinary creativity to his puzzles. I’ll post the answers to the questions at 5pm UK today. UPDATE: The solutions are up here. Please NO SPOILERS. Instead discuss your Wordle strategies. I’ll tell you my opening word if you tell me yours. I set a puzzle here every two weeks on a Monday. I’m always on the look-out for great puzzles. If you would like to suggest one, email me. I’m the author of several books of puzzles, most recently the Language Lover’s Puzzle Book. I also give school talks about maths and puzzles (online and in person). If your school is interested please get in touch. On Thursday 21 April I’ll be giving a puzzles workshop for Guardian Masterclasses. You can sign up here.Australia will open its border for fully vaccinated tourists and all visa holders, a decision branded “bittersweet” by those who have missed funerals in recent weeks due to ongoing restrictions. Scott Morrison on Monday announced the nation would open to all fully vaccinated visa holders, including tourists, on 21 February, almost two years after borders were first closed. The borders have been progressively opening since November, but some groups including bridging visa holders, some immediate family members and tourists were yet to be allowed exemption-free travel. The announcement on Monday provoked mixed emotions among those who have remained trapped by ongoing restrictions in recent months, including for Gold Coast resident Amy Jade Newsome, who is on a bridging visa while she waits a decision on a skilled worker visa. Newsome was denied a compassionate exemption to attend her aunt’s funeral in the UK last month, meaning she would have been trapped abroad if she had left Australia. “It’s bittersweet and almost like the timing, it just couldn’t be any worse, I guess,” Newsome told Guardian Australia. “I’m happy to be able to go home, but it’s been just over a month and now I can go? It’s a huge amount of emotions. Anger, happiness, frustration – I’m happy for everyone else and myself, I suppose, that we can go home.” Bridging visa holders were the last temporary visa category subject to a closed border, forcing them to apply for travel exemptions. Freedom of information data showed about 70% of bridging visa holders’ exemption applications were being rejected. In one case reported by Guardian Australia, the federal government rejected six compassionate exemption applications made by Sydney woman Ash Fadian, a bridging visa holder wanting to travel to her brother-in-law’s funeral in the UK. “I’m beyond devastated. I’m just gutted to be treated like this,” she said late last month. Exemptions from aged care workers on bridging visas trapped overseas were also rejected, denying the industry staff at a time of acute shortages. The decision to open the border has also been welcomed by Australian residents who have been unable to reunite with immediate family. The government had pledged to allow immediate family to reunite prior to Christmas, but the changes introduced last year did not define adult sons and daughters of Australian residents as “immediate family”. That meant people like Stewart Hayter, an Adelaide-based grandfather, was unable to see his daughter and two grandchildren, who both live with autism. Hayter’s frustration was compounded by Morrison’s public plea for working backpackers and students to “come on down” last month. He described those comments as a “slap in the face” to those struggling to deal with prolonged separation from their families. Hayter welcomed Morrison’s announcement on Monday as “great news”, which will enable him to be reunited with his family after more than two years. In making the announcement, which had been expected, Morrison emphasised the need for travellers to be fully vaccinated and referenced the Novak Djokovic scandal, saying “events earlier in the year should have sent a very clear message to everyone around the world” that Australia requires visitors to be fully vaccinated. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The tourism industry was quick to welcome the news. Tourism &amp; Transport Forum chief executive, Margy Osmond, said the sector was “thrilled” but that there was still detail to be worked through. “There will be some issues around the technicalities of this. There’s work to be done. It’s not as simple as just turning on the tap,” she said. The Business Council of Australia said the reopening put Australia in a position to “supercharge our economic recovery”. “This move brings to an end fortress Australia,” said chief executive, Jennifer Westacott. “This is the light at the end of the tunnel that small business, tourism operators and the events industry was desperate to see.”Scientists and conservation groups are calling for one of the world’s busiest shipping lanes to be rerouted in an effort to protect the world’s largest animal. Since 2008, researchers have been painstakingly piecing together clues about a little-known, endangered population of blue whales that live off the southern tip of Sri Lanka. What they have discovered so far hints at one group of cetaceans or even a sub-species. Rather than migrating vast distances like most blue whales, the Sri Lankan population is thought to live in the region year-round, grazing on tiny shrimps and communicating via distinctive vocalisations. What has also become clear is the immense threat they face. The whales’ habitat overlaps with a major shipping artery that connects east Asia to the Suez Canal, leaving them vulnerable to ship strikes and noise pollution. On an average day the whales face off against a relentless barrage of about 200 ships, many of them container ships or oil tankers that stretch up to 300 metres in length. “The problem for these whales is that they live in a giant obstacle course that we have created,” said Asha de Vos, a marine biologist who launched the first long-term study of the region’s whales in 2008. It is a clash playing out in increasing intensity around the world. Between 1992 and 2013, the shipping traffic swelled 300%, as maritime transport became a fixture in roughly 90% of world trade. In Sri Lanka, the push is now on to tackle what De Vos describes as a “uniquely resolvable issue”, after research suggested that a small shift in the shipping lane could make a big difference to the whales. Her longstanding push to move the shipping lane has been backed by a trio of international conservation groups, which have formally called on the Sri Lankan government to propose the route change to the International Maritime Organization. “Studies indicate that if a shipping lane were to be established 15 nautical miles to the south of the current lane, the risk of collisions with blue whales would be reduced by 95%,” read the letter from the International Fund for Animal Welfare (IFAW), Great Whale Conservancy and OceanCare. For ships travelling across the world, the 15-nautical mile shift was “insignificant”, said Sharon Livermore of IFAW. “This tiny little shift in the location of the shipping lane would make a huge difference to the conservation status of these whales.” While there are no firm numbers on how many whales live in the area or how many have been killed by ships, in recent years several carcasses have turned up bearing signs of collision. “The risk is so high that we know that there must be many more being killed than are being reported,” said Livermore. “The blue whale might be the largest animal on the planet – these ones are about 22 metres long – but they pale in significance against a 300-metre cargo ship.” The rerouting would also benefit the country’s thriving whale-watching industry and small-scale fishing communities, whose boats have been spotted bobbing perilously close to mammoth vessels in the shipping lane. “There isn’t opportunity for manoeuvre – the ships can’t suddenly change their course if they see a whale or a fishing boat in their path, so the only way to reduce the risk is to move those ships away from this critical area,” said Livermore. Her organisation first approached the Sri Lankan government about moving the shipping lane in 2015, calling it a unique opportunity to protect blue whales, 90% of which were slaughtered by whalers in the 20th century. Others have also made overtures. In 2017, the World Shipping Council, which represents most of the world’s shipping companies, urged the Sri Lankan government to consider the move, as did the International Whaling Commission in early 2021. The previous Sri Lankan government refused to sign off on the proposals, citing concerns in 2019 about the economic impact of the move. The country’s Marine Environment Protection Authority did not respond to a request for comment. The vast majority of the ships using the lane do not stop in Sri Lanka but only transit through the area, said De Vos, suggesting the economic cost of the move would be minimal. “None of us want the industry to stop using our waters or for the industry to collapse,” she added. The idea of moving shipping lanes is not without precedent. In 2007 officials in the US worked to shift a lane off the coast of Massachusetts, teasing apart the steady stream of container ships and tankers from the area’s fragile baleen and North Atlantic right whales. The move has been credited with reducing the risk of ships striking the whales by 81%. The same approach was later applied to the coast of California, where the overlap between a busy ocean highway and key feeding grounds for whales was blamed for the deaths of at least 100 whales between 1988 and 2012. In an area dotted with oil rigs and hemmed in by the Channel islands, the shipping lane could only be moved one nautical mile north. Even so, the small change, announced in 2012, helped to reduce the number of collisions between ships and whales. These gains were heightened in 2020 with the launch of Whale Safe, a tool that compiles data from sources such as an underwater hydrophone, satellites tracking ocean conditions and local whale sightings to offer a near-real time estimate of where the area’s whales are at any given moment in the Santa Barbara channel. In some cases companies have taken matters into their own hands. Amid concerns by researchers and conservationists over the eastern Mediterranean’s dwindling colony of endangered sperm whales, in late January the MSC Group said it would become the first major shipping company to reroute ships travelling along the west coast of Greece. In Sri Lanka, the risks of having a shipping land that hugs the country’s coast were laid bare in May, after a cargo ship laden with toxic chemicals caught fire, dumping a hazardous mix of chemicals into the waters off Colombo. The heavy cost to Sri Lanka from shipping was made clear in May, after a cargo ship laden with toxic chemicals caught fire, dumping a hazardous mix of pollutants into the waters off Colombo. The spill poisoned the waters, left nearby beaches coated in plastic pellets and covered stretches of water in an oil slick, in what was described as the country’s worst-ever maritime disaster. The tragedy struck a nerve with many people in Sri Lanka, said De Vos. Now she hoped the sentiment would extend to protecting the “unorthodox whales” that share the country’s waters. “They’re so different to blue whales anywhere else in the world. It’s not just that it could be a separate subspecies, it has a different dialect, different feeding habits, different behaviours,” she said. “We could start losing a culture of whales.”The Chinese streaming platform Tencent Video has restored the original ending to the film Fight Club after it amended the Chinese edition to tell viewers police had “rapidly figured out the whole plan and arrested all criminals”, prompting a widespread backlash. The wholesale reversal of the anti-capitalist, anarchist denouement to the 1999 hit film, which stars Brad Pitt, Edward Norton and Helena Bonham Carter, made international headlines last month. In the edited version, Edward Norton’s character, the narrator, still kills off his imaginary alter ego Tyler Durden, but a subsequent scene showing high-rise buildings being bombed was cut. Instead, viewers were shown a blank screen with text telling them authorities had won out. “The police rapidly figured out the whole plan and arrested all criminals, successfully preventing the bomb from exploding,” the text said. “After the trial Tyler was sent to lunatic asylum receiving psychological treatment. He was discharged from the hospital in 2012.” Beijing has some of the world’s most restrictive censorship rules with authorities approving only a handful of foreign films for release each year – sometimes with major cuts. But reversing endings is rare. The changes came to light after viewers in China who had seen the original watched the locally available edition. Censorship or banning of foreign films in China is common, but the wholesale reversal of Fight Club’s ending drew shock and mirth. “Fight Club on Tencent Video tells us that they don’t just delete scenes, but add to the plot too,” one user complained at the time. Human Rights Watch described the cuts as “dystopian”. Over the weekend the original ending was restored, according to domestic social media film accounts. That decision too drew criticism. Some netizens said it showed that Tencent was admitting that the original censorship was “too much”. Another asked: “If the original version can also be launched, why did Tencent modify it without authorisation? Tencent has been contacted for comment. Additional reporting by Xiaoqian Zhu.With that, we’ll finish up with our live news coverage for the day. There was a fair bit of news about, ahead of the first federal parliamentary sitting of the year beginning on Tuesday. Here are the day’s major developments: Australia’s borders will reopen to all visa holders from 21 February on the provision that they are double vaccinated. Up to 1700 defence force personnel will be deployed to aged care facilities to help with Covid related staff shortages, amid an Omicron crisis in the sector. Scott Morrison says there is still a chance to legislate a commonwealth integrity commission before the election, after the attorney general, Michaelia Cash, suggested the government would run out of time to do so. At least five homes have been lost in Western Australia and 60,000 hectares razed in one of the most challenging bushfire periods in recent memory, as the state’s fire and emergency services commissioner links the blaze to the climate crisis. Facebook has lost a major battle with the Australian regulator over the Cambridge Analytica scandal, after a court dismissed the social media giant’s claim that it neither conducts business nor collects personal information in the country. Covid rules in Western Australia have changed as the state moves to high case load settings, while Queensland has scrapped QR code check ins, Have a great evening, we’ll be back to do it all again tomorrow. Australia’s airports have welcomed the reopening of the country’s borders to tourists, with the peak body claiming airports will be ready for the 21 February reopening date. James Goodwin, chief executive of the Australian Airports Association, said international travel levels are currently at just 15% of pre-Covid levels with only fully-vaccinated citizens and permanent residents able to leave and enter freely. Goodwin said the reopening to fully-vaccinated tourists will not only help the international aviation and tourism sectors recover, but will boost the viability of domestic air routes because 30% of domestic flight passengers are international tourists. He said: International tourists don’t just visit one Australian city. They fly from state to state to see all of what our nation has to offer so it is vital all domestic borders reopen and stay open. Airports will be critical to ensuring the logistics associated with resuming international travel will be successfully managed and look forward to working with the government agencies involved. Some more on the new settings in Western Australia: Western Australia has recorded 26 new locally-acquired cases of Covid-19, as Covid rules in the state are changed. Premier Mark McGowan said Covid growth in the state had triggered the ‘high case load’ settings, which will change the definition for close contacts and testing requirements when the new settings – which had been outlined in January – comes into effect from Wednesday. The quarantine period for both approved international and interstate arrivals will be reduced to seven days. Additionally, the state’s hotel quarantine cap for international arrivals will be doubled, from 265 to 530, per week. McGowan said: The road ahead is about to get very bumpy. The state is going to embark on a difficult period. We’re going to get more cases, and we’re going to get them sooner. The Nine Network’s multi-million dollar deal to secure an exclusive interview with the family of Cleo Smith failed to put the program in the top ratings spot on Sunday night, although the 60 Minutes episode did win its timeslot. The network spent weeks teasing the 60 Minutes exclusive with Cleo’s mother Ellie Smith and her stepfather Jake Gliddon, which cost it $2m. The program took out the top spot for its 8.40pm slot, with 750,000 viewers, but lost out overall to Seven News (1.095 million viewers), Nine News (827,000) and Married At First Sight (825,000). Nine defended the program’s ratings, saying it was the most-watched 60 Minutes episode this year. A network spokesperson said: We are very pleased with the result and the content of the 60 Minutes interview which was compelling as Tara Brown spoke to the parents of Cleo Smith for the first time. The show won its timeslot and performed in the key demographics and on 9Now – a record streaming audience for the program meaning last night’s episode as a total number was an increase on the equivalent episode last year, and this is what we look to, we are all extremely pleased.” The ratings from OzTam showed that within the Smith family’s home state of Western Australia just 67,000 viewers tuned in, the same number to watch ABC’s Vera in the state that evening. Read more: There’s been quite a bit around today about the much-hyped federal anti-corruption commission. This morning attorney general Michaelia Cash indicated in an interview with the Australian Financial Review, that the government would not have enough time to fulfil its election pledge before the coming federal election. This afternoon, however, Scott Morrison said there is still a chance to legislate a commonwealth integrity commission before the election. The prime minister suggested that Cash had only meant the commission could not be legislated this current sitting fortnight, and that it could still be passed before the election. Guardian Australia’s Sarah Martin has been following the story today and filed this report. Morrison’s message does not appear to have filtered through his party yet. In contrast to Morrison’s comments, Liberal MP James Stevens, speaking to ABC TV just now, appeared resigned to the idea his government had run out of time to legislate the commission before the election. Stevens said: It is regrettable. I want to see us legislate a federal Icac. We’ve been undertaking a process and seeking to engage with people like the opposition on that. They’ve had no interest in sitting down and talking genuinely and sensibly with us about the model that we’ve proposed. Regrettably we’re in the situation where [we’re] close to an election [and] Labor are not interested in progressing this. They’re playing politics with it and the window has closed.” Read more: Bishops Philip Huggins and Paul Barker have locked themselves in a cage outside the Park Hotel in Melbourne’s Carlton, in solidarity with refugees stuck indefinitely inside. They are part of a growing number of public figures to join The Freedom Cage campaign, which is calling for the immediate release of all refugees and asylum-seekers. Last Saturday, former Socceroo Craig Foster participated in the protest by also locking himself in the cage. The Park Hotel currently holds 25 refugees, most of whom have been detained for nearly nine years. Bishop Huggins said: Compassion means doing to others what we would be happy to have done to us. Compassion means under no circumstances doing anything else. As a matter of compassion, these people must be freed. It is a compassion that encompasses their faraway parents and grandparents who have loved and worried about them for eight or nine years. As a matter of compassion, we can do much better. Can we imagine these people free, flourishing, being healed, and thereafter making beautiful contributions to our commonwealth of Australia?” The Antipoverty Centre is warning the Morrison government’s proposed religious discrimination bill could allow religious charities to discriminate against vulnerable Australians who are “forced to interact” with the groups. The centre’s spokesperson, Jay Coonan, is specifically concerned that those who rely on housing services and employment programs provided by religious organisations could be discriminated against based on their gender identity or sexual orientation. The warning follows a report finding that 26% of people who have relied on homelessness services had been discriminated against by housing services due to their age, race, appearance, disabilities, gender identity or sexual orientation. In a statement, Coonan said: The government is enabling discrimination that will further entrench people in poverty by allowing the very people who are supposed to help us cause further harm and distress, simply because we need to access support. We know that people who are forced to do ‘mutual’ obligations to get a welfare payment, people in social housing, people who access disability care and others living in poverty are already being harmed by religious bigotry because we have no choice but to deal with the charities the government has outsourced our care to.” Coonan said the bill will “only turbocharge the discrimination people already suffer and further protect the perpetrators”, and called on all MPs from all sides to oppose the legislation. The media release specifically calls on the Labor party – which has indicated conditional support of the bill – to vote against the legislation. In Labor’s caucus briefing, Anthony Albanese said that as the parliamentary year begins it’s the “fourth quarter” and although “games have been lost in the fourth quarter” the opposition is “at worst, competitive”. Albanese said that Labor’s climate plan is “realistic” and said in government it will implement “our plan not fringe groups” (a dig at the Greens). He said: The problem is not how much they [the Morrison government] hate each other, the problem is the way they’re not doing their job - and it hurts people.” Albanese said Labor still doesn’t know what’s in the religious discrimination bill, and the shadow attorney general Mark Dreyfus similarly gave a report that the party can’t determine its final position until it’s seen amendments. Dreyfus said the government was “not being bipartisan” in the way it has consulted. No questions were asked - a sign of Labor being determined to keep the focus on the government. Kristina Keneally was asked about WeChat - and replied that the department of home affairs said there was “no evidence” of foreign interference or a hack of the prime minister’s account, and there was no updated advice on whether Labor members should avoid using it. Margy Osmond, chief executive of the Tourism and Transport Forum, has welcomed today’s announcement that Australia’s international border will reopen to tourists from 21 February, but has cautioned the sector will need time to ramp up. Osmond said: There’s no doubt this is a day the tourism industry has been waiting a couple of years for. We are thrilled now to have a date that we can give to the rest of the world and say we’re open for business and we’d love to see you. There will be some issues around the technicalities of this. There’s work to be done. It’s not as simple as just turning on the tap and we see numbers of international tourists back where they were pre-Covid. We need to build up our aviation capacity and get those international flights and routes back in that left us during the pandemic and that will take some work and energy. We need to market Australia and the individual states very aggressively because this is now a very competitive global market with every other country in the world looking for those leisure tourists as well and many of them have the head start on us.” Western Australia’s intense bushfire season is being linked to the climate crisis as fires rip through southern parts of the state. Four homes have been lost near Denmark on the south coast, while the damage is not yet known from two emergency-level bushfires in the eastern Wheatbelt and south-west town of Bridgetown. The fire in the Wheatbelt has burned through about 40,000 hectares and at one point spanned 35km. An emergency warning remains in place for the shires of Quairading, Bruce Rock, Corrigin, Kondinin and Kulin, with residents advised it is too late to leave. “Leaving now would be deadly,” the fire and emergency services department said on Monday. “You need to shelter in your home in a room away from the firefront and make sure you can easily escape.” Department of Fire and Emergency Services commissioner Darren Klemm said the Wheatbelt fire was the greatest concern for authorities because of the open terrain. Read more: That’s a wrap from Tory Shepherd – thanks for taking us through the day’s news so far. You now have me, Elias Visontay, bringing you news updates for the next few hours. Morrison is asked about the federal integrity bill. He says: “The term is not completed yet.” Asked if he can continue to work with Barnaby Joyce after the text messages, he says he dealt with that yesterday. And, while the religious discrimination bill continues to divide parliament and his party, Morrison says nay, it should unite them: It is a bill that will bring Australians together around this issue. There is nothing in this bill that seeks to prejudice others, it is a bill that is designed to protect religious expression in this country to ensure that people who have such beliefs are not discriminated against. That is something that should unite the parliament, not divide it. Morrison is asked about a Melbourne aged care home, which is saying that inaccurate rapid antigen tests were responsible for an outbreak. He agrees they are not as accurate as PCR tests (this is not something anyone has been disputing, most of the upset has been around supply shortages): Rapid antigen tests are not as accurate as PCR tests. I did make this point for many months ... they are not as good as PCR tests. But they are the test that we often need to use because of the volume of the [virus we’re] dealing with. Mike Bowers is down at the press conference and snapped this pic. Scott Morrison has been asked about the ongoing crisis in aged care, particularly workforce shortages, and whether the ADF will fill the gap. Morrison says it has helped that they eased the close contact rules so people can go back to work, and that they’re sourcing additional workers. He’s also tried to tread that tricky line between “freedom” and deaths, and defining whether people have died “with” Covid or “because of” Covid: It’s not just about trying to prevent any fatalities that may occur ... it’s about ensuring residents have a quality of life. An important part of your quality of life is being able to have access to your family and their support and their love, and particularly for those in palliative care, end of life care – so it is a very sensitive and fine balance that you have to find to try and prevent the spread. These are the very difficult issues. When you have large numbers of people taken out of the workforce, that is very hard to deal with and there is no simple answer. You want qualified people providing care. And then that’s why we have provided the additional supports, whether it’s wage supplements and so on, to provide that recognition and support for people to do those shifts. Morrison is asked about caps on incoming travellers, and whether he hopes the change will put pressure on WA premier, Mark McGowan, to open his borders. He said he has been talking to the states and, with declining numbers of people in intensive care, this is “the safer time to be able to move to that next step”: The states and territories, they’ll continue to put in place the caps they have at their airports. Some have none at all, like in New South Wales. Others do. They’ll do that based on where their capacity is at this given point in time. As we know, Covid-19 is not, has not been experienced similarly in all parts of the country. WA is very different to NSW. And as a result the arrangements are different between those two parts of the country. Scott Morrison is asked whether the definition of “fully vaccinated” will change to mean three doses of a vaccine. He says no, it will stay at two doses: For those who are coming in who are double vaccinated, they don’t present any greater risk than those who are already here in Australia. It’s a sensible and I think very important move for us to ... as best as we possibly can this year, drive Australia back to a position of as much normality as we can achieve. The health minister, Greg Hunt, is at this press conference, as is the defence minister, Peter Dutton. All the big guns. Hunt has given a Covid update: Over the weekend we have passed the 51m dose mark for the vaccination program and we’re expected to pass the 9m booster mark. Three million Novavax vaccines are due to arrive today, later on from Singapore by air. And significantly we have now begun the deployment of 50,000 oral Covid treatments, on medical advice, to our aged care facilities. And Dutton (who did not send any nasty text messages) thanked the ADF for their existing and future support. The home affairs minister, Karen Andrews, has reinforced Morrison’s point about vaccinations: This means that we will be able to welcome back tourists, business travellers and other visa holders who to date have been unable to enter Australia. Now, visa holders who are not fully vaccinated will still require an exemption, a travel exemption to enter here into Australia and they will be on their arrival here [subject] to the relevant state and territory quarantine requirements. And the third issue Scott Morrison said was discussed today is aged care. The Australian defence force will be called in to help – read Josh Butler’s piece here for background. Morrison said national cabinet had agreed on “a package of measures” so the ADF can support the health department. He had asked ADF several weeks ago to come up with proposals for how they could help. He said: Since then we’ve seen ADF personnel being there in Victoria, supporting the ambulance service and things of that nature. We’ve seen them supporting in other areas. Now they’ll be joining that effort. I want to be very clear about this. As I said several weeks ago, the defence force are not a surrogate workforce for the aged care sector. There are around 285,000 people who work in the aged care sector. So the idea that the defence forces can come in and just replace all of the shifts that are lost because people have Covid ... we already relaxed the close contact rule and that had a real, positive impact. But the idea the defence forces could just simply come in and fill that gap is just not realistic. And [it] was never a scenario or an option that was under consideration because it’s just simply not feasible. But they do and can and have provided quite targeted support into the aged care sector in extreme situations, some of the most difficult situations. And the teams that we will be bringing together, just four teams, will be placed at 24 hours’ notice to move from today, and that will increase up to 10 teams at 24 hours’ notice and that is to go into acute situations, working together, with the health departments and public health agencies in each of the states and territories. These teams include a registered nurse team leader, some medical technicians and personnel to support general duties ... In each state and territory, it will begin with around 50 personnel going to support each state and [then] up to 200. So we’ll have up to around 1,700 defence force personnel assisting. Onto tourism now: Australia’s borders will open to all remaining visa holders on 21 February – if they’re double vaccinated. Scott Morrison said “events earlier in the year” (read: Novak Djokovic) would have made Australia’s position on vaccination clear: It’s almost two years since we took the decision to close the borders to Australia. The national cabinet has decided today Australia will reopen our borders to all remaining visa holders on February 21 of this year. We have been progressively opening our borders since November of last year. Those programs have proceeded very successfully. Whether it was the programs we had in place with New Zealand or Singapore, and then with Japan and South Korea, opening up to international students and backpackers and economic migrants who are coming to Australia, that will now be extended to international visitors who will be able to return. The condition is you must be double vaccinated to come to Australia. That’s the rule. Everyone is expected to abide by it. And it’s very important that people understand that requirement if they’re seeking to come to Australia. But if you’re double vaccinated, we look forward to welcoming you back to Australia. The prime minister is up speaking now, and he’s talking about concerns about Ukraine discussed during today’s national security committee. “Now is the time to leave,” he says to Australians living there: We remain highly concerned about the deteriorating situation in Ukraine, and seeing the military build-up that’s been taking place there for some time. All Australians in Ukraine, we have endeavoured to contact them all over the last few weeks with a very clear message – now is the time to leave. We reinforce that message. Back on Gerard Rennick, the Queenslander says he will again withhold his Senate vote from the Coalition in further protest over vaccine mandates. Rennick also said he anticipated making a speech to anti-vaccine protesters outside Parliament House this week, joining former Coalition MP Craig Kelly in throwing his support behind the growing demonstrations. The Coalition senator has railed against vaccine mandates in recent months, and has been collecting and publishing stories of alleged vaccine injuries on his social media pages. Following his Sky News interview, Rennick gave a brief doorstop where he confirmed he wouldn’t vote with the government this week. He also claimed it would be “very helpful” for the Coalition’s election prospects if the prime minister, Scott Morrison, lifted vaccine mandates in the federal government’s control (which includes aged care staff). He said: I think I am helping ... For these people who have lost their jobs or had a vaccine injury, this will be a single-issue election. We need to move on from all these over-the-top restrictions from Covid. Rennick later told Guardian Australia he was concerned that the Coalition may lose seats in the Senate at the coming election due to the anti-vaccine mandate protest movement, including in his home state of Queensland. When asked by reporters if he was vaccinated, Rennick replied: “No, I’m not.” Asked specifically about the religious discrimination bill, which the government hopes to pass in coming weeks, Rennick said he hadn’t seen “the final product”, but that he would vote on it as “a matter of conscience”. When Scott Morrison speaks shortly, he’s likely to talk about the final shape of the reinsurance pool for cyclone and flood damage. That pool, backed by a $10bn commonwealth guarantee, will help reduce insurance premiums (especially in the cyclone and flood-prone north of the country); 880,000 residential and business properties will be eligible for coverage. North Queensland MP Warren Entsch holds Leichhardt, which Labor is targeting. The reinsurance scheme and extra money for the Great Barrier Reef helped convince him not to retire. It’s been a funny old day, this non-sitting day before sitting days. There’s a fair swag of questions people will be busting to ask at this presser ... A gentle probing from Sky News presenter Tom Connell has put a wobble in Queensland senator Gerard Rennick’s already unsteady arguments. Rennick put on classic Gish gallop, pulling out all sorts of vaccine-doubting guff, but under questioning from Connell was forced to confess that much of his information was from anecdotes. He needed more information, he said, but when Connell asked if he would accept such information at face value, he said he would not. It went on for quite some time, and was reminiscent of ex-Australian journalist Jonathan Swan interviewing former US president Donald Trump. I’d list all the logical fallacies, but there are more important things going on. People following the implementation of the Jenkins review (this was the inquiry by Australia’s sex discrimination commissioner, Kate Jenkins, into workplace culture in Parliament House) will be interested to learn the government plans to deliver a statement of acknowledgement at the opening of the parliamentary sitting tomorrow. The sex discrimination commissioner recommended political leaders make a public statement acknowledging “the impact of the misconduct on individuals and the lack of action taken in the past” and “outline the institutional leadership commitment to change, with shared accountability for progress”. I’m told the current plan is for the presiding officers to deliver the statement. But because Parliament House is currently closed to visitors, some of the former staff who have been active in the campaign to change the culture say they won’t be able to attend the event in person. Rachelle Miller (who worked for minister Alan Tudge) has expressed her disappointment on social media. “So apology to victims of bullying &amp; harassment in parliament is tomorrow. We haven’t been invited. Won’t be surprised when apology starts with ‘We are sorry, if anyone was offended …’”. It will be a big week on the cultural reckoning front. Later this week, Brittany Higgins, the former government staffer who triggered the Jenkins review, and the former Australian of the Year Grace Tame will speak at the National Press Club. Some more details from Sarah Martin here on the shelved federal integrity commission bill: Last week we brought you details of a poll conducted in North Sydney which the Voices community organisation complained was too heavy on negative messages about independent candidates, but experts said was likely message testing rather than push-polling. On Friday, this reporter (formerly a resident of North Sydney) was robo-polled by Redbridge. If the amount of positive material about Kylea Tink in the poll was anything to go by, whoever commissioned it had the independent’s best interests at heart. After asking voting intention, some demographic information, and for the respondent’s most important issue, the robo-pollster unleashed this lengthy and glowing description of Tink: Tink is a successful businesswoman, CEO, parent and long time local resident running as an indie candidate in the local seat of North Sydney – she’s passionate about need for decisive action on climate change to protect both the environment and economy, restoring integrity to politics, and equality and fairness for all. [Tink is] supported by hundreds of local volunteers, who see the value of an independent community leader to represent their interests in parliament. The incumbent, Liberal Trent Zimmerman, was not mentioned by name, but the pollster wanted to know how respondents were likely to vote after being told nice things about Tink. The poll also put a number of other propositions: Do you think politicians in government are looking after themselves; or can be trusted to do the right thing? Do you approve or disapprove of the job Scott Morrison is doing? Do you approve or disapprove of the Morrison government’s handling of climate change Should Australia increase its 2030 emissions target? Here are the latest coronavirus numbers from around Australia today, as the country records at least 46 deaths from Covid 19: ACT Deaths: one Cases: 299 In hospital: 57 (with two people in ICU) NSW Deaths: 14 Cases: 7,437 In hospital: 2,099 (with 137 people in ICU) NT Deaths: 0 Cases: 831 In hospital: 156 (with 3 people in ICU) Queensland Deaths: 19 Cases: 4,701 43 people in ICU South Australia Deaths: 5 Cases: 1,147 In hospital: 224 (with 16 people in ICU) Tasmania Deaths: 0 Cases: 443 In hospital: 15 (with one person in ICU) Victoria Deaths: seven Cases: 8,275 In hospital: 638 (with 72 people in ICU) Western Australia Deaths: 0 Cases: 26 In hospital: 1 Anti-vaccine protesters have raised an upside-down flag on official flagpoles outside the governor general’s residence in Canberra. Several hundred protesters massed outside Government House in Yarralumla this morning, in the latest instalment of rallies which have taken over public landmarks across Canberra for the last week. Demonstrators yelled demands that the governor general, David Hurley, sack the federal government, and voiced criticism of the prime minister, Scott Morrison. Protesters also raised the ‘red ensign’ flag – a version of the Australian national flag with a red background instead of blue, predominantly used by merchant ships – on a pole outside Government House. The red ensign had been adopted as a symbol by anti-vaccine and sovereign citizen groups, as part of a conspiracy theory which claims the federal government is illegitimate. A number of federal police at the scene moved in to remove the flags, as some protesters yelled “traitors”. Other called out baseless claims that certain public officials and politicians were “paedophiles”. Police tried to reach a second flagpole, which had been surrounded by a large number of protesters who linked arms and sat on the ground. Officers tried to physically move protesters out of their path, leading to minor scuffles as police pushed through. ACT police have warned that “protest activity is expected to increase in the coming days”, with more demonstrators expected to arrive in Canberra. Police said in a statement: While the key protest areas are expected to be in the Parliamentary Triangle and the airport precinct, police are aware that due to the wide range of protest groups, other areas of Canberra may be targeted. The Morrison government talks about a “great reshuffle” when it comes to jobs, although presumably they aren’t talking about their own. Instead, they’re hoping the booming economy would provide ballast for their otherwise sinking fortunes. The latest retail turnover figures from the ABS add to signs the economy ended 2021 with a head of steam, Covid disruptions notwithstanding. In the December quarter, retail sales rose a record 8.2%, almost doubling the 4.4% retreat during the September quarter when half the economy was in the midst of the Delta strain lockdown. Sales were up 3.6% for a year earlier (although the CPI was also up 3.5%, so in real terms, little change. Seasonally adjusted, sales were down 4.4% in December alone to just under $32bn, reflecting some of the disruptions from Omicron. but it’s been noted that “Black Friday” and other sales in November are dragging forward some of the Christmas binges of yore. The 8.2% quarterly increase beat, for instance, the 7.7% rise predicted by CBA, which draws its projections from credit card data among other sources. ANZ had tipped a 7.8% rise, and has similar ways of watching our spending. Clothing surged 43.1% for the quarter, perhaps as people geared up to spend 18.8% more on cafes, restaurants and takeaway food (picnics?) and 25% more at department stores. The locked-down regions not surprisingly led the rebounds, with spending up 15.3% in NSW, Victoria 10.2% and the ACT up 12.4%. Check out the variant switcheroo in this graph from Victoria: Some more details from Queensland Health: The ACT has recorded 299 new Covid cases and one death. There are 57 people now in hospital, including two in intensive care, and one on a ventilator. Rogue MP Craig Kelly says his United Australia party has begun financially supporting the anti-vaccine protesters which have taken over Canberra, putting on food and drinks as well as potentially bankrolling a $10,000 sound system for further rallies this week. Protests against vaccines and vaccine mandates continue in Canberra for a seventh straight day, with thousands of demonstrators camping across the city. Following rallies at Parliament House, Old Parliament House and the National Press Club last week, hundreds of protesters are this morning picketing outside the Governor-General’s residence. In video from a protest campsite on Sunday night, seen by Guardian Australia, Kelly told protesters he had “friendly donors” who could help pay for food trucks, coffee carts or ice-cream for the rallies. A protest leader also requested $10,000 for a sound system, for further rallies. Kelly said the UAP was today putting on a free BBQ and drinks at the campsite today, and was “trying to organise” money for the sound system. At Saturday’s large protest at Old Parliament House, group leaders flagged further demonstrations as federal parliament resumed this week. A spokesman said some federal politicians would address rallies in coming days, and flagged plans to enter Parliament House in an attempt to meet Scott Morrison and opposition leader Anthony Albanese. Kelly told Guardian Australia he hoped to speak at a rally this week, and planned to sign in “a small group” to parliament on Tuesday. One of the protesters who Kelly said he planned to sign into parliament had described the building as “Satanic” in a speech on Saturday. In response, Kelly said “everyone’s entitled to a bit of hyperbole”. “The protesters are finalising a list of grievances or requests of the PM, basically that the PM ends the mandates,” Kelly said. “The prime minister, the opposition leader, they’re both in this together.” Kelly said he hadn’t approached either office yet to request a meeting. Morrison’s office said the PM had no plans to meet the protesters. We’ve also contacted Albanese’s office. Nineteen people with Covid have died in Queensland, and the state has recorded 4,701 new cases in the past 24 hours. There are 43 people in intensive care with the virus. Meanwhile, premier Annastacia Palaszczuk has scrapped QR code check-ins, although proof of vaccination will still be required in some places. There’s more anger brewing over the federal government’s concession the anti-corruption bill will not go before parliament this term. Independent MP Helen Haines said this morning that it was clear integrity was not a priority for the government, while shadow attorney general Mark Dreyfus said the government lived “in fear of accountability”. “All we’ve seen is scandal after scandal go unchecked, endless excuses and a weak, pathetic, desultory exposure draft,” he said. Political interference in research grants poses an “existential threat” to universities, the Australian National University vice-chancellor has warned. Paul Karp reports that Prof Brian Schmidt said he was “dismayed” that the education minister had interfered in the awarding of Australian Research Council grants before Christmas: Victoria’s education minister James Merlino has unveiled a state-wide campaign to encourage school children to do more physical exercise each day. The “get your move on” campaign will encourage kids to do 15 minutes of physical exercise four times a day. The campaign is part of the wider $24.2m active schools initiative that delivers grants to schools to help them get kids moving. Merlino said: We know that physical activity improves mental health, it improves physical health, it improves academic performance. We know that active kids are more resilient, they’re less likely to suffer depression. Various governments raise money in the name of climate action, and the NSW government’s Climate Change Fund is one of them. Set up by NSW Labor in 2007, the fund collects a levy from electricity use, which is supposed to be spent on reducing emissions, building resilience to inevitable nasties of climate change (because we and everyone else are doing the emissions cutting bit), and other projects. Anyway, the fund’s annual report for 2020-21 has just been (quietly) published. Lo and behold, the Berejikian government (as it was during that year) has finally spent more in a year than they collected. By $27m. That’s a good thing, but as NSW Labor notes, the Coalition governments (under premiers Barry O’Farrell, Mike Baird, Gladys Berejiklian) since they came to office in 2011 have collected $492m more than they spent. In most years, the fund’s revenue has been about $300m with expenditure lagging by tens of millions of dollars. Labor reckons the fund’s unspent money has collected $34m in interest alone over the decade. By contrast, they overspent by $86m in the four years they ran the fund, Labor says. Some credit, though, should go to Matt Kean, the NSW energy and environment minister during the year the fund turned into a net spender. It remains to be seen if more of that surplus of almost half a billion dollars is further eroded this fiscal year but since Kean is now the state’s treasurer and energy minister, you’d figure he’d have some say in this year’s outlays. Facebook has lost a major battle with the Australian regulator over the Cambridge Analytica scandal, after a court dismissed the social media giant’s claim that it neither conducts business or collects personal information in the country. The Office of the Australian Information Commissioner (OAIC) is suing Facebook, now Meta, for breaching the privacy of more than 300,000 Australian Facebook users in the Cambridge Analytica scandal, exposed more than four years ago by the Guardian. It sought to sue the parent company Facebook Inc, based in the United States, and its Irish subsidiary, Facebook Ireland Limited. Facebook Inc has since attempted to have the case against it thrown out, arguing it does not carry out business or collect or hold personal information in Australia, so it cannot be sued under the country’s privacy laws. The full bench of the federal court on Monday threw out the argument, describing parts of Facebook’s case as “divorced from reality”. It found the social media giant’s installation of cookies onto the physical devices of Australian users was enough to show it was carrying out business in Australia, among other things. The court found: There is a readily available inference that Facebook Inc installs cookies on devices in Australia on behalf of Facebook Ireland as part of its business of providing data processing services to it. Further, it is clear that Facebook Ireland’s use of cookies (installed and removed by Facebook Inc) forms an important part of the operation of the Facebook platform. It is not an outlier activity. It is one of the things ‘which makes Facebook work’. It’s a little irksome that all this energy is being expended on internal strife, so I’m going to re-post this piece from the weekend on the crisis engulfing aged care. Melissa Davey took a look at the “atrocious conditions” inside homes: Good morning all. Tory has brought you up to speed with the former NSW premier and former federal foreign affairs minister Bob Carr claiming Peter Dutton is the cabinet colleague who shared the text critical of the prime minister with Network Ten’s political editor Peter van Onselen. Dutton has categorically denied it was him. I had a brief conversation with Carr just a moment ago to establish the basic facts. Had he seen the text exchange himself? No. Who was his source for the information? Carr said it was someone he trusted “closer to the media end than the political end”. Dutton has obviously denied it was him? Carr said the defence minister should “feel emboldened to clear the air” about the texts. If not him, then who was it? (Yes, it is that kind of day; that kind of week). The Morrison government has given formal environmental approval for the construction of a controversial, publicly owned $600m gas-fired power plant at Kurri Kurri in the Hunter Valley. Sussan Ley, the environment minister, announced on Monday that the project – proposed by Snowy Hydro and funded by the commonwealth – had been approved after a “rigorous assessment”. It means construction of the 660MW plant can begin. The project has been widely criticised as unnecessary to ensure the security of the electricity grid. The former head of the Energy Security Board, Kerry Schott, said the commercial case for the government funding a gas plant in the region did not “stack up” given the range of cheaper and cleaner alternatives. Labor last week said it would support the plant if it won power at the upcoming federal election but require it to run on 30% green hydrogen, created using renewable energy, when it started operation, and to move to 100% green hydrogen as soon as possible. It estimated this could add up to $700m to the cost of the plant. Critics have questioned whether green hydrogen will be economically viable as a fuel to generate electricity, and suggested the plant risked being redundant under either party. Communications minister Paul Fletcher – who was doing the rounds this morning talking up the restored ABC funding – has also defended the delay on the introduction of a federal integrity bill. Some independent candidates for the upcoming federal election are making a brouhaha about the languishing bill. The government says it doesn’t have the support it needs to get its 2019 election pledge through (though that hasn’t stopped it introducing legislation before). This morning Fletcher said the government’s priority was its religious discrimination bill and its anti-trolling bill, and that there’s only a limited parliamentary time left, so “trade offs” must be made. Sometimes only a certain phrase will do... Labor’s shadow communications minister, Michelle Rowland, has called on prime minister Scott Morrison to introduce amendments to protect LGBTQ+ students, but she won’t say whether she would back passing the religious discrimination bill if these were made. Rowland told reporters in Canberra that Morrison had committed to protect LGBTQ+ students and it would get bipartisan support if he did so. But on the religious discrimination bill itself? Rowland said it was a “complex” area that had been “deeply scrutinised” by two committees that examined the bill. As to whether the bill gets the balance right between protection of religious people from discrimination and other protected attributes, Rowland said it would have to be considered by shadow caucus when the government produces amendments. Labor MPs and senators in those two committees did say they were in favour of the bill being passed, subject to some minor and technical amendments. The New South Wales government will launch a review into boosting women’s economic opportunity, with treasurer Matt Kean frustrated by how the gender pay gap and unaffordable childcare are limiting the state’s prosperity. Increasing workplace flexibility, as well as “empowering more female entrepreneurs”, will also be examined by the “landmark review”, with the expert reference panel to be chaired by Sam Mostyn, president of Chief Executive Women. Kean, who announced the review at the Committee for Sydney summit on Monday morning, said if women’s workforce participation reached parity with men’s, annual household income would lift by $22,000. Kean said: The review will be far ranging, seeking out reform options to help women enter, re-enter, and stay in the workforce. Unleashing the full potential of half our population is going to help build a more prosperous future for our state and everyone in New South Wales. Now is the time to make sure that a little girl born today is afforded the same opportunities as a baby boy on hospital next door. At the summit, the NSW infrastructure and active transport minister, Rob Stokes, is also expected to announce a doubling, to $1.9m, of state government spending on improving cycleways and footpaths over the next five years. Naturally this focus on text messages disparaging prime minister Scott Morrison is fertile ground for the opposition, who were already attacking Morrison for his perceived dishonesty. Labor’s Andrew Leigh this morning called it a “bad cage fight”, and listed various participants: This isn’t a good government. It’s a bad cage fight. You’ve got Emmanuel Macron, Malcolm Turnbull, Gladys Berejiklian and now Barnaby Joyce questioning the honesty and integrity of the prime minister. And it’s very clear now that those who are closest to Scott Morrison don’t trust him. And when you’ve lost the trust of Australians, I think you’ve lost the ability to govern effectively. Just imagine if there was a CEO of a major Australian organisation whose predecessor and deputy said that they were a liar. Their position would be untenable with shareholders, and that’s the position that Scott Morrison finds himself in now. Gomeroi people are set to protest over “gas-fired dispossession” today in Sydney, where Santos is challenging their native title in Narrabri to make way for a coal seam gas project. Gomeroi man Raymond “Bubbly” Weatherall said his people had never stopped “fighting attempts by Santos and the state and federal governments to desecrate our lands with the Narrabri gas project”. He wants the governments to withdraw their support for the project, and for Santos to withdraw its application. “We have never ceded sovereignty and that must be respected,” he said. The federal government’s increasingly messy attempt to pass its religious discrimination bill just got... messier. Tasmanian MP Bridget Archer has told the ABC she can’t support it in its current form because it would override that state’s anti-discrimination laws, which are in place to protect LGBTQ+ students. “Tasmania has very strong anti-discrimination laws and as a Tasmanian I know they have been very hard fought laws,” she told the ABC. “We should do what we can to protect them, and to continue to not discriminate or not allow discrimination against anyone on the basis of any attribute.” She’s likely to cross the floor. We’ll bring you the latest on that bill as it happens this week. You can catch up with Paul Karp’s piece here: – with AAP Cabinet’s national security committee will meet today to discuss a possible timeline for the return of tourists to Australia. Treasurer Josh Frydenberg told the Nine Network this morning tourists would be the next step after citizens, skilled migrants, and returning citizens were allowed in: We will consider that today, health professionals have been looking at the border restrictions, with respect to tourists in the context of a rising vaccination rate and the rolling out of our booster program,” he said, according to AAP. “Now our vaccination rate is higher, we have been changing our border policies. Bob Carr has continued tweeting: And in Victoria, seven people with Covid have lost their lives in the latest reporting period while the state recorded 8,275 new cases: NSW’s Covid numbers are in – the state has recorded 7,437 new cases and 14 coronavirus deaths overnight: The opposition leader Anthony Albanese has begun the week by saying the government is “paralysed” by the text message sagas. Albanese did not hold back when he appeared on Seven’s Sunrise this morning: Well, those closest to (the prime minister) have made the assessment that he cannot be (trusted). If the deputy prime minister cannot trust the prime minister, why should Australians? The issue here is ... this is such a distraction. This dysfunction and the dishonesty and the disunity means this government is paralysed in taking action. Like aged care, which is in crisis. Over 600 Australians have lost their lives. Aged care workers still cannot get PPE and access to rapid antigen tests. We have older Australians that are vulnerable, locked in their rooms, not getting enough food and water. Those are the issues that concern Australians, I think. Not this circus, as you described it. Communications minister Paul Fletcher is telling ABC radio about the restoration of funding to the national broadcaster (see Amanda Meade’s story, linked in a previous post). The ABC will have to detail their levels of Australian content and other key services. Fletcher: We are giving the ABC secure and increased funding and with that come some increased obligations in terms of reporting. He says asking the ABC to “live up to the high expectations the parliament has of it” is not “attacking” it. On the texts (no politicians will get away without facing these questions), Fletcher derides them as a “soap opera” for political journalists. (An analogy that makes the protagonists the soap opera stars, while journalists observe ... ) Deputy Nationals leader David Littleproud has also been out this morning. He told Radio National that leader Barnaby Joyce is “part of a cohesive team”, and that it’s not “earth-shattering” that some people in politics don’t like each other. It would be “naive” for journalists or the public to think they all sit down and sing Kumbayah together, he said. The federal government will restore ABC funding to 2018 levels, Amanda Meade has reported. That will mean $3.3bn over three years for the national broadcaster. SBS will get $953.7m. Read all the details here: Here’s that text from former NSW premier Bob Carr with the (furiously denied) claims about defence minister Peter Dutton. Dutton said “Bob Carr’s tweet is baseless, untrue and should be deleted” (it hasn’t been, yet): Michael McCormack – the former Nationals leader who would possibly like to reshuffle into that job again – has also been on ABC television talking about those text messages. Leader Barnaby Joyce “has some explaining to do”, he said. He also said Joyce could resign if he wanted to and that he would “seriously consider” putting his hand up again for the top job: I’ll weigh that up at the time. If enough members of the party came to me and asked me to lead the party, I would seriously consider that. I’ve taken them to an election. I’ve retained every seat. McCormack called the text messages Joyce sent describing Scott Morrison a “liar” and a “hypocrite” as “damaging and unfortunate”: It’s very, very unfortunate, the fact that we’re talking about ourselves when we should be talking about Australians. We should be focused on the recovery from Covid. We should be focused on all of those things that mean so much to ordinary everyday Australians who are doing it tough. So for those Australians out there in the suburbs, out in the regions, who are currently getting kids ready for school, about to open a business, about to go to work for the day, about to drive a tractor or truck, whatever the case may be, I want them to know I’m focused on them and so should every politician in Canberra. Still on treasurer Josh Frydenberg – he will announce today that pandemic financial supports must end, and that rapid antigen tests will be tax deductible for workers and businesses (plenty of people would prefer them to be free). Read Sarah Martin’s piece here: Josh Frydenberg is busy this morning. He’s on ABC television now being asked about prime minister Scott Morrison’s character. He’s swiftly segued into the federal government’s handling of the pandemic, vaccination rates and the economic recovery. He says he has full confidence in Morrison and, asked if he would contest the PM spot if it came up, he doesn’t say no: Scott Morrison will be the first prime minister since John Howard to go to a full term. We’ve got a job to do. We’ve got a job to do to ensure this economic recovery and momentum continues. We’ve got a job to do to ensure Australians stay safe from Covid but there’s some good news out there. We’ve started to see the number of cases, ICU admissions and people on ventilators come down. It’s what the health experts were telling us. The kids are back at school. Australia has fared better than nearly any other country in terms of this. Treasurer Josh Frydenberg has dismissed those claims from former NSW premier and former foreign minister Bob Carr that defence minister Peter Dutton was behind those texts about prime minister Scott Morrison. Carr was suffering “relevance deprivation syndrome”, Frydenberg said: Bob Carr, when he was foreign minister, was a waste of space. So we’re off to a grown up and civil start, then. Welcome to the 2022 federal parliamentary year – sort of. Today is not technically a sitting day but the pollies are flying into Canberra and girding their loins for tomorrow. There will only be a handful of sitting days before the election but they’re sure to be jam-packed. Speaking of jam, pop your white bread in the toaster, grab a coffee, and settle in. There will, of course, be more discussion about the two lots of texts sent that were rather unflattering to prime minister Scott Morrison. The National party room will sit today, so we may hear more about what his colleagues think about deputy prime minister Barnaby Joyce’s text (calling Morrison a hypocrite and a liar) and subsequent apology. Last week’s National Press Club address by Morrison was derailed by questions about the price of household goods and the revelations of texts apparently from a cabinet minister calling Morrison a “psycho”. That saw a conga line of ministers saying “it wasn’t me”. Defence minister Peter Dutton – who has put his hand up for the top job in the past – had to furiously deny it was him, after former New South Wales premier Bob Carr accused him of being the mystery texter. The crisis from aged care is far from over, and the political fallout will continue. And this week we will hear more about the government’s religious discrimination bill. With you is the tip-top Guardian Australia politics team. Now with added Josh Butler! Katharine Murphy, Sarah Martin, Paul Karp and Daniel Hurst will steer you through, and Mike Bowers will bring you the pictorial highlights. Tory Shepherd has landed in Canberra to try to keep the blog under control. Whoa, boy!“Napoleon’s use of the sheep was notable,” says Jordan Daughtry, 14. She’s clutching a copy of Animal Farm, and referring to the authoritarian Berkshire boar who seizes control of an English acreage, before bending his fellow animals to his will. The sheep, who represent the unwitting masses in George Orwell’s critique of Joseph Stalin’s totalitarian rule, are “ignorant buffoons”, Daughtry says. Jordan’s sibling, Kiara Daughtry, 16, continues the thought. “It did kind of remind me of the whole ‘stop the steal’ thing,” Kiara says, referencing the January 6 insurrection, when Donald Trump’s supporters, spurred by a wave of lies by the then president, besieged the US Capitol. “And all that nonsense.” The Daughtrys are sitting in the back of Firefly bookstore, a gem of new and used literature in the small town of Kutztown, central Pennsylvania. Huddled together on foldout chairs, facing down a table laden with muffins, pretzels and a stuffed toy pig, they’re members of Kutztown’s Banned Book Club, which meets every two weeks to read and discuss literature that conservatives across the country are working to ban from school libraries. Kiara Daughtry, left, and Lena Cackley. The book club members, all aged between 13 and 16, are gathered at a time of crisis. In the past year the book-banning movement has already seen works that mostly address race or LGBTQ issues removed from libraries in Texas, Utah, Virginia, Wyoming and Pennsylvania. Like many young people in the US, the members of the Kutztown Banned Book Club feel the censorship closing in. In December, the Pennridge school district, 30 miles from Kutztown, removed the children’s book Heather Has Two Mommies, a picture book about a lesbian couple and their child, from elementary school libraries. Last year, Pennsylvania’s Central York school board banned a long list of books, almost entirely titles by, or about, people of color. The ban was overturned in September after students protested. “I love to read, so it’s kind of frustrating to see the bans, especially because a lot of adults are banning it, but they’re not asking teenagers our opinion on these books,” Joselyn Diffenbaugh says. A softly spoken 14-year-old, sporting bangs and a plaid shirt, she founded the Banned Book Club in response to the sweeping prohibition in the US. “It’s scary to know that all these people who might need these books for a reason, because maybe they’re just learning about themselves, and they need something to read, they don’t have access to that.” Joslyn Diffenbaugh. ‘I love to read so it’s kind of frustrating to see the bans.’ Last week the issue gained extra attention, after the Pulitzer-winning Holocaust graphic novel Maus: A Survivor’s Tale was banned from classrooms in McMinn county, Tennessee, by the local school board. The board objected to “rough, objectionable language” in the book, which describes the experiences of author Art Spiegelman’s parents in Nazi concentration camps, and his mother’s suicide. Maus has since become a bestseller on Amazon. At Firefly, the book club is discussing Animal Farm when I join them. The allegorical novel has not been targeted in the recent banning wave, but it was banned in the USSR until the Soviet Union fell, and in the UK during the second world war – when the government felt its publication could anger their Soviet allies. It was later banned in Florida – where it was seen to be “pro-communist”. Next on the reading list will be The Hate U Give by Angie Thomas, an award-winning young adult novel about the shooting of a young unarmed black man by a white police officer, which has been removed from various school libraries. But right now the conversation moves from Napoleon’s hold over Animal Farm’s sheep to why none of the animals simply left the farm. A copy of George Orwell’s Animal Farm. Right, Jesse Hastings. Bridget Johnson, who at 13 is the youngest in the group, shows no fear in joining in the conversation: “I can kind of see that happening with real people in real life. Not knowing, not risking it, not changing anything.” There are echoes of Animal Farm’s manipulation, mistruths and – as one book club member put it – “gaslighting” in the movement to outlaw books in the US. The effort has been spearheaded by groups, which claim to be grassroots efforts, petitioning school boards or elected officials to remove certain books. In reality, many of the groups involved in banning books are linked to and backed by influential conservative donors. Most of the books relate to race or gender equality, at a time when some Republicans are mounting an effort to prevent teaching on race in schools by launching a loud campaign against critical race theory, an academic discipline that examines the ways in which racism operates in US laws and society. The book Gender Queer by Maia Kobabe, which tackles the hardship of coming out and discovering one’s gender identity, is one of the most banned. Since it was published in 2019, it has been challenged by groups in at least 11 states, including Texas, Florida and Pennsylvania. Clockwise from left: To Kill a Mockingbird, The Handmaid’s Tale, Thirteen Reasons Why and Harry Potter and the Sorcerer’s Stone. Elsewhere, Toni Morrison’s The Bluest Eye, a novel which addresses racial and gender oppression, was recently ordered to be removed from school libraries in Florida and Missouri. Out of Darkness by Ashley Hope Perez chronicles a love affair between a Mexican American girl and a Black boy in 1930s Texas. Over the past year it has been banned in multiple states. “I was disappointed that it was being allowed to happen, it just didn’t make sense to me that it could happen like that,” Johnson says of the spate of bans. Johnson, whose mother is waiting in a car outside the bookstore while the group meets, likes reading but says she is a slow reader. “I find it way easier to read with other people, and then talk about it. So I have a whole group of people to talk about it with.” Her dad, who used to serve on the Kutztown school board, has been particularly animated on the topic. “I hear him rant about it,” Johnson says. As for the efforts, which are happening increasingly close to home, Johnson said any attempts to ban books at her school would be misguided. “It would suck!” she says. Elijah Sicher, left, and Jillian Rager. “And usually it’s out of hate from that person, like against a community. A little kid, it’s not going to make them a certain way, it’s going to help them find out they’re a certain way.” After an hour and a half, the book club draws to a close. The pig, placed on the table to represent the pig elites of Animal Farm, is removed, and relegated to a place on a shelf. Jesse Hastings, a tall 16-year-old with dark glasses, holds a new copy of The Hate U Give – all the book club’s literature is funded by a wave of donations – as she heads out into the brisk Kutztown night. Hastings, who had offered assured commentary during the Animal Farm discussion, says she was “shocked” by the spate of bannings: “And especially for some of the ridiculous reasons that some books are being banned.” “A lot of the books were banned just because they had Black representation of LGBTQ representation,” she says. “Especially for young kids who are queer, or are people of color, it’s really important to see representation if books, and if you aren’t allowed access to that then that can be detrimental.” The Hate U Give by Angie Thomas. Right, Bridget Johnson, who at 13 is the youngest of the group. As well as the impact on people who might have found kinship with banned authors, or representation in now-restricted books, Hastings says there is another unsavory aspect to all of this. “It is a major issue, because already there’s a huge lack of representation of minorities in novels. And you know, there’s banning of books that discuss politics and things. “I think it leads to a lot of kids being a lot more closed-minded.”My home, like many people’s, is a place of solace and comfort. It’s somewhere I’ve worked through the end of a long-term relationship, hosted parties, waged an ongoing war with a squirrel in my garden and housed my extensive condiment collection. Despite my emotional ties to this place, I do not own it. Like millions of other renters in the UK, that puts me in a permanently precarious situation. I am at the behest of a landlord, who can evict me for no reason, at any time. In this state of uncertainty, you can be reminded of your powerlessness at any moment. That moment came for me and my housemates towards the end of last year, when we found out that our landlords were considering selling. So what did three young professionals with no rich benefactors but an unusually large understanding of housing policy do? We decided to try to turn our house into a cooperative. The housing cooperative movement has become a striking alternative to a profit-driven housing market. In simple terms, turning a house into a co-op brings a property under collective ownership, where members can come and go and ensure that a house remains under not-for-profit ownership in perpetuity. Once the cost of the property has been paid off, rents in the co-op can drop to the minimal levels needed to fund repairs and other minor costs, forming a home that can be rented affordably and well below market rate. It’s also sustainable – any surplus rent saved can be used to get other housing co-ops off the ground. The modern cooperative movement has origins in 19th-century England and France, with one of the first housing cooperatives appearing in Spotland Road, Rochdale, in 1861. Cooperatives are still found across the world today (in Sweden, 23% of homes are cooperatives). Here in the UK, however, the sector is far smaller and the movement has slowed over the past 50 years. There have been some notable exceptions, and cooperatives have received some political support from the Green party. But in the UK, there are are mere 685 housing co-operatives in total. The low figures are partly due to the immense rise in property prices since the 1980s, coupled with a lack of government support and a cultural obsession with private homeownership. Advice on the process of creating a co-op is often outdated. There are some archaic guides, usually written in the early millennium around the birth of the internet. A 2003 guide by Radical Routes recommends, endearingly, fundraising “to cover telephone, postage and stationery” costs. The lack of recent guidance on how to create your own co-op points to a struggling movement. However, it is far from impossible. If you already have a property in mind, the first step is building a business plan – which in its most basic form is a spreadsheet that works out the projected cost of the project (though at a final stage this becomes slightly more complex). This business plan would include the cost of paying back a mortgage, paying other costs such as ground rent (if it’s a leasehold), bills and housing insurance. Ethical lenders such as Triodos Bank will lend you 70% of the cost of the property against your normal rent, rather than your collective incomes, so you’re probably going to have to find the money for the other 30% yourself. That’s another row in the spreadsheet. At the end, you divide this number by the number of tenants, and you create an estimated monthly rent. You’ll need to get the landlords to agree to sell at an affordable price – potentially slightly below market rate (you are saving them estate agent fees, guaranteeing a chain-free sale and making them feel morally righteous, after all). After that, you incorporate the cooperative with a name, and register it for a small fee with the help of cooperative organisations such as Catalyst Collective. With all the above, you must then apply for a mortgage, find that 30% or fundraise for it, create co-op rules, and finally, buy the house. Ta-da: you have a co-op. In many ways, it’s a perfect solution to the housing crisis. By increasing the cooperative housing stock, co-ops create more affordable rooms and reduce the number of private tenancies that statistically are of a poorer standard, subject to unregulated rent hikes and no-fault evictions. They also ensure the house remains something for people to live in rather than an asset (a concept that has bemused many friends of mine). In sentimental terms, tenants suddenly regain control over the space. In London, where rent can make up 38% of renters’ incomes (or more if you’re young), it’s one of the few prospects for stable, affordable living. Of course, building a cooperative is not easy in today’s housing market. Historically, fundraising 30% of a property’s value was achievable. Indeed, many co-ops began as squats. Today, when house prices in the capital are 448% higher than in 1971, it’s crippling. By our calculations, we may have to find at least £100,000 upfront in order to turn our home into a cooperative, on top of the monthly costs to pay off the mortgage and other associated costs. That would bring up our monthly rent by hundreds of pounds, making the prospect unviable. Right now, turning our house into a co-op seems like an unrealistic prospect. Our landlords are receptive to the idea but of course would like to realise the best price for their property. The motivation to find some small way to evade the crippling housing crisis in this country is overwhelming, and between the Trello cards and Excel spreadsheets, I’m trying not to give up hope on our housing co-op just yet. • Ruby Lott-Lavigna is a senior staff writer at Vice UK • This article was amended on 7 and 16 February 2022. Prospective co-operatives would likely have to fund 30% of a property’s value if mortgaging with an ethical lender, not 20% as an earlier version stated several times. Also, the number of UK renters who face no-reason eviction was given as 13 million; this figure has been removed to reflect the extra safeguards in Scottish law.Although public physical contact has not been a defining feature of the last couple of years, London’s sex clubs are experiencing a renaissance, thanks to a generational shift. Think: fewer key bowls and CEOs in expensive lingerie, more pioneering house DJs and art students in makeshift harnesses, as younger crowds drive demand for events that foreground inclusivity, individuality and queerness. For smoke machines and St Andrew’s crosses, try Klub Verboten. For hedonism with a sense of humour, you’ll want Adonis. And for women and non-binary people, One Night offers a blend of Japanese rope bondage and R&amp;B. Between them all lies Crossbreed, a night where underground stars such as Shanti Celeste and Tama Sumo DJ to a room full of techno fans who can partake in everything from exhibitionist orgies to solo cups of tea in a dancefloor-adjacent wellness sanctuary. “The [queer fetish] community has long been dominated by gay men, who have rightly claimed and taken up space,” explains Alex Warren, who founded the event in 2019. “But that has left bisexuals, pansexuals, lesbians, trans and non-binary people with fewer non masc-dominated spaces to call home.” While some events veer towards exclusivity, with membership systems and high ticket prices, Crossbreed – which has hosted events across the UK and is opening a new permanent home in London in February – aims to be as accessible as possible. Its parties have a trans and femme-only play space, and there’s a mutual aid ticket scheme to help those on low incomes. Warren says they positively discriminate on the door to make space for trans, non-white and disabled people. And the dress code is strict: you won’t get in wearing jeans. “It’s not designed to weed out cis straight men – it just so happens cis straight men are put off dressing up,” Warren says. “And if they are made to dress up, there may be a discomfort that lends to them feeling less entitled.” Fetish gear can be daunting for anyone, however. The first time M, 27, had tickets to Crossbreed, they almost bailed. “Everyone always looks so good in the pictures and I ended up panicking with 12 bras on the bed in front of me,” they remember. Soon after they arrived, though, they were helping a stranger whose suspenders kept pinging off. “We laughed a lot and made jokes about how everyone’s arse was out and I felt immediately comfortable.” Crossbreed staff wearing light-up armbands monitor inappropriate behaviour. “We call it ‘perv patrol’,” says M. “Obviously, there’s like 1,000 wasted people there so it’s a really hard job, but I’ve never felt unsafe. They make a tangible effort to challenge the unhealthy sides of kink – mainly creeps who ignore consent and make other people uncomfortable.” While some people go to fetish events to “play” – the BDSM scene’s sweet, euphemistic term for all sorts of activities, including sex – what keeps most people coming back to Crossbreed is the combination of music and community. “I’ve not been to any other fetish party of the same scale that has the same degree of diversity and inclusivity,” says Tom, 33, who is non-binary. “I feel so accepted and un-judged at Crossbreed. I can be who I feel I am, and feel safe in doing so.” Warren is the resident DJ, performing under the moniker Kiwi, and also has a Crossbreed record label. “People come to dance. We just happen to create space for further hedonistic adventures,” says Warren, who started their event after navigating three “parallel universes” – DJing, partying in London’s queer/gay scene, and exploring its fetish community – and finding very little integration compared with other European cities such as Berlin. Uniting these three worlds is perhaps why Crossbreed has gone from an itinerant rave to selling out Fabric in just three years – two of which were eaten up by the pandemic. “People have had a lot of time to reflect and to find deeper understandings of their sexuality, gender, politics,” Warren suggests. “Crossbreed has become a natural home for a lot of these people.” It has the political concerns Warren mentions at its heart, too. As well as featuring hot people wearing relatively little, Crossbreed’s Instagram page starts conversations around sensitive topics such as racism in kink and how to respond to abuse without “cancellations”. Between the parties, there have been workshops on consent and bystander intervention. The aim is to help people hold each other to account, both inside the club and in daily life. “You’re not just coming to a dance, you’re active in creating a space that strives to be utopian,” says Warren. “A place where you can feel seen, desired, liberated and euphoric – something that sits adjacent to cis-heteropatriarchy and white supremacy.” Their jargon might have some older kinksters rolling their eyes, but Warren’s heartfelt political acumen is vitally meaningful to their attenders, like M, who is now a Crossbreed regular. “It has more of a ‘night out with your mates’ vibe than other events. When I’m on the dancefloor and everyone around me is so happy and queer, it feels like I’m in exactly the right place,” they say. “Getting the tube in full latex is dreadful, though.” • Crossbreed begins its weekly residency at Colour Factory, London, on 13 February. • This article was amended on 9 February 2022. An earlier version referred to Crossbreed’s parties having a “femme-only play space, where women and non-binary people can party away from men”; in fact it has a femme and trans-only play space that is open to anyone who identifies as femme or trans.The first thing Rajiv Shrikul does when he opens up his launderette in south Edinburgh each morning is pray. He says the 7am routine, which he started as a young boy in India, helps him cope with the kaleidoscope of personalities that pass through his shop. “Some people are angry, some are generous – you need to have a very stable mind. Meditation calms you down, especially in these hard times.” Photograph: Murdo MacLeod After opening in 1977, Braidburn launderette became a social hub, drawing in households that lacked the space or funds for their own machines. But Braidburn’s future is uncertain, like so many launderettes. These longtime staples of urban living have been hit hard in the pandemic and they, and their customers, are struggling with the cost of living crisis. When Scotland went into lockdown, Shrikul’s revenue tumbled by 80% – and customers are only now trickling back in. “Suddenly, nobody was coming through the doors. I only stayed open because my elderly customers needed me to pick up and wash their clothes.” Rajiv Shrikul loading a tumble dryer. Photograph: Murdo MacLeod Customer and regular visitor Arthur Mafonko with his dog Milo. Photograph: Murdo MacLeod Normally, during the Edinburgh festival fringe, tourists would pile into Braidburn to do their washing, but the last two summers have been quiet. The absence of students – another of his biggest client groups – also dented his cashflow. Danial Kochak, who helps his dad Masoud Kochak run the Barbican launderette in London, says their loyal group of regulars cushioned the financial impact of Covid. The launderette’s mouthwash green palette harkens back to the early 1970s, when it opened. While locals have been using its services for decades, Kochak’s earnings now pale in comparison with the value of the land the launderette sits on – property prices in the Barbican district have risen by 60% in the last 10 years, according to Land Registry data. Launderettes’ margins are further thinning as energy prices soar across the country. Kochak recently upped his tumble dryer fees by 20% to £1 for eight minutes. “Gas has jumped from 5p to 17p/kWh in six months. Owners will have to either weather it, put their prices up, or shut up shop,” says Bruce Herring, chair of the National Association of the Launderette Industry (NALI). But with many owners reluctant to pass the price rise on, businesses are being pushed to the brink. Masoud Kochak. Photograph: Sarah Lee In the last five years, the number of UK laundry facilities has fallen by more than a third to 2,000, according to the NALI. Developers remaking urban neighbourhoods for students and young professionals are building homes equipped with washing machines, leaving local launderettes without clientele. “We’re a throwaway society, so some people would rather buy a new duvet than have it professionally cleaned,” says Kate Yeats, a Braidburn customer. Because most tumble dryers in launderettes are gas-heated, the government’s plan to phase out gas power by 2035 is also stoking fears, Herring says. “Converting the machines to use electricity isn’t really an option as it is so difficult – and the running costs would be three times more than gas.” The Barbican launderette. Photograph: Sarah Lee The soaring energy bills come as prices rise faster than at any time in the past three decades. Braidburn customer Fraser Howie, 25, who runs a taxi business in Edinburgh, says he is close to breaking point, with spiralling fuel and insurance costs hampering his already slow recovery. “I’m worried about how businesses will survive if something changes or another Covid variant crops up. Taxi drivers have received hardly any government help, meaning some of us previously making £70,000 a year have had to live off a £3,000 grant. How are we meant to afford everything that we had?” Greta Riaukaite. Photograph: Sarah Lee Greta Riaukaite, a 25-year-old carer for elderly residents on the Barbican estate, recently moved further out from London’s centre to Brent, for cheaper rent. She now pays £830 a month for a studio flat, but may need to move again as the high cost of living, combined with stagnant wages, pushes the capital out of reach. “I do love London, but it’s so financially straining. Everything has gone up – travel and food bills especially,” she says. Another Barbican launderette regular, who only identifies himself as Raymond, says his pension barely covers the £1,733 monthly rent for his one-bed flat on the estate. A sad consequence of coronavirus has been its muffling of launderette gossip. Waiting customers would cover all kinds of topics, from dream holidays to their daughter’s wedding dress. “People used to chit-chat for hours, but I have had to ban them from staying because they cannot be socially distant in my small shop,” says Shrikul. Arthur Mafonko, a guesthouse owner, has used Braidburn for decades. Since working together in restaurants 30 years ago, he and Shrikul have been inseparable friends. “He has always been there for me,” says Mafonko. He opened a restaurant in early 2020 but due to Covid, the business never got off the ground. Pandemic restrictions also hit Mafonko’s new business, which suffered cancellations in December after the Scottish government advised families to reduce social mixing. “We have just been keeping the business afloat, waiting for the good times to return,” he says. Scenes from the Braidburn launderette. Photographs: Murdo MacLeod As the squeeze on households continues, the launderette – and its multicultural, multigenerational kind of fellow feeling – offer a balm. “I really enjoy my job, getting to have coffee and a wee chat. My oldest customers have become family,” says Shrikul, who took over the Braidburn five years ago. As a single parent, he found the role suited him much better than his long hours working as a waiter. Whenever he hears of deaths among his regulars, he always tries to attend their funeral. “Doing my home visits to pick up or drop off laundry means I often get to have a final chat with my customers, who have become part of my life. Even after they’ve died, their photos are still in my shop.” Raymond at the Barbican launderette. Photograph: Sarah Lee Since the sudden death last year of Raymond’s wife of 50 years, Hazel, his routine of meeting neighbours at the launderette every Thursday goes a little way towards healing his private anguish. “I’m very fortunate to have such a strong community at the Barbican,” says Raymond, 96. “People here check up on me.” The retired civil servant joined the parachute regiment during the second world war at 16 years old. He lied about his age to get in, he says. Though he survived 18 missions in Germany, France and Palestine “without a scratch”, all of his friends died in combat. As he approaches his 100th birthday, Raymond hopes the Queen, who is a day older than him, will be the one to send the telegram. Photograph: Sarah Lee As more and more launderettes close, the disappearances of these communal spaces that bring generations of people together are not just individual tragedies, but a loss to society that affects us all.Appearing on state television, military officers read from a statement, calmly announcing the takeover of the state. In the streets of the capital, crowds celebrate, cheering as the coup is roundly condemned outside their country. It is a scene that has played out on multiple occasions in recent memory in west Africa – in Mali in 2020 and again in August last year, in Guinea in September, and in Burkina Faso just last week. Coups have also taken place to the east, in Chad and Sudan. As recently as Tuesday, an attempted coup was thwarted in Guinea Bissau. At an urgent Economic Community of West African States (Ecowas) summit of west African leaders on Thursday, Ghana’s president, Nana Akufo-Addo, reflected the alarm in regional capitals. “Emerging threats in our region … stem from the military’s interference in Mali and its contagious influence in Guinea and Burkina Faso,” he said. Ecowas did not immediately adopt sanctions against Burkina Faso, as it did after the coups in Mali. Its lack of opposition to controversial constitutional changes and democratic failings has fuelled questions about its effectiveness at supporting democracies and preventing coups. In Mali, Chad, Burkina Faso and Guinea, young military officers aged between 38 and 41, largely from special forces units, took control of power from ageing, democratically elected leaders. While the specific contexts differ in each country, numerous underlying factors and major challenges facing the some countries in the region have come into focus. Across the Sahel, jihadist conflict that began in Mali more than a decade ago has left millions of people exposed to relentless attacks and caused one of the world’s worst humanitarian crises. Jihadists have exploited failures by governments to tackle corruption and provide inclusive governance in low-income, ethnically diverse countries. The impact of the climate crisis has added to insecurity in a region reliant on agriculture. A lack of opportunities for young and fast-growing populations, and a proliferation of weapons, are other factors. Rising insecurity was cited by coup leaders in Burkina Faso and Mali. In Guinea, the military criticised political corruption following disputed elections. Many in Burkina Faso had grown angry with the government before last week’s coup, especially over the scale of mass killings by jihadist groups in the last year. Insurgency has left 1.5 million people displaced in the country. “People are dying daily. Soldiers are dying. There are thousands of displaced,” said a protester celebrating the military takeover. “This is an opportunity for Burkina Faso to retain its integrity.” In November, 53 people, including 49 gendarmes militia forces, were killed when jihadists attacked a camp in Inata. Compounding the grief were reports that many of the militia forces died hungry as the base had run out of food supplies, said Ibrahima Maiga, an activist and co-founder of the Movement to Save Burkina Faso, a prominent protest group. “The president [Roch Kaboré] never went to the burial of any soldier who died in the last six years. He rarely visited the soldiers who were harmed during the combat. People felt like he never cared,” he said, describing how changes by Kaboré to top government and military officials at the end of last year were not enough. Protesters from Maiga’s movement celebrated the coup, and the new regime has planned talks with civil society groups in the coming days after talks with opposition groups. “The military has many people’s confidence,” said Maiga, adding that questions of democracy or military dictatorship were less critical because of the security crisis. “We love freedom, democracy, yes. But we are here at the level that we are trying to survive. The most important thing is providing safety and security.” Years of jihadist insurgency have led people in the region to question the military, political and economic influence of the former colonial power, France, which is scaling down Operation Barkhane, the anti-insurgent operation it started in August 2014. The coups have forced people to reflect on whether democracy has resulted in tangible benefits, said Idayat Hassan, director of the Centre for Democracy and Development thinktank in Abuja. “West Africans have become quite republican. They provide their [own] food, generate their own electricity, infrastructure. They expect just a little from the state but the state still fails expectations,” she said. “They cannot see what democracy has brought, so in come opportunistic militaries that see these governance vacuums and are trying to fill it.” There is also popular frustration that the international community often sound the alarm when coups occur, and not when democracies are routinely undermined. “There is a focus on elections being free and fair, and not enough focus on the way democracies are undermined,” said Hassan. “Ecowas and the African Union continue to monitor elections without any form of preventing what happened with [Alpha] Condé and [Alassane] Ouattara,” she added, referring to constitutional changes in Guinea and Ivory Coast to allow those countries’ leaders to serve controversial third terms. Both won referendums that were rejected by opposition groups as fraudulent. “Those were constitutional coup d’etats,” she said. Observers worry that support for coups suggests that populations increasingly see them as the answer to unpopular governments. In Mali’s capital, Bamako, for instance, many thousands have rallied in support of the junta, including after unpopular Ecowas sanctions were imposed. But support for military regimes has not been universal. Operations by national armies against jihadist groups have led to serial human rights abuses, often in rural areas where the conflict is most acute and where people will probably be less supportive of the army, said Oumar Bâ, assistant professor of International Relations at Cornell University. “Many of the demonstrations showing support for these military regimes are in urban areas. But the people who live in the cities have a different perception from people who live in the rural areas, where you’re likely to find more worry,” he said. According to a west African diplomat, Ecowas was finding it challenging to maintain pressure on military regimes to commit to transitions to democracy without alienating local populations. “Some of the sanctions have been tough, but produced complicated situations, such as in Mali, where they are really suffering from those sanctions now, but the people seem to be supporting the junta even more. I think there is definitely some soul-searching going on on how to deter these coups more effectively.”1) Middlesbrough exit damages Rangnick’s standing Barring a Thomas Tuchel-style Champions League triumph that seems about as likely as Bryan Robson mounting a comeback in Manchester United’s midfield, Ralf Rangnick’s candidacy for the full-time manager’s role is probably at an end after exiting the FA Cup to Middlesbrough. Should he even want it, a flaw in the plan is becoming apparent. Rangnick was reported at the weekend to have taken on a PR advisor for his six months as interim manager before a two-year consultancy role that will involve working with the next, “permanent” boss. That Rangnick has been unable to arrest much of the slide that occurred under Ole Gunnar Solskjær does his credibility in that future role little good, though a few leading football men can say that after involvement with United in recent years. The FA Cup may have lost its former importance but five years without a trophy is significant, a key indicator that the slump is long past a blip. John Brewin Report: Man Utd 1-1 Middlesbrough (Boro win 7-6 on pens) 2) Lucky Hammers show class at Kidderminster West Ham were fortunate to avoid what would have been a famous upset at Kidderminster but their exit from Aggborough was dignified. After the game West Ham’s players, including Declan Rice, showered with Kidderminster’s to make use of the roomier facilities in the home dressing room, while Russell Penn and his assistant, Jimmy O’Connor, shared a post-match beer with David Moyes in his manager’s office. Several players swapped shirts and after heading out of the tunnel Rice, escorted along the main stand by a burly security guard, stopped to sign countless autographs and pose for photos with young Kidderminster fans. “I was sat on the floor and their striker came and picked me up and said, ‘don’t be down, you’ve done unbelievable,’” said the Kidderminster defender Matt Preston. “Rice came in afterwards and said: ‘You deserved more from that game.’ They were all very nice – they weren’t massive time at all, which you sometimes get.” Ben Fisher Match report: Kidderminster 1-2 West Ham (aet) 3) Time for Tuchel to revisit Lukaku conundrum Chelsea’s players flew straight off to Abu Dhabi for the Club World Cup after their tight, slightly fortunate extra-time defeat of League One Plymouth, which feels like an extended oxymoron in itself. They departed without Thomas Tuchel, who now faces a battle with his own immune system plus the endless rigmarole of PCR tests to have any hope of joining them. Tuchel will miss the chance to work with his players, but it seems unlikely the problems with Chelsea’s attack are down to a lack of attention on the training field. Romelu Lukaku was again a vague meandering figure, and looks like man simply in the wrong place. The manager’s period of self-isolation will no doubt be spent poring over his options, but it will soon be time to question Tuchel’s own capacity to draw more from that portfolio of diverse creative talent. Barney Ronay Match report: Chelsea 2-1 Plymouth (aet) 4) More than a game for Palace and Hartlepool Michael Olise may have stolen the show again for Crystal Palace with a goal and an assist, but Patrick Vieira reserved his highest praise for the club’s supporters. After Palace donated £1,000 to the JustGiving page of the Hartlepool manager Graeme Lee’s wife following her brain cancer diagnosis, fans’ donations mean it has now surpassed the £60,000 target. “I would like to pay tribute to all the Palace fans who have helped support Graeme Lee, his wife and family by making donations,” Vieira wrote on Twitter. “What you have done in the last couple of days has made me very proud. This shows a really good side of the game and is what our club is all about.” Lee added: “The last time I looked before the game it was about a year’s supply of medication for my wife and knowing that is absolutely unbelievable to know that we’ve got our medication there for another year.” Ed Aarons Match report: Crystal Palace 2-0 Hartlepool 5) Lampard gains early platform to build on Frank Lampard drew a line in Everton’s season at his first press conference as manager, purposely emphasising the quality at his disposal and refusing to dwell on inherited problems on and off the pitch. The clean slate approach reaped rewards as Brentford were dominated in the FA Cup and the 43-year-old basked in the biggest win of any Everton manager on their competitive debut. It was not only young talent such as Anthony Gordon who benefited - “He’s got all the attributes to do what he wants in this game,” said Lampard - but the likes of André Gomes and Mason Holgate thrived on the palpable release of tension and negativity that had afflicted the club under Rafael Benítez. The trick will be to repeat the performance at Newcastle. As Holgate admitted: “When people like the boss and Ashley (Cole) come in you are a little bit in awe of them really. The boss told us he believed in the quality of the squad and we showed we have got that in us, but we have got to keep working on what we are going to do.” Andy Hunter Match report: Everton 4-1 Brentford 6) Guardiola hopeful on Delap’s prospects Liam Delap made a first appearance of the season following a long run of injuries, the 18-year-old entering for Jack Grealish on 77 minutes in Manchester City’s 4-1 win over Fulham. Pep Guardiola said the striker has to force himself into the manager’s long-term plans. There is a confidence the son of former Stoke and Republic of Ireland midfielder, Rory, has the requisite temperament. “He will dictate to me,” said Guardiola. “It depends on his behaviour and his performance. Now he is a player who is training every day with us and you cannot imagine the improvement from him. Today there are a lot of distractions off the pitch – I can control what happens on the pitch, but to be a top player you have to be [exemplary] on and off it. With Liam, his father works at Stoke [as a coach] and has come from the world of football so he knows exactly what he has to do. But we are not guards here, we cannot control players. It depends on them.” Jamie Jackson Match report: Manchester City 4-1 Fulham 7) Morison’s refreshing outlook on officiating Given football’s culture of complaining, there is something admirable about a manager who endorses a refereeing decision that goes against his team. When Caoimhín Kelleher hacked down Mark Harris, Cardiff were drawing at Anfield and there were two reasons to argue the card should be red, not the yellow Andy Madley showed. The goalkeeper was a long way out, but perhaps it was a clear scoring opportunity. Maybe it was serious foul play. Both the referee and VAR decided not and, rather than looking for a hard luck story, Steve Morison agreed. “I don’t think it was a sending off, there were too many players around,” he said, instead finding fault with his forward. “I was more disappointed Mark Harris didn’t take the ball around the goalie and put it in the goal.” It was a laudable stance, even if the temptation is to think it will never catch on when others play the blame game. Richard Jolly Match report: Liverpool 3-1 Cardiff 8) Forest academy deserves praise for current success Much has been made of Nottingham Forest’s shrewd recruitment since they changed transfer policy in the summer to focus on younger players but it should be noted the number of talents coming up through the academy. Joe Worrall captained the side, while Brennan Johnson and Ryan Yates also played key roles in the win over Leicester. In years gone by, Matty Cash and Patrick Bamford started their careers at Forest, proving how much success they have at youth level. Johnson and Worrall have attracted interest from the Premier League and many scouts will be watching the versatile Yates. Forest, however, will be hoping all three on show in the FA Cup triumph will stay at the club next season, whether they make it up or not. On the upside, should they leave, it will make the club plenty of money. Will Unwin Match report: Nottingham Forest 4-1 Leicester 9) Hatters’ workload rewarded with Chelsea tie The manner of Luton’s victory dampened the Cup fever at Cambridge’s Abbey Stadium, where a marquee with bar and pumping PA system had been set up behind the main stand. Both managers’ selections bore the evidence of an EFL schedule that would have certain Premier League bosses squealing in outrage. Luton have played eight matches in 2022, Cambridge have played 10. Nathan Jones, the Luton manager, made eight changes while Mark Bonner was without two heroes of victory at Newcastle, goalscorer Joe Ironside and defender Jack Iredale. Luton’s push for a Championship play-off spot sees them host Barnsley on Tuesday while Cambridge’s League One assignment is a trip to Gillingham, a relentless workload. Carlos Mendes Gomes, talking after a first Luton goal, got his post-match wish of Chelsea in the fifth round draw. After struggling with Plymouth, Thomas Tuchel’s men face an organised and tough opponent who exhibited their depth and quality at Cambridge. JB Match report: Cambridge 0-3 Luton 10) Seagulls show Conte what he is lacking For those who measure happiness in wing-backs, shooting envious glances at Graham Potter is the norm. And despite Tottenham’s Saturday night intensity, the sense that Antonio Conte’s sextet of options bring him little joy lingers. Conte’s suggestion that Dejan Kulusevski – a natural No 10 – could fill the role is telling. For now, Potter has arguably the Premier League’s best pairing in Tariq Lamptey and Marc Cucurella. Emerson Royal had an excellent Cup tie but summer change is afoot at Spurs. Should Conte fancy a Lamptey reunion - the player was in the academy during his time managing Chelsea – at least a zero will need adding to the £4 million he supposedly cost Brighton. Sam Dalling Match report: Tottenham 3-1 Brighton 10.1) And finally … some romance There was something cruel about the way Kidderminster’s hopes were crushed – twice – by West Ham at Aggborough on Saturday. Victory for the Harriers would have been a bona-fide shock for the ages against a supremely strong Premier League team – one that could have merited a place for replays of Alex Penny’s goal alongside those of Sutton United’s Matthew Hanlan and Wrexham’s Mickey Thomas when FA Cup giant killings were discussed in the future. Over at Stamford Bridge, the European champions took an extra 30 minutes to avoid what would have been an almighty shock against Plymouth, who led early in the game and then missed a penalty in extra-time that would have taken the match to spot-kicks. So we have to be thankful to non-league Boreham Wood for injecting the fourth round with some more romance late on Sunday as the 37-year-old Mark Ricketts’ goal secured a dream victory at Bournemouth to secure a fifth-round tie for the first time in the club’s history. That it is at Everton, where Wood’s impressive young manager Luke Garrard will get the chance to lock horns with Frank Lampard, only adds to the allure of the tie. Match report: Bournemouth 0-1 Boreham WoodConservationists in Zambia have hailed a high court injunction preventing deforestation and commercial agriculture on the edge of Kasanka national park, which they say threatens the world’s biggest mammal migration. Every October, about 10 million straw-coloured fruit bats descend on the swamps of Kasanka from across Africa and beyond. They feast on fruit in and around the park, one of Zambia’s smallest but under the highest level of protection, dispersing seeds across the continent on their epic journey. Park officials warned last year that the bat migration could disappear if proposals for farming in the park’s buffer zone were approved, which involved drawing on water from the Luwombwa River, which passes through the protected area, and clearing thousands of hectares of habitat. Last month, a high court judge in Zambia granted an interim injunction against two companies – Lake Agro Industries and Gulf Adventures – restraining them from cutting down trees, clearing land, fencing off areas and taking water from the river pending a full trial. Kasanka Trust, which co-manages the protected area and brought the case with two community groups, told the court at a hearing in November that the companies had cleared hundreds of hectares of native forest, diverted parts of the river for their own use and constructed roads, an airstrip and permanent dwellings in the area. Both companies had failed to comply with stop orders from Zambia’s national park authority, the trust said. A high court judge, Mr Justice Kafunda, granted a temporary injunction, pending a full trial. A breach of the interim injunction could lead to criminal charges for the companies. No date for the trial – where parts of the Zambian state would also be sued – has been set, and it is believed the process could take years. James Mwanza, general manager of the trust, said the decision was a cause for celebration, but cautioned it could be a temporary victory. “For too long, some of Zambia’s most important habitats, including Kasanka, have been threatened by the illegal activities of private companies with no consideration of the adverse effect this has had on local communities which depend on the land. The court’s ruling strengthens our continued efforts to protect the environment,” said Mwanza. Lake Agro has not responded to a request for comment and the Guardian was unable to contact Gulf Adventures. Previously, Chuma Simukonda, head of Zambia’s Department of National Parks and Wildlife, said that while he welcomed investment in the country’s agricultural industry, another site for the commercial farm must be found. Find more age of extinction coverage here, and follow biodiversity reporters Phoebe Weston and Patrick Greenfield on Twitter for all the latest news and featuresScott Morrison has signalled he will seek to legislate the religious discrimination bill “in the near future”, as mounting internal opposition leaves securing Labor support the most viable path to pass the reform. Morrison appealed for support for the “important bill” on Monday, telling reporters in Canberra that it is “something that should unite the parliament, not divide it”. On Friday Labor MPs and senators on two committees joined the government in calling for the bill to pass after a series of minor and technical changes. Labor is using the wait for these amendments to stall finalising its position. The Coalition faces fierce internal resistance to the bill, with the member for Bass, Bridget Archer, telling Guardian Australia on Friday she can’t support it in its current form, and senator Andrew Bragg seeking protections for teachers and removal of the controversial statements of belief clause. Morrison has committed to preventing the expulsion of LGBTQ+ students, with varying levels of support from government MPs. It was enough to win Angie Bell’s vote, but Dave Sharma has also expressed concerns about teachers, while Katie Allen has investigated amending the statement of belief clause so it doesn’t override state laws. Trent Zimmerman and Warren Entsch have both reserved their position. Entsch told Guardian Australia he “never believed the bill should have been there in the first place”. “I’ll continue to negotiate,” he said. “But it’s interesting that even the Australian Christian Lobby, one of the main proponents, has threatened to pull the pin.” Christian groups were outraged about Morrison’s commitment that students would not be expelled for their sexuality or gender, as the attorney general, Michaelia Cash, had said these changes would follow more than 12 months after the passage of the religious bill. One such group, FamilyVoice, publicly doubted on Monday that the bill would ever see the light of day, with Greg Bondar, the New South Wales/Australian Capital Territory state director, arguing that introducing it so late in the term was “either politically astute planning or extremely poor legislative planning” as it may prevent a vote before the election. Morrison told reporters the Sex Discrimination Act changes “go well together” with the religious discrimination bill “which I intend to become an Act in the near future”, signalling a vote as early as Tuesday in the lower house. “It’s a very important bill,” he said. “It’s a bill that means that a Sikh family can go and rent an apartment and not be discriminated against.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Morrison said the bill would also ensure “people can speak their beliefs” in society or in the workplace. “We will continue to work with our colleagues on the measures that they have raised,” he said, when asked about Archer’s vocal dissent. “My hope … is that it is a bill that will bring Australians together around this issue. “There is nothing in this bill that seeks to prejudice others, it is a bill that is designed to protect religious expression in this country to ensure that people who have such beliefs are not discriminated against.” In addition to protections for students, Cash has suggested the statements of belief clause could be softened to ensure employers can still ensure safe workplaces. Labor has insisted they must see the final bill before they come to any position. Earlier on Monday the Australian Council of Trade Unions president, Michele O’Neil, the ACTU assistant secretary, Liam O’Brien, and the Independent Education Union addressed a group of Labor MPs, reiterating their concerns with the bill. The ACTU submitted to the Senate inquiry that “all sections and parts of the bill that are inconsistent with existing anti-discrimination laws should be removed, including all provisions overriding state and territory anti-discrimination laws”. If Morrison pushes ahead with the bill, Labor has not ruled out teaming up with Liberal moderates or crossbench MPs and senators to support amendments adding protections for LGBTQ+ teachers and students or to remove the bill’s other contentious clauses. Michelle Rowland, the shadow communications minister, told reporters the government appears “deeply divided” on the religious discrimination issue. “We have long recognised in Labor the importance of ensuring that people aren’t discriminated on the basis of their religion and we have made that clear … but we are not the government bringing forward a bill or bringing forward government amendments,” she said. Kristina Keneally, the shadow home affairs minister, played down the prospect of backlash against Labor if they passed the bill. Asked if Labor faced “grassroots revolt” over the bill, Keneally said no, because religious and equality groups understand “we are a multicultural, multi-religious country”. “We respect one another and we want to see people’s rights upheld, and we want to see our responsibilities towards one another honoured and respected,” she said. Labor MP Graham Perrett, one of the members of the joint human rights committee that examined the bill, said there are “serious concerns” about the statements of belief clause. Perrett said that “any sensible member of parliament” would support prohibiting discrimination on the grounds of religion, but Queensland has had such protection since 1991. “I can see how parliamentarians would want something that brings people together and not cause division. “I would hope that the prime minister, who has a long history of ‘wedge-islation’, would focus on doing the right thing by all Australians, not [on] a short-term political manoeuvre.” But some in Labor argued it should use the moment to be rid of an issue that hurt it engaging with religious communities at the 2019 election. “There’s an opportunity to draw a line in the sand and have this behind us once and for all,” one Labor parliamentarian told Guardian Australia. “We need to stop talking about things the public don’t want us to talk about.”Taylor Wimpey has appointed an internal candidate as its new chief executive, in a move likely to anger Elliott Advisors, the activist investor that was pressuring the housebuilder to appoint someone from outside the company. The appointment of Jennie Daly marks a milestone in the male-dominated industry as Taylor Wimpey becomes the first UK housebuilder to appoint a female chief executive and only the third company in the FTSE 100 to have a female CEO and a female chair. Daly, who is group operations director, will take over from Pete Redfern, who has led the business for 15 years since it became the UK’s third biggest housebuilder through the merger of Taylor Woodrow and George Wimpey in 2007. She will be paid a basic salary of £750,000, and receive pension contributions of £75,000. She will also be eligible for a bonus of up to £1.12m and shares in the company worth up to £1.5m, dependant on performance. The chair, Irene Dormer, said Daly’s skills “set her apart from the other candidates we were considering”. However, the move is likely to spark a backlash from Elliott, which in December revealed it was one of the company’s top five investors and went public with demands including finding a new chief executive. In a nine-page public letter to Dorner, it said shareholders were “unlikely to support a chief executive candidate that represents an extension of the status quo at Taylor Wimpey”. “The successor must represent a clean break with the current management team,” Elliott wrote. “While there are talented members of the Taylor Wimpey team, any current leader would represent a continuation of the status quo, and have shared in the loss of trust and credibility with investors.” Elliott reportedly considered the Crest Nicholson chief, Peter Truscott, the former Persimmon boss, Dave Jenkinson, or the Barratt deputy chief executive, Steven Boyes, as its preferred candidates. A spokeswoman for Taylor Wimpey said on Monday: “We engaged with all major shareholders on the succession process, including Elliott.” In a statement Elliott said it was pleased to see progress on management change at the company, and said it would continue to engage over the appointment of two new non-executive directors to offer support to the new chief executive. “As one of Taylor Wimpey’s largest investors, Elliott has been pleased to see progress on management and board change following our recent dialogue with the company, including the departure of the incumbent chief executive,” said a spokeswoman for Eliiott. “Following today’s appointment of Jennie Daly as the new CEO, we expect to see Taylor Wimpey take the necessary steps to deliver improved value for shareholders and to correct the deep share-price underperformance that has persisted in recent years.” She added: “Critical to this process will be the appointment of new non-executive directors, and Elliott remains engaged with Taylor Wimpey regarding the identification of candidates who would add relevant experience and operational expertise to the company’s board.” Elliott has a reputation for aggressively picking battles at its restructuring targets, which have included the Argentina government, the mining company BHP, GSK and Telecom Italia. “Jennie has extensive experience in the housebuilding sector and has demonstrated exceptional leadership and a razor-sharp operational focus,” Dorner said. “Her strong focus on execution, combined with her customer and people-focused skills, set her apart from the other candidates we were considering.” Daly, who joined Taylor Wimpey from Redrow in 2014, will officially take over as chief executive at the company’s annual meeting on 26 April. In the first half of 2021, the UK’s third-largest housebuilder finished a record number of homes, returned to profit and upgraded forecasts for the full year, the results for which it will publish in March. Analysts said Elliott was attracted to Taylor Wimpey because of Britain’s housing shortage and the firm’s hidden potential, including its land bank, but some believed it needed to improve its operational performance. Its shares have fallen by a quarter since February 2020.Jock McFadyen’s London is an eerie place: a derelict sprawl of abandoned buildings, industrial sites and boarded-up shopfronts. His territory is “the edges of the city where it gives away to the landscape”, he says, and paints transitional spaces that are in between uses, or on the way to somewhere else. Olympia (2015) shows the graffiti-covered hoarding of a Hackney building site, with the Olympic Stadium and Anish Kapoor’s Orbit sculpture just visible above; Cambridge Heath (2004) depicts an empty petrol station against a tumultuous night sky; Elephant (1996) reveals a deserted underground platform, all peeling paint and ominously hanging cables, a no-smoking sign the only hint of habitation. Two decades of McFadyen’s London paintings are gathered in Tourist Without a Guidebook at the Royal Academy of Arts, London, the last of four exhibitions planned to mark his 70th birthday in September 2020 (the series was delayed by the pandemic). Also on show at the Lowry in Manchester are works spanning 45 years, interspersed with paintings by LS Lowry, one of McFadyen’s favourite artists. The exhibition at the Royal Academy brings together works made in the early 1990s with pieces completed under lockdown, including old paintings that McFadyen has reworked. All explore the hidden life of the city and its inhabitants, real or imagined. Born in Paisley, McFadyen came to London to study at Chelsea College of Art, and, since graduating in 1977, has stayed in the city. At art school, he made “witty, schematic, pop art-influenced pictures which got me enough money for a deposit on a flat and a shiny car”. But after a residency at the National Gallery in 1981 surrounded by Titians and Rembrandts, McFadyen lost faith in his caricatural figures and decided to change tack. “I went out with a pencil and started sketching things I’d actually seen, rather than wallowing in things that I’d invented,” he says. And what he saw was the changing East End. In the early 1970s, his part of east London was “grainy black and white, not many cars, a lot of poverty. Very much low rise.” Heavily bombed during the blitz, much of the area is now unrecognisable following years of redevelopment. Now, from his bedroom window, McFadyen can see the Gherkin in one direction and Canary Wharf in the other, as if “surrounded by the pincer movement of money”. He compares the process of painting to being in a speedboat driven by someone else: you can start out with a plan, but have to be prepared to let it go. He started his career painting figures in the urban landscape – often based on strangers he’d photographed with a long-lens camera, “like a stalker” – but soon found they were getting smaller. “The painting itself was telling me that I was painting places,” he says, “when I thought I was painting people.” He abandoned figuration almost entirely in the early 1990s, but in recent years his practice has come full circle. Two years ago he began sketching nightclub scenes, inspired by memories of student life: carnivalesque depictions of grotesquely distorted figures (“How can anyone try to be straightforward about depicting humans?”). Asked to describe his relationship with London, McFadyen quotes Lord of the Flies: “As Piggy says about Ralph, when you really get to know someone you hate them. I’ve got a love-hate relationship with London.” Yet he’s not planning on leaving: “What London has is endless people. You really have the biggest pool of life here.” Toast of London Jock McFadyen on four of his cityscapes Roman Road 4, 2007 “When I moved to Bethnal Green in 1989 my elderly neighbours refused to call it Roman Road [the name changed in the 30s]: ‘It was Green Street when we were kids … ’ The view is looking west from Market Square, an empty plot created by the Nazi bombing in the 1940s.” From the Greenway 3, 2003 (main picture, above) “In 2003, the writer Iain Sinclair invited me on a stroll along the top of the main sewage outflow pipe from Stratford to Beckton. A difficult offer to refuse: in 2001 he had referred to me as ‘the laureate of stagnant canals and night football pitches’, one of the best compliments of my career. This is the view on the walk back in the falling light.” Elephant, 1996 “London is a building site and it changes before your eyes. The tube stations are either high-end glass and steel or in between upgrades. The crappier ones have surfaces which are irresistible to paint.” Nightbus, 2020 “During lockdown, I reworked a group of older pictures made when my pictures were almost exclusively figurative. Most night travellers in London are drunk, and in order not to be intimidated, it’s best to be drunk oneself. Distortion happens, and in the tradition of artists like Picasso, Bacon or Lowry, distorted figures can have more fidelity than attempts at realism or portraiture.” Jock McFadyen RA: Tourist Without a Guidebook is at the Royal Academy of Arts, London, to 10 April; Jock McFadyen Goes to the Lowry is at the Lowry, Manchester, to 27 February.I have met people, mercifully few in number, who just don’t respond to Chekhov. For me, his four main plays (Uncle Vanya, The Cherry Orchard, The Seagull and Three Sisters) are stone-cold masterpieces, timeless examinations of the human condition. But some people, slap them in the best seat in the stalls and they’ll ask what all the fuss is about: a whole lot of rich people complaining about nothing and achieving even less? And perhaps now, with Gary Shteyngart’s latest book, I’m beginning to understand their bewilderment. Our Country Friends, a Chekhov-inspired Covid novel, comes lauded with every form of praise from serious Americans, up to and including the word “masterpiece”. And yet here I am in the Crush Bar, staring into my G&amp;T and wondering what I’m missing. The initial premise is more Boccaccio than Anton Pavlovich. Sasha, a Russian-born and previously successful satiric novelist, has invited his closest friends up to his “house on the hill” somewhere on the east coast to sit out the disease now running rampant through New York. But it opens nevertheless like any good Chekhov – after a self-conscious page of dramatis personae, straight out of a 19th-century playscript – with old retainers running round, preparing the estate. Sasha has near-bankrupted himself to build four bungalows around the main house, each to safely accommodate a guest. There’s Vinod (Indian immigrant) and Karen (Korean immigrant), Sasha’s friends since maths high school. There’s Ed, also Korean, now a trust-fund idler, and Dee (surname Cameron, making sure we don’t entirely lose track of that Boccaccio analogy), a former creative writing student of Sasha’s, now firebrand essayist. And one extra guest is promised: The Actor. In a Trollopian touch, he is never awarded an actual name but again fills a classic Chekhovian role: the impossibly handsome and successful incomer (think Trigorin or Vershinin) who drives the men to despair and the women to masturbation, including Sasha’s psychiatrist wife Masha. And now, once they’re nicely settled in? They behave according to Standard Chekhovian Operating Practice: fall in love, bemoan their lack of fulfilment, fall out of love and then the estate is sold. In a slight deviation, a Shakespearean touch is required to trigger The Actor’s amour fou for Dee: Karen is a newly minted tech billionaire following the sale of her app, Tröö Emotions. This app, by toying with a selfie of two willing participants, somehow induces unstoppable love (usually). It’s slightly less credible than Oberon’s wild thyme bank but still generates the kind of intense, semi-requited passion that runs through most Chekhovs. Which is not to say that all the action is old world. Dee’s shtick is “y’all-ism”, trading on her Poor White Roots (think Hillbilly Elegy) but when the George Floyd murder erupts outside, bifurcating the country, she finds herself at the wrong end of Twitter for standing by “my people”, namely southern whites with racist inclinations. Social media may have anointed them “The First Couple of Quarantine” but now The Actor’s retinue strongly advises him to cut and run. But he is soon back, still agonisingly in love, and craving the antidote. Somehow Karen (off you go again, Puck) knows exactly what to say to him, which images of his former self to show him in order to explode this ersatz, algorithmic passion of his. She sits and talks him through it – bizarrely staying indoors, bungalow windows closed – and thus, the final Chekhovian piece slots in: bang goes that Covid gun that was on the wall in the first chapter. The disease has breached the commune. The American praise quoted on the dust jacket promises a “brilliant” “laugh out loud” tragicomedy, but I didn’t laugh and I didn’t cry. I wonder if too many of its culture-war references – the dark foreboding on the roads around the estate, a menacing “black pickup” which seems to embody the White Lives Matter backlash – simply lack the same pungency for a British readership. The friction between self-regarding Manhattan creatives and barely managing upstate farmers should be fertile enough ground for any novelist, but I constantly felt as though I’d forgotten to pack the codebook. Which left me with the mere domestic shenanigans of the characters, namely a whole lot of rich people complaining about nothing and achieving less. • Our Country Friends by Gary Shteyngart is published by Allen &amp; Unwin (£16.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyA police officer charged with murdering an Aboriginal man had significant expertise in handling weapons but had rarely worked in remote communities, a court has heard. Zachary Rolfe, 30, allegedly shot dead Kumanjayi Walker in November 2019 while trying to arrest him in Yuendumu, about 300km north-west of Alice Springs. After a series of delays, Rolfe’s trial started in Darwin on Monday. At the time of the fatal shooting, Walker was subject to an outstanding warrant. When Rolfe and his partner tried to arrest him, the 19-year-old Warlpiri man lashed out at them. Rolfe was stabbed in the left shoulder, and then allegedly shot Walker three times. The prosecution told the court on Monday that another officer was on top of Walker on a mattress when Rolfe fired the second and third shots. He is charged with murder in relation to those final two shots. If a jury finds him not guilty of murder, he faces a charge of manslaughter, and if he is found not guilty of that charge, a further charge of engaging in a violent act causing death. The police officer has pleaded not guilty to all charges. Prosecutor Philip Strickland SC told the Northern Territory supreme court in opening his case that he expected Rolfe would defend his actions during the incident in three ways: that he had acted in self-defence, that he was acting as a police officer and believed his actions were reasonable in the circumstances, or that he was acting in good faith in the exercise of his power under the police administration act. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Strickland said Rolfe and another officer, Constable Adam Eberl, had attended a property known as House 511 to arrest Walker at about 7.20pm on 9 November 2019. Strickland said that Rolfe fired the shots within a minute of entering the house. Strickland said Rolfe’s first shot – which he repeatedly reiterated was not part of the charges against Rolfe – occurred 2.6 seconds before the second shot. He said there was 0.53 seconds between Rolfe’s second and third shots. Strickland said that in police and defence terminology this was known as a double-tap, and was specifically used when shooting with semi-automatic weapons to inflict maximum damage. Strickland said the prosecution case, however, would not simply be about the events on the night of the shooting, but about the context in which it occurred. Rolfe had been a former soldier who had completed tours overseas including in Afghanistan, Strickland said, and was working with the Alice Springs Immediate Response Team, a police outfit that has access to higher powered weapons and paramilitary uniforms. “As at the time of the shooting he had extensive experience in handling firearms and weapons, but he had little experience in performing policing duties in remote communities … such as Yuendumu,” Strickland said. Walker had been wanted by police because he had removed an electronic monitoring device and left a residential alcohol rehabilitation program on 29 October 2019. Strickland told the court that on 6 November 2019, Snr Const First Class Christopher Hand and Snr Const Lanyon Smith attended another house at Yuendumu to arrest Walker. Strickland said he often stayed at the house with his partner. But when the officers tried to arrest Walker in a bedroom, he charged at them with a small axe, Strickland said, that he then dropped after he fled outside. “Now both Hand and Smith had considerable experience in policing in remote Indigenous communities,” Strickland said. “When Kumanjayi Walker was armed with that axe, neither Hand, nor Smith, thought it was necessary to draw their guns.” Strickland said that Hand later wrote in an email to Assistant Commissioner Travis Wurst about Walker: “I don’t think he wanted to chop us up, he just wanted to escape. “No one was injured, and that’s the best result in my view.” Strickland said Hand’s supervisor and partner, Sgt Julie Frost, who was officer in charge of the Yuendumu police station, also had experience in remote communities, and had previously worked in Yuendumu as a nurse. Frost and other officers, including an Aboriginal officer, spent the next few days speaking with the parents of Walker’s partner to negotiate his surrender, Strickland said. Strickland said the parents told police Walker had escaped from the rehabilitation facility because he had wanted to attend a great uncle’s funeral, which had been rescheduled to take place on 8 November. It was arranged he would hand himself in after that. But the funeral was again rescheduled, Strickland said, to the following day – the same night Walker was shot dead. Strickland said Rolfe had become aware of the “axe incident” on 7 November when he started a shift in Alice Springs. Strickland said Rolfe and his partner on that shift discussed how Smith and Hand had responded was wrong, and what they would have done differently. Rolfe and other officers also spent part of that shift searching for Walker in the Warlpiri camp in Alice Springs, Strickland said. Two days later, Rolfe and four other officers travelled to Yuendumu to arrest Walker. The trial before Justice John Burns is set to continue for the next four weeks. Rolfe was supported in court by his parents, Debbie and Richard. The former soldier Heston Russell and officers from the NT police association also attended the hearing. Outside court, Warlpiri elders Lindsay Japangardi Williams and Ned Jampijinpa Hargraves said the community was still in pain about the shooting. Both men wore white paint on the foreheads, a sign that they are involved in sorry business. NT police association president Paul McCue said he was glad the trial had started and he looked forward to justice prevailing. • This article was amended on 7 February 2022. Justice John Burns is presiding over the trial of Zachary Rolfe, not Chief Justice Michael Grant, as an earlier version said.Sajid Javid has denied that a plan to clear the huge NHS backlog in England has been delayed because of wrangling with the Treasury over funding, as health bodies warned any further wait could exacerbate the scale of waiting lists for treatment. The health secretary, who had been scheduled to announce the plan on Monday, insisted it had simply been held up by chaos caused by the Omicron variant of Covid, and that it would come imminently. Saffron Cordery, the deputy chief executive of NHS Providers, which represents NHS trusts in England, said the plan should be published as quickly as possible to help the health service tackle the 6 million-strong backlog, which is set to rise further. “There has been no argument, there has been a very active discussion within both the NHS and my department to collectively agree on an elective recovery plan,” Javid told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. “We’ve got a plan. It is being finalised right now. It will be published very soon.” Cordery told the same programme: “We need to see this plan as quickly as possible because trust leaders are really keen to plough on and make their way through these very long waiting lists which have built up during the pandemic, and indeed pre-existed the pandemic. “What we’re waiting for is a set of priorities and measures and procedures that will be put in place to support trusts, to enable them to boost their activity levels, so it will be measures to free up clinician times, it will be measures to support trusts to work more effectively together.” Matthew Taylor, the chief executive of the NHS Confederation, has warned health funding plans could face gridlock due to opposition from the Treasury, which might view the spending as “wasted on a dying administration”. But in another interview Javid denied he was at loggerheads with the chancellor, Rishi Sunak. Javid told Sky News: “What I would say about the Treasury is that I couldn’t wish for a better partner when it comes to the challenges that I have. “I don’t recognise that at all. Having been chancellor, having a close relationship with the Treasury, for any department, is crucial. And right now, for health and care, I’m just really pleased we’ve got that really good working relationship.” The plan was delayed “because we had a roadblock with Omicron”, Javid said, adding: “I had planned to publish the plan in December. We were almost there, we were agreeing it finally with the NHS and across government, but because of Omicron we’ve rightly changed our focus, especially to boosters and to focus on that.” The row comes as the numbers of cancer patients facing delays in seeing a specialist for the first time and starting their treatment have hit record highs in England. Half a million people in England with suspected cancer will have to wait longer than the supposed two-week maximum to see an oncologist this year, an analysis for the House of Commons library reveals. The number of patients confirmed to have the disease who are unable to start treatment such as surgery or chemotherapy within the 31 or 62 days that hospitals try to guarantee is expected to exceed 75,000 for the first time. Javid told Today it was inevitable waiting lists “will rise above 6 million over the coming months” as patients returned following the pandemic, before starting to fall.The most consistent downhill skier of all time finally added the lone piece of hardware missing from his trophy case on Monday when Switzerland’s Beat Feuz struck gold in the sport’s most prestigious event. The 34-year-old from the tiny village of Schangnau won the Olympic men’s downhill title with a blistering trip down the unforgiving speed course known as the Rock in 1min 42.69sec, coming in a scant 0.10sec ahead of France’s Johan Clarey, who took the silver, and 0.14sec faster than Austria’s Matthias Mayer, who added a bronze to his Sochi gold of eight years ago. “I can’t think of anything more beautiful than flying home with a gold medal around my neck,” said Feuz, the four-time reigning World Cup downhill champion with a record 45 career wins in alpine skiing’s fastest discipline. “It was perfect weather, no wind, and I was just standing perfectly on the skis. A dream came true.” A jubilant Feuz tossed one of his skis high in the air in the finish area after seeing the green light indicating he had taken the lead with a run that knocked the Norwegian pre-race favourite Aleksander Aamodt Kilde off the podium. Thrown off by the extra speed of the upper sections of the 890m track, Kilde’s eventual fifth-place finish completed an underwhelming day for alpine skiing’s power couple after his partner Mikaela Shiffrin skied out of the women’s giant slalom earlier Monday. Experience proved a crucial asset in successfully negotiating the 40 gates along the unfamiliar man-made piste in the absence of the usual test events that allow skiers to get accustomed to the mountain. The men’s World Cup downhill and super-G races scheduled at the newly constructed facility on Xiaohaituo in February 2020 were among the first international sporting events cancelled as the coronavirus outbreak took hold. Clarey, a 41-year-old who has never won a World Cup race in 19 seasons on the circuit, eclipsed the record for oldest alpine skiing Olympic medallist held by Bode Miller, who was 36 when he won bronze in the men’s super-G in 2014. And Mayer, a 31-year-old who won Olympic golds in downhill in 2014 and in super-G in 2018, joined Feuz as only the eighth and ninth skiers to win multiple Olympic downhill medals. “With all the delays and the conditions and everything that is around the downhill slope, I think to have some experience was OK today,” Clarey said. “You can see it on the podium.” Added Clarey: “I was pushing, pushing, taking a lot of risks. I knew I only had one chance left in my career to get a medal in the Olympics.” The 5ft 8in Feuz, who missed several seasons amid a series of persistent left knee injuries, entered the Beijing Games in a rich vein of form, having won last month’s famed Hahnenkamm downhill at Kitzbühel in addition to a pair of podiums in World Cup speed races. He also recently welcomed a second daughter with his longtime partner Katrin Triendl, a former Austrian slalom champion. With Monday’syesterday’s dramatic win in the blue-ribbon event of the Winter Games, his resume is beyond reproach.Canadian outsider James Crawford delivered the run of his life only to settle for fourth, an agonising 0.07sec off the podium. Switzerland’s Marco Odermatt, the World Cup overall leader, finished 0.71sec back and in seventh, behind Italy’s Dominik Paris and ahead of Austria’s current double world speed champion Vincent Kriechmayr. Ryan Cochran-Siegle, the American whose mother won Olympic gold in slalom at the 1972 Sapporo Games, lost time before the first split and was unable to make it up on the lower sections. He came in 1.33sec behind Feuz and finished 14th. It didn’t take long for the treacherous course at the National Alpine Center to show its teeth. Germany’s Dominik Schwaiger, the second racer out of the starting gate, caught an inside edge while travelling at nearly 80mph toward the bottom, lost a ski while caught in the safety netting and was evacuated by stretcher. Shortly after, Austria’s Daniel Hemetsberger finished his run with a bloody nose and mouth after colliding with a gate. The men’s downhill was initially scheduled to open the alpine skiing programme on Sunday but was postponed a day thanks to punishing 40mph gusts by the starting gate.Jimmy Carr’s comment about the Gypsy, Roma and Traveller communities are “deeply disturbing”, Downing Street has said, while declining to say that broadcasters should no longer feature the comedian. The response came after Sajid Javid, the health secretary, suggested viewers should boycott Carr after a much-condemned section of his Netflix special, His Dark Material. Carr joked about the horror of “6 million Jewish lives being lost” before suggesting the deaths of “the thousands of Gypsies” at the hands of the Nazis had been one of “the positives” of the Holocaust. Boris Johnson’s spokesperson said: “Those comments are deeply disturbing and it is unacceptable to make light of genocide.” He pointed to plans already in place for the government to pass legislation giving tighter control over the content of streaming services. Downing Street’s intervention came more than a month after Carr’s comedy special became one of the biggest comedy hits of the year. Netflix does not release viewing figures but estimates by analytics company Digital I suggest 1.8m British Netflix accounts watched His Dark Material in the week after it was released on Christmas Day – with the total audience likely to be much larger. However, the joke became a political issue only after a short clip was uploaded to Twitter last week, where it quickly went viral. Unlike domestic British broadcasters, Netflix is not overseen by Ofcom and is overseen instead by the Dutch media regulator. On Saturday, the UK culture secretary, Nadine Dorries, had suggested future legislation could prevent the broadcast of Carr’s comments, telling BBC One Breakfast that they were “abhorrent and they just shouldn’t be on television”. But Johnson’s spokesperson declined to say if he agreed. He said: “I’m not necessarily going to draw on a specific example. We are clear that any change in legislation should be proportionate to ensure freedom of speech that is within the law is not stifled.” Asked if Netflix should remove Carr’s show, he said: “That would be a matter for them.” Carr has been condemned by groups including the Holocaust Memorial Day Trust, the Auschwitz Memorial and Hope Not Hate for his remarks. The show opened with Carr telling viewers: “Before we start, a quick trigger warning. Tonight’s show contains jokes about terrible things. Things that may have affected you and the people you love. But these are just jokes. They’re not the terrible things.” Asked about the comments, Javid told Times Radio they were “horrid”. He added: “I think we all have a right to react to that. And one of the best ways anyone can react to that is show these platforms what they think about Jimmy Carr by not watching or listening to him, and that will send him a very strong message.” In the special, Carr sought to explain what he said was the context of the joke, saying it was “edgy as hell” and had an educational value. “It’s a joke about the worst thing that’s ever happened in human history, and people say ‘never forget’, well this is how I remember,” he said. “There is an educational quality. Like everyone in the room knows, 6 million Jewish people lost their lives to the Nazis during the second world war. But a lot of people don’t know, because it’s not really taught in our schools, that the Nazis also killed, in their thousands, Gypsies, homosexuals, disabled people and Jehovah’s Witnesses.” Johnson’s government has separately been accused of seeking to effectively criminalise Traveller communities in a section of the new policing bill that would make living on land without the permission of its owner a criminal offence, and would allow police to seize vehicles.A care worker at a hotel used to relieve pressure on NHS beds has claimed vulnerable people have been “failed”, with problems including stinking clinical waste being stored in a bathtub and a lack of accessible showers. Lesley Horn, who worked in the the Future Inn hotel in Plymouth for two months told the Guardian she feared people were being “warehoused” in temporary care hotels, which health officials have been instructed to use amid an acute shortage of care packages. More than 500 care homes are closed to new admissions because of outbreaks of Covid among residents and many more closed because of staff testing positive. There are also shortages of homecare workers so “care hotels” have been set up in places including Bristol, Norwich and Newquay. But there are rising concerns about their suitability. Horn said a bathroom on the residents’ floor was periodically used as an overflow for clinical waste with bin bags filled with faeces and urine-soiled materials stacked up. “You can imagine – you open the door and it was oh, my God, you are kidding me?” she said. “The smell. And this was not according to the infection control guidelines. It’s not on.” Current NHS England guidance states that care hotels are supposed to be used for “days, rather than weeks” but Horn, who worked at the Plymouth hotel from late October to early January, said some residents stayed as long as two months. Care hotels are not regulated as care homes by the Care Quality Commission regulator, but they are recorded as locations where domiciliary care is being provided. CQC is currently undertaking a risk-based inspection of the Plymouth hotel. Horn said there were only two walk-in showers for more than 30 of the residents and these were located on a different floor to their rooms. She alleged there were not always enough hospital-style beds and there was sometimes a lack of appropriate equipment such as commodes. Devon NHS clinical commissioning group, Plymouth city council and the private operator, Abicare, defended the arrangements, said they did not agree with some of Horn’s claims and said “safety and quality of care are always our main priorities”. They conceded there had been issues with a waste contractor, but said these were now solved and patient care was unaffected. They denied equipment shortages and said it was normal for hospital patients to walk a short distance to access a shower. Long stays were only in a very few cases where, because of homelessness or safeguarding concerns, discharge was difficult. “Feedback from the people who have used the centre has been overwhelmingly positive and staff have been touched by the many cards and messages,” said Darryn Allcorn, Devon’s lead chief nurse, and Craig McArdle, strategic director for people at the council. “The care hotel is just one of the many measures health and care partners have put in place to support the city’s main hospital during a period of unprecedented pressure when capacity in the care sector is challenged by the effects of the pandemic.” The need to accelerate the discharge of hospital patients has been acute. Derriford hospital in Plymouth recently declared a level 4 alert, which means patient safety could be compromised. But domiciliary care operators have warned that “care hotels … may not be equipped to meet [the] needs” of older and disabled people. “It should never have come to this,” said Jane Townson, the chief executive of the Homecare Association. “We call on the government to invest properly in home-based support and care, so we can enable people to live well at home … take pressure off the NHS and reduce costs for the health and care system.” Last month the daughter of a resident at a care hotel in Bristol complained her father hadn’t been seen by a nurse for a week. Linda Slade told the BBC: “He has a stoma bag, they didn’t know anything about stoma bags or what to do.” Kate Terroni, CQC’s chief inspector of adult social care said the regulator would “engage providers to ensure high quality care for people in these settings” and “inspect in response to concerns”. Horn, who has worked in healthcare for 40 years, said conditions of some residents being discharged were worse than she would usually see in care settings. Health officials countered that all discharges had been deemed medically appropriate. Horn said it felt as though people were being “warehoused” and said: “They are put in our hands to give them the best care we can and this is where I feel we were put in a corner … It was difficult for us.” The providers said these were the opinions of one person but that they strongly disagreed with them. Most rooms had conventional baths, which are not accessible to many people in care settings, but there were two walk-in showers on the fourth floor, one in a room stacked so high with furniture that it was impossible to turn the main light on, Horn said. It required care staff to take residents up in a lift, usher them through the darkened room and give them a shower. “It’s horrible,” Horn said. “This isn’t the type of environment you take somebody in.” The Department of Health and Social Care said it had made £3.3bn available to assist timely hospital discharge since the pandemic began, with funding due to continue until March.Film Environmental concerns have motivated the animation giant Studio Ghibli since its salad days: Nausicaä of the Valley of the Wind (made pre-Ghibli but now absorbed into its canon) and Pom Poko are among those which imagine climate disaster. The studio reached a peak of cinematic sophistication with Princess Mononoke, Hayao Miyazaki’s 1997 fable about a dying prince drawn into the struggle between nature and civilisation in ancient Japan. Humans battle gods; limbs and heads are severed. Meanwhile, the placid kodama (tree spirits) look on. Their naive, ghostly faces rotate slowly, accompanied by a tick-tick-ticking sound like time running out. Ryan Gilbey Music Equal parts rapper and digital-age activist, Chicago’s Noname has frequently used her work to be outspoken about social issues. With her jazzy-yet-sombre 2021 single Rainforest, she critiques billionaire capitalism, consumerism and anti-Blackness as a young radical, desperately trying to make change while also wanting to cling to some remaining sense of pleasure in a world on fire: “A rainforest cries / Everybody dies a little / I just wanna dance tonight”. A sentiment to which many of us can relate, it is a climate crisis anthem that points its fingers in some pretty shrewd directions. Jenessa Williams Book When it was first published in 1826, Mary Shelley’s The Last Man did not get the favourable notices of her earlier novel Frankenstein. It was derided as the product of a “diseased” imagination, perhaps that was because the premise seemed far-fetched. After all, who could possibly believe in a world where there was not only a global pandemic, but also climate meltdown and apocalyptic flooding? Now, of course, it feels eerily prescient, even if plenty of its other details are clearly stuck in the 19th century. It’s an wildly inventive and pioneering investigation into humanity’s precarious relationship with nature – and still more fascinating as it also provides a thinly veiled history of the author’s tragically deceased husband, the poet Percy Bysshe Shelley. Sam Jordison Game Climate breakdown is often used as set-dressing for post-apocalyptic stories, but few games have applied much creative thinking to what to actually do about the most pressing and terrifying issue of our times. But when it feels overwhelming, Alba: A Wildlife Adventure reminds us that even if we can’t personally stop the world’s corporate polluters, we can at least make a difference in our communities. Set on a Spanish island, this soothing, family-friendly game stars a little girl trying to stop a luxury hotel from being built on a wildlife reserve, photographing birds and picking up rubbish with admirable determination and idealism. Keza MacDonald Art This is what winter looked like, once – a world swathed in snow and ice, from the thick white village street to distant frozen mountains. It is a picture of a world we are losing all the time, as ice caps and Alpine glaciers recede and forest fires become more “normal” than snow globe winters. With Hunters in the Snow (1565), Pieter Bruegel painted the planet before industry, when people lived in nature and the climate was something that happened to us rather than being changed by us. Life may have been tough but it was also full of pleasure and wonder, as the skaters know. If the crisis isn’t reversed, this painting will be a monument to all we have destroyed. Jonathan JonesThe number of Americans dying while homeless has surged dramatically in the past five years, an exclusive analysis by the Guardian in conjunction with an academic expert at the University of Washington has shown. An examination of 20 US urban areas found the number of deaths among people living without housing shot up by 77% in the five years ending in 2020. The rise from 2016 through 2020 was driven by many factors, including ever-rising numbers of people living on the street and the growing dangers they face, such as violence, untreated disease and increasingly deadly illicit drug supplies. From 65-year-old Randy Ferris, killed when a car veered into a California sidewalk encampment, Justine Belovoskey, 60, who died alone in a tent during a Texas cold snap, and Anthony Denico Williams, stabbed to death at age 20 in Washington DC, to scores of young people succumbing to overdoses on the streets, their stories reflect the harrowing tragedy of an epidemic of homelessness. “People who die while experiencing homelessness are some of the most neglected in society,” said Matt Fowle, University of Washington researcher and co-creator of the organization Homeless Deaths Count. “These are folks who most need our help and are least likely to receive it.” Coronavirus was just one more hazard people struggling on the streets and in shelters faced in the last two years. While the federal government makes no effort to count deaths nationally of people deemed homeless, the Guardian worked with Fowle to collect local data from large urban areas, where consistent year-to-year counts were available. The stark results stretch from Los Angeles and Seattle to New York, Philadelphia and Miami, via the heartland. The Guardian’s analysis counted 18,000 people who died homeless over five years in encampments, on sidewalks or in shelters, including 5,000 deaths in 2020 alone. In most cases, the deaths were tracked by county coroners and medical examiners, but in a few locations only local non-profits kept track. Experts at the non-profit National Health Care for the Homeless Council say that, in many places, the people who perish without housing are never counted. They estimate the total number of deaths is actually between 17,000 and 40,000 every year. “Every person and every life matters,’’ said the council’s Katherine Cavanaugh. “That’s part of why we are encouraging people to just track these deaths. We want to make sure that we can use that information to improve situations for people in the future and not have these deaths be happening in vain.” In all but two of the 20 cities or counties examined by the Guardian, numbers rose significantly over five years. For instance, the homeless death toll in Los Angeles almost doubled to more than 1,600 in 2020 from 871 in 2016, while New York’s total more than doubled to 685 from 290. In places that listed causes of death, the most prevalent have plagued homeless populations for years: drug overdoses, violence, traffic deaths and premature lethality of treatable conditions like heart disease. Only New York and Los Angeles noted a large number of deaths caused by Covid-19. The overall jump in deaths may reflect both increases in the sheer number of unhoused people but also, disproportionately, the growing dangers they face. The annual count of the nation’s homeless population was postponed in 2021 due to the pandemic, but counts for previous years showed a disheartening trend: after declining for years, the homeless population increased steadily between 2016 and 2020. And more people who find themselves without a home are living outside, in unsheltered conditions, a factor that was exacerbated by shelter closures in the pandemic. They also suffer the toll of increasingly deadly synthetic street drugs, including fentanyl. Many may have faced the kind of societal headwinds encountered by 26-year-old Christopher Madson-Yamasaki of Oregon, a bright, aspiring renewable energy technician with a mischievous grin, who had struggled with schizoaffective disorder since his teenage years, his family said. He had become addicted to methamphetamines, after falling off his medication routine and self-medicating. He and his mother repeatedly sought to get him treatment around Portland. But in the end, there were no doors open for him. He was found in a tent on 27 February 2020, dead of a meth overdose and with all his valuables stolen from him, days after being kicked out of a shelter for smoking on a balcony, according to his mother, Hope Yamasaki. Yamasaki told the Guardian how Christopher fell through the cracks. She described how he had repeatedly been turned away from drug treatment centers, because they couldn’t handle those with mental illness, and from mental health programs, because they couldn’t take those with addiction problems. When he turned 26, Madson-Yamasaki no longer qualified for youth programs that had previously provided housing. “And he didn’t make it to 27,” said his mother. “This is so hard to talk about, but it’s so important. So many members of our community are dehumanized for mental health and addiction issues. They matter.” Officials of Multnomah county, which provides health services for Madson-Yamasaki’s region, held a press conference featuring his story to highlight the need for more specialized treatment, which they hope to provide with recently approved new funding. “We know that there is a lot more to be done,” said the Multnomah county chair, Deborah Kafoury. People without a home face three times the risk of death of the general population, according to a local analysis of 2017 to 2019 deaths by Los Angeles county health department’s center for health impact evaluation. It found homeless people in LA were 35 times more likely to die of drug or alcohol overdose, 16 times more likely to die of traffic-related injuries, such as being hit by a car, and 14 times more likely to be the victim of homicide. In 2020, drug overdose deaths were the top cause of death among homeless people in every urban area that reported causes. “It’s deadlier to have a substance use disorder now,” said Liz Hersh, director of Philadelphia’s office of homeless services, who said fentanyl, which is as much as 100 times as potent as heroin, is a huge driver of increased overdose deaths. Methamphetamine was also a factor in many deaths. Jennifer Vines, health officer of Multnomah county, said people living outside sometimes report taking the stimulant at night because they fear violence. “We often hear anecdotally that people will start using meth as a way of staying alert to protect themselves and their belongings,” she said. “And then, the flip side of that is it can also lead to psychosis and erratic and violent behavior.” Hersh of Philadelphia, where homeless deaths doubled over five years, also noted rising trends in overdoses and violence since coronavirus arrived, even though its homeless population decreased. “We’re seeing some of the frustration and rage that the pandemic has engendered,” she said. “People are despairing.” In Las Vegas on 13 July 2020, Brent Michael Lloyd, 48 and unhoused, was shot in the head while he slept outside, in what police described as a “thrill killing”. Anthony Denico Williams, 20, lost his mother to cancer at age 16 and ended up regularly sleeping under the neoclassical arches of Washington DC’s Union station railway hub. He dreamed of opening a home for youth in need. Asked what he would do with three wishes, he said he’d want “a house over my head, to be able to give back to others and to have a nice job, that’s it”. Instead Williams was knifed to death 26 January 2020, in an altercation over a drug sale. A friend, social worker Grace McKinnon, told a local TV station that his death seemed senseless. “So young, he still had his life ahead of him. And for it to end like this, I don’t know if there’s meaning in that.” Homeless people are at greater risk of being hit by cars, according to numerous officials, particularly where large numbers are living under bridges or beside freeway off-ramps. Randy Ferris, a Vietnam war veteran, was one of three men killed on 15 March 2021 when a driver veered into an encampment under a San Diego bridge. Amber Joseph, who recently got housing, spoke at a memorial about how Ferris had helped her navigate living on the streets. “He was like a big brother to me. He kept a close eye on me,” the Times of San Diego reported her saying. Deaths from exposure make up a relatively small fraction of reported deaths, according to several homelessness experts, perhaps because the coldest cities have programs to get people indoors in winter. But Bob Erlenbusch, executive director of the Sacramento regional coalition to end homelessness, said his normally temperate area of northern California, where 70% of the homeless population live outside, has seen more people dying of hypothermia in unusual weather events. “I think it’s just so many more people outside exposed to the elements,” he said. “And the elements are somewhat more unpredictable than they might have been in the past. Sadly, really terrible storms and fires are the new normal.” The climate crisis is driving more extreme weather events across the US. During the exceptional cold snap that gripped Texas last winter, leaving millions without power, Justine Belovoskey, 60, perished of hypothermia in her tent in a state-sanctioned homeless encampment on 15 February. She didn’t make it to a warming center with a diesel generator, according to the Texas Observer. In Denver, Colorado, the cold certainly killed people living outside, but disease and injury caused more deaths, while drug overdoses far exceeded other causes, Axios reported, citing local reports. Beyond the direct medical causes, factors such as widespread lack of affordable housing drive increases in homelessness and, ultimately, deaths, experts say. Those jurisdictions that reported the genders of those who died typically found that about three-quarters were men. Racial trends were hard to establish, based on the few reports that included racial breakdowns. Sacramento, California, for example, reported that 41% of those dying while homeless were people of color. The average age of death for people without housing is low. Again in Sacramento county, for instance, it was 51 for men and 49 for women. “Basically, on average, homelessness takes off 25% of a person’s life,” said Erlenbusch. Preventable and treatable diseases, including heart disease and diabetes, are among the biggest causes of premature homeless deaths. “People should be dying of these illnesses when they are 80, not when they’re 48,” said Margot Kushel, a professor of medicine at the University of California, San Francisco, and director of its center for vulnerable populations. It may be some time before the true effects of Covid-19 on this population are known. The biggest surge in coronavirus deaths nationally didn’t come until January 2021, which isn’t yet included in most jurisdictions’ homelessness data. New York City, which recently disclosed deaths among people experiencing homelessness for the fiscal year ending July 2020, found that there were 121 deaths from Covid-19, mostly among those living in city-funded shelters. That made Covid the second highest cause of the 613 recorded homeless deaths that year. Los Angeles’s unhoused have suffered several hundred Covid deaths, Will Nicholas, director of LA county’s center for health impact evaluation, said preliminary figures suggested. And the pandemic probably worsened overdose deaths across the board. “It’s a sad situation,” Nicholas said. Experts agreed that the best prescription is to house people. “You cannot have a healthy society with this many people living on the economic and social margins,” said UCSF’s Kushel. “Homelessness is lethal. We’re not going to be able to solve this without solving homelessness.” For UW researcher Fowle, who is working on a doctoral thesis about the crisis of US homeless deaths, it comes down to whether our society can muster the empathy to act. “It’s a tragedy that people are dying without housing,” he said. “We know the solutions. Housing saves lives and, for these people, is often a form of healthcare.”For a man currently under investigation by the police, Boris Johnson has quite the interest in law and order. Throughout his premiership, the government has used the rhetoric of being “tough on crime” as a pillar of its populist appeal, epitomised by the home secretary, Priti Patel, turning up to a photo-op last year in a personalised police vest. This would be nauseating at the best of times, but when combined with their attempts to curb protest, it has deeply worrying authoritarian undertones. This stance also means the government has little interest in the nuts and bolts of running a humane prison system – which has led to the borderline neglect of the men, women and children who are currently incarcerated. This has been painfully brought to the fore by new figures from the Ministry of Justice which show that the number of people dying behind bars in England and Wales has reached its highest level since current recording practices began. Some 371 people died in prison custody in 2021 – the equivalent of more than one a day. Many of these deaths were coronavirus-related. Tragically, 86 took their own lives, up from 67 the previous year. We may no longer have the death penalty in this country, but people in prison are still dying under the state’s watch. The prison system has long failed to support those with mental health problems – research in 2019 found that male prisoners are 3.7 times more likely to kill themselves than the wider public – but the pandemic has all too predictably made this worse. Strict coronavirus restrictions in prisons have left tens of thousands of people locked in their cells for 23 hours a day for months on end. Ministers were warned that prisons would become “dangerous Covid-19 hotspots”, and that suicides may increase, but failed to maximise an early release scheme that would have protected as many prisoners as possible. Those left behind have suffered further damage to their mental and physical health. Ministry of Justice data in October last year showed that self-harm rose by 47% among female prisoners in the three months to June 2021, and by a fifth for young people over the course of a year. The death of a baby after a pregnant teenager was left to give birth alone in her cell shows just how brutal conditions in our prisons have become. Prison reform has long been one of those political hot potatoes that few politicians are willing to tackle sensibly, all too aware that they will be accused of being “soft on crime” or “not on the side of victims”. The government’s recent white paper on prisons is evidence of this, boasting that the government will provide 20,000 more prison places to “protect the public”. Consider that the UK already has the third largest prison population in the Council of Europe after Russia and Turkey. Those who are uncomfortable with talk of reducing prison numbers often raise fears that it would let “dangerous criminals off the hook”. But the truth is, flaws in the justice system mean that’s exactly what the current system does. New data shows only 1.3% of rape cases are now going to court despite the number of recorded rapes hitting a record high. The idea that the Tories are the party to be trusted on crime was further discredited last week when the Home Office was caught making misleading claims about the latest crime figures. Instead of reflecting a system working well, incarceration is disproportionately inflicted on people who grew up in poverty, as well as those with mental health conditions and from an ethnic minority; the Prison Reform Trust estimates that the over-representation of black, Asian and minority ethnic people jailed in this country is estimated to fill a dozen extra prisons. What we really need is reform of the entire prison system, starting with an increase in funding for healthcare and palliative support. Not only is it the right thing to do, it will also save taxpayers’ money in the long run by improving prisoners’ health and helping to nurture future rehabilitated citizens. Similarly, we know that investment in rehabilitation keeps the public safer: the “unmitigated disaster” of the Conservative privatisation of probation services led the number of rapes, murders and other serious crimes committed by offenders on parole to rise by more than 50% in just four years. Investing in preventive measures will also keep people out of the criminal justice system in the first place. Prisons are too often used as a solution to social problems; a civilised – and smart – society would spend its resources on tackling poverty rather than building more cells. Alongside prevention strategies, we should radically reduce the size of the prison population – by reducing the imprisonment of non-violent offenders, and focusing on community-based options instead. This is particularly sensible for women, the majority of whom are jailed for non-violent crimes. Imprisoning mothers serving sentences for non-violent offences should end and community women’s centres used instead. Research shows that separating children from their mothers – often for a minor crime and short sentence – puts them at risk of school exclusion, suicide attempts and exploitation. Pregnant women especially have no place in our prisons. The consequences of carrying on as we are clear: experts warn that the government’s plan to expand female prison places could mean that more babies die. As a former public prosecutor, Keir Starmer is in a better position than most to challenge the government to adopt an evidence-based approach to prisons without Johnson being able to accuse him of being “soft” on crime. Justice for victims does not mean the abuse of prisoners, just as law and order cannot be achieved by creating more chaotic lives. Running a nation’s prison system requires more than playing dress-up in a personalised jacket. Perhaps we might begin by remembering that prisoners are still human beings. Frances Ryan is a Guardian columnist and author of Crippled: Austerity and the Demonisation of Disabled People – now out on audiobookFor nearly three years, Kevin Zhou has worked as a delivery driver in New York City for DoorDash, UberEats, Grubhub and other food delivery apps, and often has to work 12- to 16-hour days just to make ends meet and support his family. “Sometimes in an order, you can make just $3 to $5 and it can take half an hour,” said Zhou. He added issues such as traffic and parking tickets, car maintenance, car insurance, gas, other expenses, and being sent by the app on long delivery runs that are out of the way of areas where most orders are concentrated force him and other workers to have to work long hours to make it worthwhile to work the apps. Just a few weeks ago, Zhou got into a car accident while working during a winter storm in New York City, as he said during bad weather is often when the app is the busiest, and he had to pay several hundred dollars in repairs out of his own pocket. “The companies can take 20 to 30% of our earnings, and by myself I don’t have the power to change that, so we need to unite together to fight for our rights,” added Zhou. “We need change and to organize together to fight these big companies.” Zhou is a founding member of the International Alliance of Delivery Workers, one of nine grassroots worker organizations in the New York City area that are launching a new coalition, Justice for App Workers, representing 100,000 rideshare and delivery app workers on 1 February and kicking off the new organizing effort with a rally in Foley Square in Manhattan. The coalition is one of the largest organizing campaigns focused on the gig app economy in the US. It held the New York rally last week, where hundreds of workers held banners and protested to highlight their struggles in the gig economy. The coalition comprises groups including the NYC Rideshare Club, United Delivery Workers Association, International Alliance of Delivery Workers, the Independent Drivers Guild, Long Island Uber &amp; Lyft Network, Black Car Mafia, UzBER, NYC Drivers Unite, and Utany, which represents Spanish-speaking rideshare drivers in the Bronx. The groups are organizing together in demand of living wages, a safe working environment, an end to unfair deactivation, quality healthcare benefits, reliable bathroom access, and the right to form a union for rideshare and delivery app workers, with the aim to expand these demands and organizing efforts around the US. Rideshare and delivery app workers around the US have been pressuring elected officials to rein in the industry’s treatment of workers. The New York city council passed legislation several months ago to establish minimum pay and guarantee bathroom access for food delivery workers and some regulation efforts have been made over the years, but workers affirm that significant issues remain that they hope to amend through organizing efforts. “We are fighting to transform this industry,” said Naomi Ogutu, who has worked full-time as a rideshare driver for Uber and Lyft since 2016. “We want to take on these multibillion-dollar companies that control our lives. We are a big part of the New York economy and we are an important and integral part of New York. We deserve better.” She explained the issues she has faced as a rideshare driver and heard from other drivers over the past several years, such as the apps taking a significant chunk of revenue out of every ride, a lack of security features to protect drivers, a lack of support or fair arbitration in cases of wrongful deactivation of driver accounts, and a lack of paid leave if a driver has any job-related issues such as getting assaulted by a passenger. Ogutu also cited a lack of access to bathrooms as a prevalent problem for rideshare drivers in New York City, as she often has to drive far out of her way to find a bathroom she is able to use while on the job. “I close my app to go to the Wegmans supermarket in Brooklyn, that’s where I go to the bathroom. So that’s how I’ve broken my day. That means I’m losing income, because I’m driving across the bridge, going all the way to Brooklyn, just to use a bathroom,” said Ogutu, who is also president of NYC Rideshare Club, which represents about 4,400 rideshare drivers in New York City. Ogutu added: “If you are working and generating billions of dollars for a company, and you can’t even access a bathroom, that’s not fair and it’s not human at all.”Let’s start with a multiple choice question. It is a cold, wet February evening. You come home with your two kids after school. You stand in the hallway and contemplate your options. Do you put on the heating? It is freezing and your kids are reluctant to take off their coats. Perhaps you should make a cheap but nutritious dinner for them. They have been saying all the way home that they are “starving”. You could give them their night-time bath, because it is two days since they had their last one, or save the cost of the heating for some new winter boots – theirs are too tight and letting in water. You can pick only one option. When energy bills increase for millions in April, these decisions will become a stark reality for many. According to the thinktank the Resolution Foundation, the number of households living in “fuel stress” will rise by 2.5 million to 5 million. This is a staggering number to comprehend, so please think of your neighbours, your auntie, your best friend, your favourite teacher from school who might be in that position. As for the measures announced by the government on Thursday to ameliorate the effects of the rise in the energy price cap, the words “too little, too late” and “poorly thought‑out” spring to mind. Perhaps I should be writing this from a clear-eyed, journalistic point of view, but in fact I am writing this from a place of fury. You see, I grew up in extreme poverty. I know only too well the absolute degradation and hardship of poverty – particularly fuel poverty – when home isn’t a home, but a place that you avoid as long as possible, lingering in shopping centres or libraries, where you can stay warm for a little longer. “It was just so warm and cosy. Our bed was right by the radiator.” This is what my mum always said when she recalled the women’s shelter we ended up in not long after I was born. For many, it wouldn’t be something worth mentioning, but if you have grown up poor – and in the cold, hard granite of Aberdeen, no less – warmth is memorable. Indeed, my grandmother and her sisters used to go down to the docks in their childhood to scavenge lumps of coal, earning the name “Torry seagulls”, after the working-class area where they grew up. I sometimes imagine that cold passing down through slow-moving blood, generation to generation, woman to woman. That is three generations for whom sleeping next to a radiator that you don’t worry about paying for is an anecdote worth repeating over and over, throughout your life, like meeting a celebrity. After the women’s shelter, there was an unfurnished, uncarpeted council flat that no one wanted on a street no one would choose to live on. My single mum and I had only a coal fire. As a mum to a 15-month-old boy, I cannot imagine the stress of building a fire, keeping it going and ensuring it was safe. Or of lugging the coal up the front steps with a baby and a buggy. When I was a toddler, I came running through to tell my mum I had run a bath. I had filled our tub with coal. I understood that was where warmth came from, but not how. After that council house, we moved around a lot, up and down the country, taking in Kent, Durham, Lancashire and East Anglia. We lived in homeless B&amp;Bs, bedsits, council houses and slum private rentals. I think there were about 16 places – possibly more, but I lost count. One thing they all had in common was brutal, biting cold. We measured and rationed water for bathing, wore clothes as long as we possibly could before washing them. Often, there were no facilities to do so anyway. As a child, I came to know what it was to be constantly cold, even as you slept. Even a duvet could feel wet, heavy and hopeless. In one childhood council flat, we had ice inside the windows; I used to say: “Jack Frost has been.” At night, I would lie in bed and draw shapes with my fingertip in the black mould on the wall – council-estate kid Etch A Sketch. In a B&amp;B my sister, my mum and I shared, the metal bunk beds would get icy to the touch. There was a meter in the communal showers. If we didn’t have a 20p piece, we couldn’t have a shower. Often, that money was days away. At school, I was often told I was smelly. For years, I believed it was because kids were cruel and I was always the strange new girl with the falling-apart shoes and the free school dinners. But I now realise that, since we got to shower only twice a week and we never had the money to wash our clothes regularly, I did probably stink, especially as I reached puberty. When I got my period at 13 – such an acutely self-conscious age – I begged my mum for a bath each night, but I had to settle for a cold sink wash and, when the night came, the thirdhand bath water. In one bedsit, when I was in my teens and adept at gallows humour, I joked to my mum that maybe we could eat the mushrooms growing out of our damp bathroom carpet. She said: “Don’t be daft,” as though I had been serious and that was an entirely normal thing to suggest. I cannot remember a warm home in the winter from my youth. Instead, I recall my mum, my sister and I crowded around small fires, like characters in a Dickens novel, after showers, to change our clothes, to eat, to read. It didn’t matter whether we had a whole council flat, a bedsit or a single room: all our lives and activity took place within the two square metres’ warmth of that heater. Except, of course, we weren’t Dickensian characters. I grew up in the 80s and 90s. Even more reprehensibly, these scenes are still being repeated three decades later. Growing up in this way told me I didn’t matter, that society didn’t think I was worth even the most basic provisions. I truly believed – well into adulthood – that I had done something wrong to deserve it. That somehow I was lesser or bad. That was why, when I went to better-off friends’ houses, I could take off my shoes and feel warm carpet under my feet. It was why we sat on top of their Groovy Chick duvets and didn’t huddle under them, wearing two jumpers. Now that I have a child of my own, I often think about that first flat, with its bare floorboards and coal fire. Unthinkable even in the 80s. My boy was born in Prague at the height of the pandemic during a winter of heavy snow. When people came into our small apartment, they would declare it almost tropical, shedding layers as they walked from the front door to the living room. They would look at me questioningly: “Aren’t you boiling? Can I crack a window?” I would shrug, hold my baby close to me and say: “I just really can’t take the cold.” Lowborn: Growing Up, Getting Away and Returning to Britain’s Poorest Towns by Kerry Hudson is out now (Chatto, £8.99). To support the Guardian and the Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.An elderly gentleman wearing a raincoat and a crumpled tan golf cap ambled across a makeshift stage at dusk on Sunday in Kansas City to accept a trophy that many fans of his team believe had taken far too long to win. Then the wiseguys on social media let him have it. Twitter and Facebook did not exist the last time his Cincinnati Bengals won the AFC title and earned a trip to the Super Bowl, but 86-year-old Mike Brown has been a target for years, for running his football team on the cheap. The Twitter wisecracks kept it up: “My man spoke at the podium like he was wondering how much the Super Bowl was going to cost,” one read. Another read: “You know how much cheaper the flights in are the next day? Let’s just show up the 14th and play then.” That was a good one. The Bengals are to play the Los Angeles Rams in Super Bowl LVI on 13 February at the Rams’ beautiful new home stadium. The Rams, the designated visiting team in the game, won’t even have to make a road trip. The Bengals’ journey, on the other hand, has taken 33 years. The fans are thrilled to see their team in the Super Bowl, but they are not quite ready to let go of the lean years, which included footing the bill for a new stadium so Brown would not move the team. When asked how much credit Brown deserves for the Bengals’ Super Bowl run, the Cincinnati Enquirer sports columnist Paul Daugherty told the Guardian: “Hard to say. He has stepped away from the day to day [operation], but still collaborates on the big decisions. He approved the hiring of Taylor and the free-agent spending they’ve done the last two years, so I guess he deserves praise. Whether it makes up for the previous three decades is open to debate.” Days after the Bengals upended Tennessee on 15 January for their first playoff victory in 31 years, an op-ed appeared in the Cincinnati Enquirer with the headline: Yes Cincinnati, you owe Bengals owner an apology. Many of those who commented were not kind to the author. “An apology?! I don’t think so,” one reader wrote. “I’m old enough to remember Mike Brown blackmailing the taxpayers of this county to get a new stadium and including an implied warranty that the Bengals would field a more competitive team if one were provided to him. It took the Bengals a quarter of a century to deliver while Mike Brown screwed Cincinnati.” Not only does Brown also serve as the team’s general manager, a la Jerry Jones in Dallas, the Bengals have been reluctant to chase free-agents and have no indoor practice facility in a city where average winter temperatures hover around freezing. The scouting department was thin for years, leading to poor personnel decisions. Former players have weighed in too – and it’s easy to see why Cincinnati may not have been the first choice for big name free-agents down the years. “We didn’t have bottled water or Gatorade and when we first got it, guys would be taking bottles of Gatorade home,” former Bengals wide receiver TJ Houshmandzadeh told Colin Cowherd in 2018. “The year before I got there, Willie Anderson was telling me they didn’t even have jockstraps. They would get a bunch of used jockstraps and throw them in the middle of the locker room and say ‘Here you go’”. Add in rotten luck along the way – like when quarterback Carson Palmer, the No 1 overall draft choice in 2003, had his knee caved in as he completed a 66-yard pass, his first in the playoffs. Palmer played in only one other playoff game with the Bengals, losing that one. The Bengals traded away the No overall 1 pick in 1984, which became the five-time Pro Bowler Irving Fryar, and their No 1 overall pick in 1994 was defensive tackle Dan Wilkerson, who forced a trade in 1997 after he called Cincinnatians “prejudiced and uptight and stiff.” The No 1 overall pick in 1995 was the Penn State running back Ki-Jana Carter, who tore up his knee on his third carry in his first preseason game and missed his entire rookie season. Carter would gain all of 747 yards rushing over five injury-plagued seasons with the Bengals. Sixteen years later, quarterback Joe Burrow, the No 1 overall draft choice, had his knee wrecked 10 games into his rookie season. The young head coach, Zac Taylor, won only six of 32 games in his first two years, leading Brown to issue a postseason vote of confidence. But Burrow recovered to post a brilliant second season, the Bengals have rallied under Taylor to win 11 regular-season games and three playoff games, and Cincinnati is saying “Who Dey?” as they did when Boomer Esiason and Ickey Woods led them to Super Bowl XXIII. (The Bengals, who have never won a Super Bowl, lost to the 49ers for the second time.) “When you say the Bengals are going to the Super Bowl, that has a nice ring to it,” Brown said on Sunday after accepting the trophy from Woods, an honorary captain. “Our people in Cincinnati will be ‘Who Deying’ it through the night.” The perception is that Brown, whose late Hall of Fame father, Paul, started and coached the team in 1968, has ceded some of the hands-on operation of the Bengals – though he still attends every practice and game, and next on the organizational flow chart is his daughter, Katie, who has taken several steps to build a better relationship with the community. “I personally am happy for Mike, who never received the credit he deserved for his part in building the last Super Bowl team, and who was incredibly accessible and thoughtful in my many dealings with him in Cincinnati,” Mike Bass, a former Cincinnati sports writer turned occasional columnist, tells the Guardian. “The fans grew to blame him for everything that went wrong after the Super Bowl, and he certainly deserved his share of criticism. “When I was there, for instance, the Bengals relied for a long time on the coaching staff to do a lot of the college scouting instead of hiring more scouts to do it, the way other teams did. When I started writing again for the Enquirer, the fans clearly still were angry at Mike, seeing him as too cheap to build a championship organization or team, same as when I was there. Now? I don’t see Mike’s name come up a lot. The focus now is on Joe Burrow and the team.” Burrow, the unflappable, cigar-smoking, bling-adorned 25-year-old quarterback, provides quite a contrast to Brown – but so did the inimitable former Bengals wide receiver Chad Johnson, who was known for a time as Chad Ochocinco, after his jersey number, 85. Brown, who was born when his father was the 27-year-old football coach at Washington High School in Massillon, Ohio, in turn provides quite a contrast to the Rams’ 74-year-old owner, Stan Kroenke. Brown’s estimated worth is a mere $925m, making him the second ‘poorest’ owner in the NFL behind the Raiders’ Mark Davis. Kroenke, worth around $11bn, has amassed a sports empire that includes that gorgeous new stadium near LAX, as well as the Premier League’s Arsenal. The Mike Brown sidebar to the Bengals’ Super Story would be so much cuter had he simply been the famous coach’s son who persisted through years of mediocrity to build a champion the old-fashioned way. This just feels as if the Bengals made it despite the old guy.UK house prices reached a record high in January according to Halifax, but the lender warned growth is likely to slow “considerably” this year as household finances come under increasing pressure. The price of the average UK home reached a record high of £276,759 in January, up £24,500 over the year, and £37,500 higher than two years ago. However, house price growth slowed to just 0.3% in January, the smallest monthly increase since June last year, in a sign that the pandemic-fuelled boom could be fading. “While the limited supply of new housing stock to the market will continue to provide some support to house prices, it remains likely that the rate of house price growth will slow considerably over the next year,” said Russell Galley, a managing director at Halifax. Halifax, which has previously said that the housing market “defied expectations” last year, said affordability remains at historically low levels as price rises continue to outstrip growth in earnings. Last week, the Bank of England raised interest rates for the second time in three months, as it sought to temper inflation, which is running at a 30-year high of 5.4%, with analysts expecting further rises later this year. Homeowners are also facing a dramatic increase in living costs, including higher energy and food bills, rising phone and broadband charges, and increased national insurance payments from April. “This situation is expected to become more acute in the short term as household budgets face even greater pressure from an increase in the cost of living and rising interest rates begin to feed through to mortgage rates,” said Galley. “Despite record levels of first-time buyers stepping on to the ladder last year, younger generations still face significant barriers to homeownership as deposit requirements remain challenging.” In the final four months of last year house price growth ran at more than 1% each month, before January’s dip, said Halifax. House prices remain 9.7% up in average compared with January last year. “Deposits will be key to the level of house price inflation this year,” said Anthony Codling, the chief executive of the property data site Twindig. “Those with a big deposit will be able to rise above the living and mortgage cost rises, those without will not unfortunately. The deposit poor will also find it harder to save as living costs rise.” Halifax said Wales had the strongest start to the year of any nation or region, with annual house price inflation of 13.9% compared with last January, to an average of £205,253. Northern Ireland house prices rose by an average of 10.2% to £170,982, while Scotland was up 8.9% year on year to £192,698, a dip on December. In England, the north-west was once again the best-performing region, up 12% year on year to £213,200, with the second highest annual growth rate in the UK. London remains the weakest-performing region with annual growth of 4.5% in January, a third monthly increase double the rate recorded in December and the strongest performance in a year. The annual rate of growth in average UK house prices was unchanged in January at 9.7%.The government is facing a legal challenge over its newly updated shooting licences for England, which classify game birds as livestock and so allow wild birds to be shot to protect them. Campaigners have said the licences give an unfair advantage to gamekeepers, as they allow the birds to be defined as livestock when shooters want to kill other birds to protect them, but are otherwise considered wild birds so the estate owners are not liable for any damage the game birds cause. This year, Natural England advised the government that when receiving food and shelter from landowners, birds such as pheasant and partridge count as livestock. They now give explicit permission for shooters to kill carrion crows, jackdaws, magpies and rooks to protect the game birds. General licences give broad permissions to shoot certain species of wild birds to protect livestock, aid conservation, and preserve health and public safety. They are permissive licences, meaning users do not need to apply for them but they must comply with their terms and conditions when undertaking licensed acts. Wild Justice, the campaign group run by Mark Avery, Chris Packham and Dr Ruth Tingay, has started a legal challenge against this clarification of the rules. It claims the new definition of livestock is unlawful as it is significantly wider than that used in the Wildlife and Countryside Act. The licence says: “‘Livestock’ is as defined in section 27(1) of the 1981 Act). For the purpose of this licence, this expression also includes gamebirds kept in an enclosure or which are free roaming but remain significantly dependent on the provision of food, water or shelter by a keeper for their survival. This does not include supplementary feeding.” But Section 27(1) Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 (the “1981 Act”) defines “livestock” as any animal that is kept: “(a) for the provision of food, wool, skins or fur; (b) for the purpose of its use in the carrying on of any agricultural activity; or (c) for the provision or improvement of shooting or fishing;” Its legal letter to Defra says: “Accordingly (as seen by the word ‘also’), footnote 7 seeks to apply – for the purposes of GL42 – a definition of ‘livestock’ which is wider than that defined in section 27(1) of the 1981 Act.” Wild Justice added: “We are unaware of evidence that the species listed on the general licence do cause serious damage to gamebirds at this stage of their lives. Any damage should be capable of being reduced by netting release pens. “If, extremely rarely, any such damage occurs, then lethal control is obtainable through application for a specific licence.” This group has previously brought successful challenges against the legislation and in 2019 managed to get it suspended. Wild Justice has since managed to secure changes including removing all gull species, and the places the licences can be used no longer include sites of special scientific interest and other nature reserves. Wild Justice said: “Any licence authorising killing of wildlife should be clear about when it can be used. Defra’s general licence 42 fails that test. In any case, why is Defra fiddling with definitions of livestock while wildlife declines?” A Defra spokesperson said: “We cannot comment on potential legal proceedings. The aim of our revised guidance in the new general licence is to clarify the statutory definition of ‘livestock’ in the Wildlife and Countryside Act, in relation to the example of released game birds.” • This article was amended on 10 February 2022. An earlier version said Natural England classified game birds as livestock when they are receiving “any” food and shelter from landowners but, as the quote from the licence makes clear, supplementary feeding is excluded; the word “‘any” has been removed. The article also referred to Natural England having “declared” when game birds are livestock; this has been clarified to explain that the environmental body provides the advice to government on which the declaration is made. The picture caption was revised because it said magpies can be shot “under the updated shooting licences”; while this is true, it is possible magpies could be shot previously in certain circumstances.An Ode to Himself Where dost thou careless lie, Buried in ease and sloth? Knowledge that sleeps doth die; And this security, It is the common moth That eats on wits and arts, and oft destroys them both. Are all th’ Aonian springs Dried up? lies Thespia waste? Doth Clarius’ harp want strings, That not a nymph now sings? Or droop they as disgrac’d, To see their seats and bowers by chatt’ring pies defac’d? If hence thy silence be, As ’tis too just a cause, Let this thought quicken thee: Minds that are great and free Should not on fortune pause; ’Tis crown enough to virtue still, her own applause. What though the greedy fry Be taken with false baites Of worded balladry, And think it poesy? They die with their conceits, And only piteous scorn upon their folly waits. Then take in hand thy lyre, Strike in thy proper strain, With Japhet’s line aspire Sol’s chariot for new fire, To give the world again; Who aided him will thee, the issue of Jove’s brain. And since our dainty age Cannot endure reproof, Make not thyself a page To that strumpet, the stage, But sing high and aloof, Safe from the wolf’s black jaw and the dull ass’s hoof. Ben Jonson wrote two odes to himself, both of them expanded varieties of the Horatian ode, and both declaring his disenchantment with the theatre. I’ve chosen the succinct and elegant An Ode to Himself, but the other poem, Ode to Himself (“Come leave the loathed stage”) is very much worth a look. It’s thought to have been occasioned by the failure of his play The New Inn in 1629. I haven’t been able to find a composition date for An Ode to Himself. It could be a more polished, less vitriolic response to the same disappointment, but isn’t necessarily. Notwithstanding the success of his humours-inspired comedy writing, Jonson suffered various setbacks during his theatrical career. For example, he completed Thomas Nashe’s unfinished satire The Isle of Dogs, only to see the play suppressed for alleged sedition, and to receive a short jail sentence (a case of the “dainty age” being unable to “endure reproof”, perhaps). His tragedies were criticised for being overly reliant on classical models, and he was ridiculed for collecting and publishing the plays as “Workes”. While Jonson’s odes seem clearly to express intense personal sentiments, neither should be read as a permanent valediction to the stage. Despite the focus on poetry and criticism in later life, Jonson wrote four more plays, performed during the reign of Charles I. Two unfinished scripts were found among his papers at his death. The first stanza of An Ode to Himself considers the wider implications of succumbing to “ease and sloth”: “Knowledge that sleeps doth die”. It doesn’t seem that his failure has plunged the speaker into depression, or not admittedly, but that he understands his continued stubborn “security” (confidence) in his own worth will be a threat if it allows stasis. And so in the next stanza he rhetorically questions the extinction of his sources of inspiration, referring to Aonia and Thespia, places associated with the muses, and to Clarius, site of the temple of Apollo. The “chatt’ring pies” originate from the myth in which the nine daughters of King Pierus are turned into magpies for daring to challenge the nine muses. Jonson awards himself the realms of tragedy (Thespia) as well as those of poetry and music. His Ode continues on its gracefully majestic path of self-encouragement, pausing only to demote the youthful competitors, the “greedy fry”, flattered by the false praise of their inferior work. Japhet (stanza 5) is Prometheus, and the “issue of Jove’s brain”, Minerva. With both wisdom and the fire of inspiration, how can the author fail? The last stanza suggests that it’s the response to the satirical writing that has prompted his disappointment, and that his wish is to attain a “higher”, non-worldly form of artistic expression. It’s fortunate that his talent overcame the prescription. While his tragedies are now generally forgotten, his verse still sings, insured against the critical wolves and asses by its human warmth as well as its formal excellence.Another member of the Sadowski-Synnott family has struck gold after Zoi Sadowski-Synnott’s dad Sean went viral on social media for a sweary live television interview in New Zealand, in the wake of her winning the nation’s first ever Winter Olympics gold medal. “I’m pretty fucking excited,” he said, after being asked how proud he was of his daughter. Earlier in the clip he had described the reaction of Sadowski-Synnott’s younger sister Illy as “fucking crazy. She went off the roof.” Asked about her father’s excitement at her victory in the women’s snowboard slopestyle final on Sunday, Sadowski-Synnott told reporters on Monday in Beijing: “Yeah, I think really that he had a few too many drinks at that point, but you can’t really blame him, it was Waitangi Day in New Zealand and his daughter just won the Olympics so …!” She added: “The last 24 hours has been a whirlwind, super-stoked to be standing here with gold around my neck.” Her historic win has been warmly received in New Zealand, with the prime minister Jacinda Arden sending a congratulatory message as well. “Honestly the reaction has been absolutely insane, I haven’t been able to keep up with all the support and love that I’ve got and then I got a shoutout from Jacinda,” said the 20-year-old. Sadowski-Synnott’s father has been a continuing source of amusement in his reaction, having told the website Stuff that, in her bid for gold, his daughter made many sacrifices. “Zoi sacrificed doing the dishes, mowing the lawns, cleaning her room and getting the vacuum out, she sacrificed all of those things,” he said. Coach Sean Thomson said of Sean Sadowski-Synnott’s TV interview: “He’s amazing, it just was so cool to see the emotion coming out of him in that clip. We loved it and we loved all the support from back home with friends and family. It’s just really special what Zoi has done here, and to see everyone react the way they have been doing is just something else.” Sadowski-Synnott will go for Olympic gold again in the big air event. The qualification rounds start on 14 February. Reuters contributed to this reportGennaro Fabbri had a plan. He would stop selling chairs and find a small shop with a vinaia (wine cellar) that could be converted into a distillery for the production of liquori and syrups. He found what he was looking for in the main piazza of a small town called Portomaggiore in the province of Ferrara, in Emilia-Romagna. Helped by a loan from his brother, Antonio, Gennaro made the necessary alterations to the old grocery shop and gave it a new name, Premiata Distilleria G Fabbri. The year was 1905. One of the first products was a liqueur called 1° Maggio, named for 1 May, Labour Day. The yellow liquer came in a flask-like bottle labelled with an picture of two workers shaking hands, beside them a sickle and a hammer, and behind them the rising sun. 1° Maggio was a well-priced, everyman’s drink celebrating the dawn of a new century. It was followed by an amaro called Carducci and, soon after that, Virov, a yolk-yellow zabaione-like drink made from egg and marsala. Success was swift and, by the early 1920s, Gennaro had taken on a small factory in Bologna. Rachele Buriani was, by all accounts, every bit as visionary as her husband, Gennaro. It’s a good story: Rachele picked wild sour cherries called amarena that grew in orchards near Bologna, cooked them in copper pans with sugar until sciroppate (meaning “cooked in syrup”), then persuaded her husband that the future was cherries on a larger scale. It’s a neat origin story for Fabbri, too (the distillery was already well established, but never let a date get in the way of a good story). The couple shared a vision to make products with a broad and democratic appeal, and with a dynamic aesthetic that stood out. Virov, for example, came with a set of matching yellow cups that provided a playful way to serve the drink and served as a reminder never to be without a bottle. And all this at a time when the futurist movement, with its themes of motion, speed and technology, had momentum. Rachele and Gennaro were no doubt in tune with the new interpretations and explosive energy in sculpture, painting, music and architecture, ceramics and gastronomy. The futurist sculptor and ceramicist Riccardo Gatti was commissioned to design the curved, blue-and-white jar for what would become Fabbri’s signature product: deep-purple amarena cherries in syrup that give you ruby lips. The Fabbri story continues, wonderfully, with a pirate and gelato and five generations. But I am going to stop here, with the jar of cherries sitting on the shelf. And, of course, you can use any cherries in syrup for this week’s recipe, which is a combination of Elizabeth David’s flourless chocolate cake, a torta caprese, Margot Henderson’s brownies and a black forest gateau. Keep all these in mind when you bake (cautiously); it should have a creped top and fudge-like heart. Rachele, Gennaro and Riccardo Gatti got it right. They created a jar that serves many purposes: it contains the cherries, it’s lovely to serve from and it’s such a beautiful object that you can’t possibly throw it away, so it becomes part of your life as a decoration, vase or pencil pot, forever hinting that another pot of cherries would be nice. The cake is also nice. So nice, in fact, that if all else fails, I might find a small shop with a wine cellar that could be converted into a bakery. Chocolate, almond and cherry cake Prep 5 min Cook 45 min Makes 10-12 slices 200g butter, diced 200g dark chocolate, finely chopped 150g caster sugar 4 eggs A jar or tin of cherries in syrup (typically 300g cherries and 600ml syrup) 200g ground almonds 1 tsp baking powder In a bowl balanced over a pan of simmering water, melt the butter, chocolate and sugar. Keep stirring and, once melted, lift off and allow to cool for a few minutes. Add the eggs to the melted mixture one by one, beating well between each addition, then stir in two tablespoons of syrup from the cherry jar, followed by the ground almonds and baking powder. Scrape the batter into a tin lined with parchment, then press 12 cherries into the batter (keep in mind one per slice). Bake at 170C (150C fan)/gas 3 1/2 for 30-35 minutes or until the cake is just set and with a slightly creped top. Allow to cool completely before lifting out of the tin. Serve in slices with two or three more cherries and little syrup. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from OcadoAfter a difficult day at work in February 2009, Stefan went to a popular gay bar in London with a friend. “It was around the time of the economic crisis and I was a junior lawyer. We’d just had to let lots of new recruits go,” he says. While there, he spotted a “cute guy” in the smoking area. “I really liked the look of him and asked my friend to give him my number,” he says. It wasn’t the first time the two men had seen each other. Sebastien, who had been working in financial services in London since 2006, had spotted Stefan on a night out two years earlier. “I was so shy and just coming out at the time, so I didn’t speak to him,” he says. “I remembered him instantly, though, and told the friend I was with that he was ‘the man of my life’.” Sebastien still felt too shy to approach Stefan, so he was delighted when his friend passed on the phone number. “My cheeks flushed and I was so excited,” he says. “I sent him a text the next day. It took me ages to write because I didn’t want to mess it up.” They went on a date that Friday night to a French bar, followed by a Spanish restaurant. “Sebastien is French and it was his favourite bar,” says Stefan. “We hit it off straight away. We had the same interests, the same values and the same taste in music.” Although Sebastien was “too nervous” to eat much on the date, he was pleased when Stefan offered to finish his leftovers. “It meant he enjoyed his food as much as me,” he laughs. He was also impressed by all the travelling that Stefan had done. “I had always wanted to discover the world. When I told him I was thinking about leaving London to go travelling, he said: ‘I’ll go with you.’” Over the next few weeks, they continued to enjoy date nights and soon became a couple. In 2011, they moved into a shared flat in Acton, west London. “We started doing small trips to Europe, but knew we wanted more,” says Stefan. After a trip to Thailand in 2012 to get diving certificates, it became clear to them both that a gap year was on the cards. They began saving and by 2014 they were ready to quit their jobs and leave the country. “We started with the Trans-Siberian railway through Russia and spent almost two years travelling across Asia,” says Stefan. They set up a blog called Nomadic Boys to document their travels, which has become a full-time job for both of them. “When we started out, we wondered whether there might be an issue with any countries that have anti-gay laws. We were very careful,” says Stefan. “But after a while, we began to relax and we were welcomed by gay communities everywhere.” They married in 2018 in Ealing, west London, with plans for a bigger wedding celebration in 2020, but the pandemic put that on hold, as well as their travels. The couple settled temporarily in Cyprus, where Stefan has family. “We are so used to being with each other in confined spaces that the lockdowns weren’t too much of a challenge,” he says. This year, they hope to travel again, starting with Iceland and South Africa. “I’ve been with Seb for 13 years and he always finds a way to make me burst out laughing,” says Stefan. “Every day is different and it’s always exciting. He fills me with joy when I’m with him and I feel like I’m at my greatest as a person.” Sebastien appreciates his partner’s honesty and positivity. “He would never lie or say anything bad and he’s the sweetest person you will ever meet,” he says. “I’ll be thinking about what could go wrong and he’ll always be looking at how to make it better. That’s what I love about him.” Want to share your story? Tell us a little about yourself, your partner and how you got together by filling in the form hereGood morning. The French president, Emmanuel Macron, believes he can deliver “a historic solution” to the Ukraine crisis ahead of his arrival in Moscow for talks with the Russian president, Vladimir Putin. After a flurry of diplomatic activity that included talks with the US president, Joe Biden, this weekend and three phone calls with Putin, Macron will land in Moscow on Monday seeking a “de-escalation” of the tense standoff on Ukraine’s eastern borders. Russia has denied planning to invade Ukraine but has tens of thousands of troops near its neighbour’s borders, prompting the US to order about 3,000 extra troops to bolster Nato’s eastern flank in Poland and Romania. The US national security adviser, Jake Sullivan, said on Sunday that an invasion could take place “as soon as tomorrow”. Why does Sullivan believe this? The White House believes Moscow has assembled at least 70% of the firepower it needs to give Vladimir Putin the option of a major military operation by mid-February. What else is planned for today? While Macron is in Moscow, the German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, will be in Washington for talks with Biden, aiming to narrow differences between the US and German approach to the crisis. What has Germany done differently? The German government has refused to act on Kyiv’s calls for arms and has been vague over the future of the Russian Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline to Germany. Trump’s incendiary Texas speech may have deepened his legal troubles, experts say Donald Trump’s incendiary call at a Texas rally for his backers to ready massive protests against “radical, vicious, racist prosecutors” could constitute obstruction of justice or other crimes and backfire legally on Trump, say former federal prosecutors. Trump’s barbed attack was seen as carping against separate federal and state investigations into his efforts to overturn the 2020 election results and his real estate empire. Trump’s rant that his followers should launch the “biggest protests” ever in three cities should prosecutors “do anything wrong or illegal” by criminally charging him for his efforts to overturn Biden’s 2020 victory, or for business tax fraud, came at a 30 January rally in Texas where he repeated falsehoods that the election was rigged. Legal experts were astonished at Trump’s strong hints that he would pardon many of those charged for attacking the Capitol on 6 January last year in hopes of thwarting Biden’s certification by Congress if he runs and wins a second term in 2024. Spotify CEO condemns Joe Rogan over use of N-word but won’t ‘silence’ him Spotify’s chief executive officer Daniel Ek says he “strongly” condemns racial slurs and other comments made by popular US podcaster Joe Rogan, but will not be removing him from the platform. Ek’s comments, sent in a letter to staff seen by Reuters, come on the heels of Rogan issuing an apology for the second time in a week, the latest for using racial slurs after a montage video surfaced showing him repeatedly using the N-word. Ek said it was Rogan’s decision to remove a number of past episodes from The Joe Rogan Experience podcast, following discussions with the music streaming platform and his own reflections on some of the content in the show, including the usage of racially insensitive language. Ek reiterated his stand on Spotify’s content moderation policies and said that he believes the company should have clear boundaries around the content being published. The company should take actions when they are crossed, but he cautioned that cancelling voices is a slippery slope. What else did he say? “While I strongly condemn what Joe has said ... I want to make one point very clear – I do not believe that silencing Joe is the answer,” he said. In other news … Chinese tennis star Peng Shuai has given her first interview to an independent media organisation since she alleged on Weibo that a senior Chinese official had coerced her into sex, saying it was an “enormous misunderstanding”. The tennis star was accompanied by a Chinese official who also acted as translator. Navy officials on Sunday identified a Seal candidate who died after an intense training session known as Hell Week, and promised to investigate the episode that left a second sailor in hospital. Kyle Mullen, 24, of New Jersey, died in hospital on Friday night, the officials said, giving no cause of death. Scientists and politicians “probably killed hundreds of thousands of people” by damaging the reputation of the AstraZeneca vaccine, according to an Oxford scientist who worked on the jab. Prof John Bell said: “They have damaged the reputation of the vaccine in a way that echoes around the rest of the world.” The mayor of Canada’s capital declared a state of emergency on Sunday and a former US ambassador to Canada said groups in the US must stop interfering in the domestic affairs of America’s neighbour as protesters opposed to Covid-19 restrictions continued to paralyse Ottawa’s downtown. Stat of the day: the number of deaths among homeless people has shot up by 77% The number of Americans dying while homeless has surged dramatically in the past five years, an exclusive analysis by the Guardian in conjunction with an academic expert at the University of Washington has shown. An examination of 20 US urban areas found the number of deaths among people living without housing shot up by 77% in the five years ending in 2020. Untreated disease, violence, exposure, overdoses and car strikes are all added hazards of living on the streets. Don’t miss this: ‘Adults are banning books, but they’re not asking our opinions’ Huddled together on foldout chairs, facing down a table laden with muffins, pretzels and a stuffed toy pig are members of Kutztown’s Banned Book Club, which meets every two weeks to read and discuss literature that conservatives across the country are working to ban from school libraries. The book club members, all aged between 13 and 16, are gathered at a time of crisis. In the past year the book-banning movement has already seen works that mostly address race or LGBTQ issues removed from libraries in Texas, Utah, Virginia, Wyoming and Pennsylvania. … or this: Books overboard! The supply chain crisis over the last year has caused quite a splash for the book publishing industry – literally. In early January, a large shipping vessel coming from Taiwan was stalled in the mid-Atlantic, its arrival into the port of New York delayed by port congestion. Intemperate weather – huge waves and powerful ocean winds – knocked 60 containers overboard. Another 89 containers were damaged as the ship rolled in the waves. Containers full of books at the bottom of the ocean are just one problem for an industry facing a host of shortages Climate check: A third of Americans are already facing above-average warming More than a third of the American population is currently experiencing rapid, above-average rates of temperature increase, with 499 counties already breaching 1.5C (2.7F) of heating, a Guardian review of climate data shows. The US as a whole has heated up over the past century due to the release of planet-warming gases from burning fossil fuels but though the climate crisis is convulsing the US, it is doing so unevenly. Hotspots of extreme warming have emerged. Last Thing: Original Fight Club ending restored in China after backlash The Chinese streaming platform Tencent Video has restored the original ending to the film Fight Club after it amended the Chinese edition to tell viewers police had “rapidly figured out the whole plan and arrested all criminals”, prompting a widespread backlash. The wholesale reversal of the anti-capitalist, anarchist denouement to the 1999 hit film, which stars Brad Pitt, Edward Norton and Helena Bonham Carter, made international headlines last month. Sign up First Thing is delivered to thousands of inboxes every weekday. If you’re not already signed up, subscribe now. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.comWe would like to hear your experiences of Covid testing in recent months. Have you received a positive LFT test result followed by a negative PCR result? When did you take the tests? How often has this happened? Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.While former Miami Dolphin Coach Brian Flores’ lawsuits against the NFL dominate the news, his story is an old one that’s as American as football. The former coach’s allegations of league-wide racial discrimination and team interviews with minority candidates conducted in bad faith, sets the NFL’s nearly 20-year-old Rooney Rule – which was adopted in 2002 to address the virtual exclusion of minorities from leadership roles – in stark relief. The rule requires teams to interview minority candidates for coaching and other front-office jobs. However, in the nearly 20 years since the rule was conceived, the number of Black head coaches increased from one in a single season to a high of eight in 2011, but today again stands at one. Such is the history of a league, and a country, for which two steps forward and two steps back, is a well-choreographed dance. It evokes the short-lived racial progress during Reconstruction following the civil war, and then the century-long backlash in the form of lynching, voter suppression through literacy tests and poll taxes and other flagrantly discriminatory laws targeting Blacks. The same fits and starts continue to zigzag through history, seen more recently in the election of Barack Obama followed by the rise of Donald Trump and white nationalism and current efforts to curtail the minority vote and the teaching of the nation’s fraught racial history. The NFL is merely a microcosm of America. “Victories are hard won and defeats happen overnight,” says Cyrus Mehri, the civil rights lawyer who in 2002, along with the late Johnnie Cochran, conceived the Rooney Rule after back-to-back firings of two Black coaches with winning records. The coaches, Dennis Green of the Minnesota Vikings and Tony Dungy of the Tampa Bay Buccaneers, had been among the five African American head coaches in the league’s entire 80-year history. Their firings – the second reported on the Martin Luther King holiday in 2002 – inspired the lawyers to commission a study of the win and loss records of NFL coaches by race over the course of 15 years. Their report, Black Coaches in the National Football League: Superior Performance, Inferior Opportunities, found that year after year qualified Blacks were overlooked for coaching opportunities and that the handful who were hired were more likely to inherit underachieving teams. Black coaches were also more likely to be fired than white coaches with inferior records. The numbers revealed that Black coaches, on average, won more games per season and led their teams to the playoffs 67% of the time, compared with 39% for white coaches. “The cruel counterpart to the superior performance of black coaches in the NFL is inferior hiring opportunities,” it said. The report findings in a league whose players were nearly 70% Black, but that had not hired its first Black coach until 1989, were hard to ignore. In December 2002, the league’s 32 teams, led by the Pittsburgh Steelers president, Dan Rooney, unanimously adopted a rule requiring the consideration of minorities for leadership roles. The so-called Rooney Rule initially held promise and was credited with moving the needle in a league long resistant to change. But nearly two decades later hope for many has faded to disillusionment. Although many critics say the Rooney Rule has failed diversity, Mehri believes the NFL has failed the rule by neglecting to consistently enforce it. In 2003 the NFL initially signaled to teams that the rule was to be taken seriously when it levied a $200,000 fine – the largest in NFL history – against the Detroit Lions for hiring a white coach without interviewing minority candidates. But over time, suspicions of sham interviews of minority candidates mounted, culminating in 2018 when Mehri says the Oakland Raiders’ flagrant violation of the rule went unpunished – causing one of its pillars to collapse. The NFL denied the rule had been violated but agreed to close some of the loopholes by requiring teams to only interview minority candidates with the requisite experience for the job. Mehri still sees the league’s failure to enforce in 2018 as a turning point. “It was a missed opportunity,” insists Mehri. “You either enforce it or you destroy it.” History shows that the effectiveness of any measure aimed at racial progress is commensurate with demonstrated commitment to the cause. And without leadership, oversight, and enforcement any hard-won gains can be swiftly erased. Pamela Newkirk is a professor of journalism at New York University and the author of Diversity Inc: The Failed Promise of a Billion-Dollar BusinessOlivia Colman has been named actress of the year by the London Critics’ Circle film awards for her lead role in the Elena Ferrante adaptation The Lost Daughter, in sharp contrast to the Bafta film awards’ failure to nominate her for its equivalent prize. Directed by Maggie Gyllenhaal, The Lost Daughter is about an academic (played by Colman) on holiday in Greece who becomes involved with another family when their young daughter goes missing. Colman has already been nominated for a string of awards for the role, including the Golden Globes and the Screen Actors Guild, and is expected to be nominated for the best actress Oscar when they are announced on Tuesday. Jane Campion’s western The Power of the Dog, starring Benedict Cumberbatch and Kirsten Dunst, is also emerging as an awards-season powerhouse, and came away with four prizes from the London Critics’: film of the year, director of the year for Campion, actor of the year for Cumberbatch, and supporting actor of the year for Kodi Smit-McPhee. The ceremony, held virtually for the second year in a row, also proved good news for Joanna Hogg’s acclaimed The Souvenir Part II, which had been entirely overlooked by the Bafta voters: it picked up British/Irish film of the year and was cited as part of the British/Irish actress of the year award for Tilda Swinton. Andrew Garfield, who likewise had been passed over by Bafta voters, took British/Irish actor of the year, for roles including Tick, Tick … Boom! and The Eyes of Tammy Faye. Full list of awards Film of the year The Power of the Dog Foreign language film of the year Drive My Car Documentary of the year Summer of Soul British/Irish film of the year The Souvenir Part II Director of the year Jane Campion (The Power of the Dog) Screenwriter of the year Ryûsuke Hamaguchi and Takamasa Oe (Drive My Car) Actress of the year Olivia Colman (The Lost Daughter) Actor of the year Benedict Cumberbatch (The Power of the Dog) Supporting actress of the year Ruth Negga (Passing) Supporting actor of the year Kodi Smit-McPhee (The Power of the Dog) British/Irish actress of the year Tilda Swinton (for her body of work in 2021, including Memoria, The Souvenir Part II and The French Dispatch) British/Irish actor of the year Andrew Garfield (for his body of work in 2021, including Tick, Tick ... Boom!, The Eyes of Tammy Faye, Spider-Man: No Way Home and Mainstream) Breakthrough British/Irish film-maker Rebecca Hall (Passing) Young British/Irish performer Woody Norman (C’mon C’mon) British/Irish short film Play It Safe Technical achievement award Dune – visual effects (Paul Lambert, Tristan Myles, Brian Connor and Gerd Nefzer)To this day, only footsoldiers have paid a price for the riot at the Capitol last January 6th. Politicians who spurred them on, praised them afterwards, and now incite further hatred with hallucinatory talk of “political prisoners” have remained smugly immune. This could change in one case: Republican Congressman Madison Cawthorn, who was on the mall that fateful day, implored Trumpists to “fight,” and is now seeking re-election in North Carolina. His candidacy is being challenged on the basis of the 14th Amendment. Passed after the Civil War, it disqualifies from holding office anyone who has sworn allegiance to the Constitution and then engages in insurrection. Other democracies are comfortable not just with restricting individual rights to run for office, but with banning entire parties suspected of undermining democracy. Americans, by contrast, have been inclined to leave things to sort themselves out in the political process. But here drastic measures are justified: citizens in a democracy have to accept being governed by politicians they disagree with; they don’t have to put up with politicians who start insurrections when things don’t go their way. Disqualification could have a salutary effect on the Republican Party as such; and it might provide a model for banning Trump from holding office again – something that was on the table during the 2021 impeachment and endorsed by seven Republican senators at the time. In North Carolina, citizens can challenge a candidate to prove they meet qualifications for Congress. Unlike the House Committee investigating the events of January 6th, the board on elections could force a sitting member of Congress to testify about the role he played before, during, and after the insurrection. In the end, his fate could resemble that of many Confederates after the Civil War: not necessarily criminal punishment, but exclusion from exercising power. Many American constitutional lawyers feel ambivalent about an approach known elsewhere as “militant democracy”: measures to restrict the rights of people posing a threat to democracy but who have – unlike terrorists, for instance – not done anything criminal. Courts in Germany, Spain, and South Korea ban entire political parties; in the US, even at the height of McCarthyism, the Communist party was not effectively prohibited, despite attempts by some to do so. Why, skeptics might ask, not have faith in politics instead of democracies doing something that looks pretty undemocratic? After all, if the people themselves are not able to see dangers to democracy for what they are, democracy might be lost anyway. That’s not where worries stop. If you go down the path of prohibitions, for example, what would prevent Republicans from McCarthy-style retaliation against figures like AOC? After all, they could argue, she’s a socialist, capitalism’s the American way, and hence she’s obviously engaged in overthrowing our political system. This is not paranoia: in Indiana, Republicans are pushing a school bill which would declare socialism incompatible with the principles on which the US was founded. As a matter of principle, it seems inconsistent to oppose felon disenfranchisement and yet demand rights restrictions for office-seekers. People ought to be punished for actual criminal behavior, but why also deny them a role in our process of self-government? After all, no democracy should create situations where some people look like second-class citizens not enjoying full use of political freedoms. Such worries must be taken seriously. A democracy that is trigger-happy about taking individuals or entire groups out of the political game is probably not as democratic as it sees itself to begin with. (In Europe, for example, Turkey holds the record in party bans – and these bans have often been aimed at legitimate advocates for the Kurdish minority.) But ultimately these worries do not weaken the case for disqualifying pro-insurrectionist Republicans. Constitutional requirements are not something that can be dispensed with ad hoc: you either meet the age, residency, and citizenship requirements for Congress or you don’t. What matters is that the process ascertaining what Cawthorn said and did is fair. True, anyone disqualified will style themselves a martyr – further proof of Democrats’ tyranny! They will wallow in the culture of victimhood which, in a typical form of projection, the far right always attributes to left-wing proponents of identity politics. Of course, the far right itself relentlessly pushes people to indulge the fantasy of being a persecuted minority: as a result, insurrectionists do not regard themselves as aggressors at all, but as merely engaged in self-defense and saving the Republic. Since this game is being played no matter what, there are hardly prudential considerations to go easy on pro-insurrection politicians. Plus, if disqualified figures feel that a great injustice was done, they can appeal to Congress, which, with a “two-thirds majority in each House,” can decide to lift restrictions, for instance if politicians stop lying that January 6th was a tourist outing for patriots. Unlike in the case of so many felons, this not a political life sentence. Of course, there is always a predictable chorus of pundits and politicians lamenting that all this will further “deepen our divisions.” But they should ask themselves whether such disqualifications and demarcations are not the kind of thing that a normal center-right party would not undertake itself: because the Republican Party has become a Trump personality cult, it might actually be in the interest of those too afraid to speak out against the cult to outsource the necessary boundary-drawing to what Cawthorn himself dismisses as “state bureaucrats.” After all, to paraphrase Lyndon Johnson, even strident left-wingers have an interest in a democratic rightwing party that is inside the tent pissing out rather than an anti-democratic, violence-prone one pissing in. Those crying that disqualifications re-open political wounds and delay national “healing” – often a demand pushed by rightwingers to distract from their complicity in the assault on the Capitol – have to realize that the issue will not go away. Other figures will be challenged as well, and, of course, Trump himself, if he tries to get on state ballots in 2024. Whether a heavily right-leaning US supreme court will uphold disqualifications is a very open question indeed – but there is every reason to try enforcing them. • This article was amended on 16 February 2022 to clarify details about the Communist party in the US during McCarthyism. Jan-Werner Mueller teaches at Princeton and is a Guardian US columnist. His most recent book is Democracy RulesManchester City fail to rattle in-control Chelsea The Manchester City manager, Gareth Taylor, said his team deserved a point from Sunday’s 1-0 defeat to Chelsea. Perhaps they did and had Chelsea conceded there would have been few complaints with the final outcome. However, while City upped the ante in the later stages the home team did not at any point look rattled. This was a controlled Chelsea performance. One which denied potent wingers Lauren Hemp and Jess Park room and stopped the final pass reaching Khadija Shaw and, later, her replacement Ellen White. “I think we were diligent out of possession. Our defensive strategy was brilliant,” said Emma Hayes. “Our ability in the first half to take Man City to the spaces we wanted them to be in worked really, really well. Second half I made a change in terms of where I wanted them to go. I didn’t want [Alex] Greenwood on the ball as much.” Yes, City had spells of control, but these were managed spells, with Chelsea almost urging the visitors to come at them. SW Match report: Chelsea 1-0 Manchester City Everton defeat encapsulates a torrid season The nature of Everton’s defeat at home to Reading, throwing away a 1-0 lead to lose 2-1, accentuates the chaos surrounding the club. They fired Jean-Luc Vasseur last week, the second manager to be shown the door this season. And by exiling the former Lyon man they have probably ended any chance of success. Whoever is brought in – the former Scotland manager Shelley Kerr is among the rumoured replacements – to fill his shoes will not have enough time to bed in before the end of the season. They are 19 points off the top of the table and 14 outside of Champions League qualification spots. Sacking Willie Kirk seemed a strange decision back in October and it has been the downfall of their 2021-22 campaign. SR Everton sack Jean-Luc Vasseur after 10 games in charge Big-game player Russo steps up for United Look up the definition of big-game player in the Oxford dictionary and you, uh, won’t find anything. That’s not how the dictionary works. Anyway, here’s Manchester United’s Alessia Russo. The attacker has scored four goals this season and they’ve all come against the big teams – Chelsea, Arsenal (twice) and Manchester City. So, when her team faced off against the league leaders Arsenal on Saturday, it came as no surprise she got her side’s goal. Russo was a menace to deal with from the onset, especially for Arsenal’s left-sided defender Katie McCabe, who was faced the full brunt of the United forward’s prowess and was eventually sent off for two yellow card offences. Russo nodded United ahead from Katie Zelem’s pinpoint corner for the opener – a set-piece move that their manager, Marc Skinner, called “brilliant”. Arsenal equalised late in the game through Stina Blackstenius but Russo’s efforts meant the leaders dropped two crucial points in the title run-in. MN Match report: Arsenal 1-1 Manchester United Brighton’s spark fizzles out The opening stages of the season gave rise to talk of Brighton qualifying for the Champions League with results going well. But those discussions have stopped and for good reason. Hope Powell’s side lost 4-0 to Tottenham on Sunday, extending their winless run to seven league matches for the first time. They have scored just one goal in that period. “We were below par even though we had a lot of the ball,” Powell said after the latest defeat. “We didn’t create enough. The goals were disappointing. If you become easy to beat, you’re going to lose the game.” She is not wrong. Spurs, on the other hand, continue to push for the third Champions League spot and are just a point behind Manchester United. SR Emma Hayes and Gareth Taylor call for expansion of WSL Over and out for Birmingham? A disastrous afternoon for Birmingham City may have gone a long way towards sealing their relegation fate as Leicester, the team they lost to, are now five points above them at the foot of the table. Birmingham were the architects of their own demise as goalkeeper Emily Ramsey was shown a red card in the 26th minute for bringing down Jess Sigsworth. It had been a fairly even match until that point but Sigsworth scored the resulting penalty and Leicester went on to win the game 2-1. It’ll be a tough task for Birmingham to stay up now with Leicester finding form. Last season the Blues ended with 14 points from 22 matches (0.64 points per game) to narrowly avoid relegation. This time around they have four from 14 games (0.29). It is not looking good. SR New maternity and injury cover deal for female footballers revealed West Ham’s Stringer ends goal drought Abbey-Leigh Stringer had a game to remember in West Ham’s 2-1 win over Aston Villa. The midfielder, who joined the Hammers from Everton in the summer, poked home her first goal for West Ham, her first in the WSL for three seasons. It wasn’t the prettiest strike, with Villa’s keeper Hannah Hampton bundling the ball to the floor after a corner. A flurry of players tried to gain possession but Stringer got the decisive touch. It is a fine line between hero and villain though and Stringer nearly got sent off. A yellow card for a challenge on Jill Scott was followed by a sliding tackle on Mayumi Pacheco that could well have earned a second. SRThe lunchtime shop-bought sandwich was dealt a heavy blow by Covid, as city centres emptied and trips out were limited. The return to the office and the lifting of lockdown restrictions have propelled it back on to the menu for millions of workers but the cost of living crisis, plus the fact that many people feel they saved a fortune on lunches, snacks and coffees during the pandemic, mean lots of us are looking for ways to make our money go further. With that in mind, Guardian Money this week carried out a survey of lunchtime meal deals (typically a sandwich or salad, etc, a drink and a snack) from some of the main high street chains. We were keen to find out the answer to these questions: What’s the most you can get for your money if you choose the most expensive items permitted? Which retailer offers the biggest potential saving? And because it’s important to have a lunch to look forward to, how do some of the bestsellers rate taste-wise? The answer to the savings question, according to our (nonscientific) survey, is Tesco, where buying items through its meal deal resulted in paying 55% less for them than getting them separately. (It is possible Boots may be able to beat that as its meal deal is cheaper in most locations outside London.) In monetary terms, Boots was the winner, with a £4.21 saving. Tesco has kept its meal deal pegged at £3 for almost 10 years, during which time most if not all of its rivals have increased the headline cost. For example, Sainsbury’s put up its lunchtime meal deal price from £3 to £3.50 in May 2021 (although it says it is offering more than three times as many choices as it was before the price change). As of 19 January, the government no longer asked people in England to work from home if possible. That prompted millions to head for the office again – and triggered an immediate increase in people buying sandwiches, salads and the like. Meanwhile, the easing of restrictions on travel means more people are grabbing some food from a shop before they catch their train or plane. Waitrose says its sandwich sales leapt 91% during the week beginning Monday 24 January, and that it also saw strong demand for sushi. A spokesperson says the retailer is also noticing a growing trend in people “upgrading” their homemade sandwiches – in terms of what they are putting in them and the bread they are using. Some on tight budgets will have no choice but to continue bringing in their own sandwiches or something in a plastic container. Meanwhile, some would rather hand their cash to an independent sandwich bar or cafe. But many will welcome the opportunity to take a lunchtime stroll and pick up a meal deal from one of the big chains. The maximum saving you can achieve is actually slightly bigger than when Guardian Money last took a close look at pricing almost seven years ago. That was in June 2015, and on that occasion, Boots was the winner with a 53% saving. Of course, some will argue that if individual items are overpriced in the first place, then these deals aren’t nearly as good as they might first appear. What’s not in doubt is that the lunchtime meal industry is a highly competitive sector, which may be helping to keep retailers on their toes. The latest player to muscle in on the market is Amazon, courtesy of the Amazon Fresh food stores it is rolling out. At the one in London’s East End that we visited this week, it was offering a meal deal where, if you bought a main (options included a sandwich, wrap, salad or sushi tray), you could add a snack plus a drink for £1 extra. The range was comparable to what is on offer at other retailers, although perhaps with a few more “high-end” options. Meanwhile, in the last couple of years a lot more vegetarian and vegan mains have been launched – from vegan BLT sandwiches to falafel wraps – plus more healthy snack options such as olives and fruit pots, and items tailored to people on specific diets. However, purely in terms of getting the most bang for your meal deal buck, meat-based sandwiches, subs and wraps typically offer the best value. Look for things such as triple packs of sandwiches and sushi trays. We also found that sandwiches for people on a gluten-free diet were often quite pricey – perhaps £2.80 or £3 – but available as part of a deal. On the drinks front, coconut water and smoothies from companies such as Naked and Innocent are good to grab as part of a meal deal because they can cost £2-£3 each when bought individually. Most people probably reach for crisps as their snack but there are usually higher-priced options such as yoghurt and granola pots or protein bars. So what are the UK’s favourite meal deal items? According to Tesco, they include a chicken, bacon and stuffing sandwich, a 500ml bottle of regular Coca-Cola and a bag of McCoy’s flame grilled steak crisps. Boots says its most popular items are a chicken sandwich, Walkers Max paprika crisps and Coca-Cola. It remains to be seen how supermarkets and other retailers will respond to the latest wave of food and drink price inflation, which was running at more than 4% in December. Crisps and soft drinks – key components of many a meal deal – are two products that have shot up in price. A note on our findings: this was a snapshot survey carried out in various parts of London over two days this week. For each retailer, we visited two outlets. Products on offer and stock availability will vary by location and at different times of the day. Tesco Cost of meal deal £3 in all stores. Most expensive combination we could find £6.70: a gluten-free chicken and bacon mayonnaise sandwich (£2.80), Vita Coco coconut water (£2.75) and a Graze lemon flapjack (£1.15). Saving £3.70, or 55%. Observations There are apparently more than 10m possible combinations. These include a good number of items from Tesco’s Plant Chef range, including plant-based takes on traditionally meaty old favourites. Co-op Cost of meal deal £3.50 in all its stores (it says prices may vary in some petrol station locations). Most expensive combination we could find £7.40: a deep-filled BLT sandwich (£3), a Ginsters Cornish pasty (£1.50) and a Luhv Skin cold-pressed drink (£2.90). Saving £3.90, or 53%. Observations Top tip: if you buy a Ginsters pasty or slice as your snack today, you could have it tomorrow – thereby sorting out two lunches for the price of one. We were impressed with the Re:Nourish vegan soups range, as they looked classy, with interesting flavours. Students who are Totum or Young Scot cardholders can get a further 10% off. Boots Cost of meal deal £3.39 outside London, £3.99 in London and at airports. Most expensive combination we could find £8.20: a chicken sandwich triple pack (£3.35), a Naked Green Machine drink (£2.60) and a Trek Power choc orange protein bar (£2.25). Saving £4.21 in our test, or 51%. Observations Lots of choice and plenty of vegan options. But in the two shops we visited, it wasn’t always clear which items were included in and excluded from the meal deal, and what they cost individually. Sainsbury’s Cost of meal deal £3.50 in all stores. Most expensive combination we could find £7.15: a gluten-free cheese and tomato sandwich (£3), an Emmi Mr Big iced coffee (£2.50) and a Nomadic yoghurt and oat clusters with chocolate pot (£1.65). Saving £3.65, or 51%. Observations Hot food, as well as hot drinks, are now included – things such as a southern fried chicken breast fillet or steak and potato slice. Breakfast and bakery items such as croissants, porridge and doughnuts have also been added, making it a meals deal. Marks &amp; Spencer Cost of meal deal £5 (only available in franchise stores). Most expensive combination we could find £7/£7.40. The reason for the two figures is that one store had space on its shelves for a reduced fat hummus and carrot snack costing £1.55 but there were none left, so we couldn’t buy one and had to choose another snack costing 40p less. We bought a chicken honey mustard pasta salad (£4), a bottle of Coca-Cola (£1.85) and an almond, blueberry and cranberry bar (£1.15). Saving £2/£2.40, or 29%/32%. Observations Lunchtime meal deals are only available in its franchise stores at rail stations, BP garages and in hospitals. You will not find them in M&amp;S’s main outlets – a spokesperson told us the company had not offered lunchtime meal deals in these “for a number of years”. M&amp;S says prawn mayo is still its top-selling sandwich. Too Good to Go: You can bag a bargain – but it might lack magic A bargain lunch and the chance to help the planet are an attractive combination to a Guardian Money editor, so when I noticed that the food waste app Too Good to Go had added lunch to the menu, I was quickly reaching for my debit card. I often find myself in the Pret a Manger near the Guardian office at around 2pm, so when the coffee and sandwich chain popped up on the app last autumn, it seemed too good to be true. The offer that day was £12 worth of hot food for £4 – I booked and paid in the evening and started to look forward to my lunch the next day. Would it be mac and cheese? Maybe a wrap? The prospect of the “magic bag” I had ordered kept me going that morning. It was an unseasonably warm day, so no one was buying soup. I wouldn’t have bought soup given the choice. I wen to pick up my bag and headed back to the office. In it, I discovered three pots of soup – all different flavours – and two warm croissants, one with cheese and tomato and one with ham. It wasn’t what I’d have selected but pleased several colleagues and seemed reasonable value. Last week I thought I’d try the app again – it was more like soup weather, and I was back in the office after several weeks eating fairly boring cheese sandwiches at home. I went to Pret and paid the same and got three pots of soup – all chicken and rice. And that was it. It was very pleasant soup – the colleagues I gave the other two pots to agreed – but I’d say that, for me, it added up to a false economy. I asked other people if they’d used Too Good to Go for lunch. Several reported having had better luck than me – lunch boxes from independent cafes for £2.50, good salads from Chop’d. The best buys seemed to be food picked up at the end of the day and eaten the next, rather than the lunchtime offers. One person said they had picked up a Costa bag one Sunday and been living off the tuna melts ever since after freezing them. Near home and work there are a handful of outlets offering collection around lunchtime, including independent bakeries as well as some chains. The choice is much broader if you are able to collect at the end of the day, and it seems like you get a better selection of food. If you’re up for a lunchtime lottery – and have colleagues who like soup – the app is well worth a punt. Hilary OsborneToday in a nutshell: Men’s downhill honours went to Beat Feuz of Switzerland as Kamila Valieva produced another world-first figure skating performance Next up: Later today the curling mixed doubles reaches the semi-final stage, and we’ll see the mixed ski jumping. Tomorrow’s early action features the men’s Super-G and a US v Canada ice hockey face-off Beat Feuz of Switzerland is the king of the mountain, winning the men’s downhill by just 0.10 seconds ahead of 41-year-old Johan Clarey of France, who became the oldest man to win an Olympic medal in Alpine skiing. “I can’t think of anything more beautiful than flying home with a gold medal around my neck,” said Feuz. Sweden’s Sara Hector won the women’s giant slalom in two runs either side of the rescheduled men’s downhill. Hector said: “It’s been so much all day. I’ve been so nervous. It’s so much feeling, it’s crazy. It’s for sure a lot of joy.” Italy’s Federica Brignone took silver and Switzerland’s Lara Gut-Behrami bronze. Mikaela Shiffrin’s bid for a record medal haul got off to a rocky start when she missed a gate early in the first run and was DQ’d, and the race was halted for 15 worrying minutes while her compatriot Nina O’Brien was stretchered off after a crash. A US team spokesperson has since said she is “alert and responsive”. Fifteen-year-old Kamila Valieva landed the first quad by a woman in Olympic competition, as the Russian Olympic Committee (ROC) claimed their expected gold in the team figure skating. The US took silver, Japan the bronze. “I’m very happy to land two quadruple jumps and a triple axel. It’s an incredible feeling to be skating in your first senior season and people are already talking about you,” Valieva said. Lightning nearly struck twice in two days in the speed skating as Japan’s Miho Takagi looked set to take gold with a new Olympic record on the final run of the women’s 1,500m – just as Nils van der Poel did in the men’s 5,000m yesterday. However, she made a tiny error in the final run-in, which meant Ireen Wüst’s agonising wait ended with another gold for the Netherlands and her brand new Olympic record left standing. Takagi ended up with silver, Antoinette de Jong of the Netherlands took bronze. Canada’s failure to beat Italy in their final mixed doubles curling match confirmed this evening’s semi-final lineup will see a still-unbeaten Italian pair face Sweden, while Norway and Great Britain have an instant rematch of the game Norway won 6-2 yesterday. Canada enjoyed success in the men’s slopestyle snowboarding though, with a gold for Max Parrot and a third consecutive Olympic bronze for Mark McMorris. China’s Su Yiming snuck in for silver and the hosts’ second medal of the Games. “I don’t know how to express my feeling. I have never felt such feelings in my life,” Su said. Parrot won silver at Pyeongchang in 2018, then had to take time away from sport after being diagnosed with Hodgkin lymphoma. “I was going through a true nightmare,” Parrot said. “And just the thought of snowboarding was my dream at that point.” Things you might have missed Yesterday’s late medals included Johannes Ludwig of Germany winning the men’s singles luge, while Ryoyu Kobayashi of Japan won the men’s normal hill ski jumping. Jakara Anthony became Australia’s first Winter Olympics gold medallist since 2010, winning the freestyle skiing women’s moguls. She said: “It’s all still sinking in but I was so grateful to be able to celebrate with my team last night and share the experience with Tess [Coady], both getting podiums on the same day.” Canada’s women’s ice hockey match with the ROC was delayed by an hour before players returned to the ice wearing face masks. No reason was given, but Canadian media reported ROC had not provided Canada with their Covid test results. Canada won 6-1. In the other match so far today, Denmark have given themselves hope of progressing by recording their first victory, 3-2 over the Czech Republic. You might also enjoy reading: Defending champion Mikaela Shiffrin out of giant slalom on first run Olympic hockey match delayed before players return to ice in masks Peng Shuai says Weibo post sparked ‘enormous misunderstanding’ The briefing’s picture of the day A lot of athletes struggled with the fourth shooting round as Denise Herrmann prevailed in the women’s 15km biathlon to win Germany’s second gold. Despite picking up one shooting penalty, she finished 9.4 seconds ahead of France’s Anais Chevalier-Bouchet. What to look out for next Times are all in local Beijing time. For Sydney it is +3 hours, for London it is -8 hours, for New York it is -13 hours and San Francisco is -16 hours. Later today – Monday 7 February 8.41pm Short track speed skating – the women’s 500m and men’s 1,000m have finals 🥇 8.51pm Ski jumping – the conclusion of the first ever mixed team competition 🥇 9.10pm Ice hockey – China’s women can book a quarter-final berth with a positive result over Sweden in Group B. Switzerland face Finland in Group A – neither side has won a match yet 🏒 9.30pm Luge – the day with the second run of the women’s singles Tomorrow – Tuesday 8 February 10am Freestyle skiing – another new event as it is the first ever Olympic women’s Freeski Big Air contest 🥇 10.40am – 3.43pm Snowboard – both the men’s and women’s parallel giant slalom will be decided today 🥇 11am Alpine skiing – the men’s Super-G 🥇 12.10pm and 4.40pm and 9.10pm Ice hockey – the day opens with the US and Canada clashing in the preliminary round. Both countries are guaranteed a place in the quarter-finals but will be wanting to lay down a marker 🏒 2.05pm and 8.05pm Curling – the bronze medal match and then the final in the mixed doubles could deliver Team GB’s first medal of the Games 🥇 4pm – 8pm Cross-country skiing – the women’s and men’s sprint free competition runs all afternoon and into the early evening in Beijing 🥇 4.30pm Biathlon – today it is the turn of the men to do their 20km individual race 🥇 6.30pm Speed skating – on Tuesday the men race in the 1,500m🥇 7.50pm and 9.35pm Luge – runs three and four of the women’s singles will decide the medals 🥇 Full Winter Olympics schedule | Results, sport by sport | Medal table How things stand Here’s what the emoji table looked like at 6.45pm Beijing time … 1 🇸🇪 Sweden 🥇 3 🥈 0 🥉 0 total: 3 2 ◻️ Not Russia 🥇 2 🥈 2 🥉 2 total: 6 3 🇳🇱 Netherlands 🥇 2 🥈 1 🥉 1 total: 4 4 🇩🇪 Germany 🥇 2 🥈 1 🥉 0 total: 3 5 🇳🇴 Norway 🥇 2 🥈 0 🥉 2 total: 4 6= 🇨🇦 Canada 🥇 1 🥈 1 🥉 2 total: 4 6= 🇯🇵 Japan 🥇 1 🥈 1 🥉 2 total: 4 8 🇨🇳 China 🥇 1 🥈 1 🥉 0 total: 2 9= 🇦🇺 Australia 🥇 1🥈 0 🥉 1 total: 2 9= 🇸🇮 Slovenia 🥇 1🥈 0 🥉 1 total: 2 9= 🇨🇭 Switzerland 🥇 1🥈 0 🥉 1 total: 2 Don’t forget you can get in touch at martin.belam@theguardian.com. The last word Yeah, I think really that he had a few too many drinks at that point, but you can’t really blame him, it was Waitangi Day in New Zealand and his daughter just won the Olympics so …!” – Zoi Sadowski-Synnott, New Zealand’s first ever Winter Olympics gold medallist, responds after her well-refreshed dad goes viral for telling a TV interview “I’m pretty fucking excited, to be honest” in the wake of her victory.Deciding to pick the inexperienced and extreme Sarah Palin as his running mate – a choice many say facilitated the rise of Donald Trump, threatening US democracy itself – John McCain mimed rolling a pair of dice and said: “Fuck it. Let’s do it.” The pithy vignette is revealed in a new book, Insurgency: How Republicans Lost Their Party and Got Everything They Ever Wanted, by Jeremy W Peters, a New York Times reporter. It was reported by Axios. McCain, a Republican senator from Arizona, enjoyed a reputation as a political maverick. He sometimes tried to deny it, for example in 2010 telling the reporter David Margolick: “I never considered myself a maverick. I consider myself a person who serves the people of Arizona to the best of his abilities.” But that earned mockery – Jon Stewart said it was “like Rudy Giuliani coming out and going, ‘Hey, I never mentioned 9/11! What are you talking about?’” – and the new story from Peters only adds to the impression McCain was happy to take political risks, sometimes to the detriment of himself and those around him. McCain died in 2018 but remains a figurehead of sorts for the few Republicans who defy Trump, whose dislike for the senator and Vietnam veteran is often demonstrated, sometimes in bizarre fashion. In 2008, McCain was the Republican nominee to succeed George W Bush. He faced Barack Obama, an inexperienced senator from Illinois but a political meteor. Peters reports that in August, with election day three months off, needing a boost, McCain spoke to advisers at his ranch in Arizona. He had narrowed his choice of running mate to three. There was Palin, governor of Alaska, a hard-right populist and political neophyte. There were two experienced moderates, Tim Pawlenty, then governor of Minnesota, and Mitt Romney, a former governor of Massachusetts. According to Peters, a longtime aide, Mark Salter, “cautioned [McCain] voters could see a Palin pick as discordant with the message of readiness and experience that the campaign had been focusing on as a contrast with Obama, a 47-year-old first-term senator.” Salter told McCain: “There’s worse things, John, than losing an election. You could lose your reputation.” Another aide, Steve Schmidt – now a prominent anti-Trump campaigner – has widely been blamed for the Palin pick. Peters reports that Schmidt “told McCain he should consider whether it would be worth it if he chose Palin and lost, but also knew in the end that he’d lost because he did something bold. “What you’ve got to decide,” Schmidt reportedly said, reaching for a football metaphor, “is would you rather lose by seven going for it?” Peters writes: “McCain turned to his wife, Cindy. ‘John, it’s a gamble,’ she said. “This made McCain’s face light up. ‘Well, I wish you hadn’t said that,’ he said. McCain, an avid craps player, balled up his fist and blew on it, then shook it like he was about to roll a pair of dice. “‘Fuck it,’ he said. ‘Let’s do it.’” With Palin at his side, McCain lost convincingly. Palin nonetheless became a national figure, mocked on the left, loved on the right, sharing airtime with the Tea Party, a hard-right anti-tax movement fed by big donors and, detractors said, racist resentment of the first Black president. Romney was the Republican nominee in 2012, losing to Obama. Trump followed in 2016, blowing the party establishment out of the water with a campaign of anger, controversy and hatred then beating Hillary Clinton in the general election. In the first years of Trump’s tumultuous presidency, McCain was a thorn in his side, famously voting down an attempt to repeal the Affordable Care Act with a dramatic thumbs down. He died in August 2018, of brain cancer. Three years later, Romney is a senator from Utah, the only member of his party to vote to convict Trump in both his impeachments, for seeking political dirt from Ukraine and for inciting the Capitol attack. Palin is in court in New York, suing the New York Times over an opinion column she says linked her political rhetoric to a mass shooting, in a case which could have far-reaching implications for US libel law. Cindy McCain has been censured by her state party for opposing Trump. Joe Biden, Obama’s vice-president who beat Trump in 2020, made her ambassador to the United Nations food agency.Sifu owes an obvious and honest debt to classic Hong Kong cinema. But if you’re here for a kung fu power fantasy, a word of warning: you are in for a wait. While it eventually lives up to its inspirations, Sifu initially plays out less like a Jackie Chan film than the blooper reel that runs under the end credits, with our hero mistiming a kick and falling on his arse, greeting a coffee table with his chin, or somehow contriving a wedgie from a stepladder. Except that here, instead of a rueful Chan-style grin to camera, the screen fades to black and you die. Thankfully, death is not the end in Sifu. It is, paradoxically, the lifeblood of the game. Die, and you can resurrect – but you pay the price with age. A “death counter” rises with every failure, adding to how much older you become each time you get back up: first one year, then two, then more. The protagonist’s face wrinkles and hardens; their health bar shortens, but the wisdom of age makes their attacks deal more damage. Once you hit 70, your next fall will be your last. This is an alien concept at first, in keeping with a game that often seems more interested in confusion than entertainment. Sifu is punishingly difficult, built around a morass of jarringly unconventional ideas that are minimally explained. The combat that forms the meat of the game is made of familiar parts – light and heavy attacks, a dodge, a pleasing suite of graceful bobs and weaves – but even veterans of hand-to-hand video game dust-ups will struggle to put them into practice. The game appears to favour neither attack nor defence. Your combos are ducked or parried, your guard broken by volleys of enemy blows, collapsing you to the floor. And when you do create a window of opportunity, it slams shut at lightning speed. The action spans five levels, running the gamut of kung fu classics – drug den, nightclub, tower block. They are long, drawn-out and exasperatingly difficult at first (though shortcuts, once discovered, shorten the route to the boss). When you die, you can try again at the last stage you had reached, your age and upgrades carried over. However, when you finally beat the first boss, the chances are you’ll be pretty old. (I was in my late 60s after a solid day’s punishment.) You will have maybe a couple of lives left – enough for a nose around the next level, but no more. And of course, if you’re that old when starting the second level, you have next to no chance of clearing all five. To give it a proper go you will have to abandon the new area, return to the previous one and run through it over and over until you make it through at a more acceptable age. Then you will work on getting to the next boss, and the cycle repeats. At some point you’ll need to go back to the beginning and optimise your run further. This, sadly, means saying goodbye to most of the upgrades you’ve unlocked. It is a strange, and rather deflating, sensation when your reward for finally surmounting a challenge is being told to go back and do it again, only better. Over time, I came to understand what the game expected from me: perfection, pretty much. You can claw back a little health from flashy take down kills, and reduce the death counter by killing strong enemies. You unlock new moves and small stat increases as you go. But the only way to truly succeed in Sifu is to submit to its demands and learn its language, committing attack patterns and parry timings to memory. The flow of each fight – where enemies come from, where weapons are placed, how to position yourself to make best use of the scenery – must be rehearsed until perfected. Then you practise, and practise some more, and hope for the run where everything goes to plan. When it finally does, it sings. You’ll stroll into areas you know inside out, seeing off the goons who once gave you so much trouble, with effortless grace and bone-crunching power. The boss you were stuck on for two days barely lands a single hit on you as you duck, dive and counter with immaculate ease. In these moments, the frustrations of the earlier game simply melt away. Until the next boss fight, anyway. The Chinese term “kung fu” roughly translates as “a skill acquired through hard work and practice”. Sifu might just be the purest expression of the concept that games have ever seen. The journey is brutal. It is not for the faint of heart, nor the short of patience. But those prepared to rise to the challenge will find that something spectacular comes after the pain. Is it worth the hardship? Ask me when the wounds have healed. Sifu is out 8 February; £39.99‘We’ve made it. We’re still alive!” begins Mick Hucknall. He’s obviously talking about the pandemic – more sombrely dedicating the gig to “all those who didn’t make it”. However, he could be describing the 37 years in which he’s been through some 20-odd band members, womanising, alcoholism and a brief band split to emerge as a happily married 61-year-old who radiates warmth and contentment. Despite selling 50m albums, it’s years since Simply Red’s pop-soul was contractually obliged to blare from every wine bar and taxi in the country, although you’d never know it from the sea of middle-aged couples swaying along and marvelling at the Huck’s timelessly honeyed chops. After six years off the road, his famous hair hasn’t gone simply grey but the introductions are as rusty as the barnet. The Huck announces wrong songs (“Er, this isn’t For Your Babies”), shouts “Let’s go back to 1988! Er… 1985!” and introduces Gregory Isaacs’ lovers rock classic Night Nurse as “Sort yer cold out.” Such endearing off-piste moments are welcome in Simply Red’s otherwise succession of machine-polished smashers, in which the newest song dates from 2007. Hucknall’s career wasn’t built on experiment, but Homer Banks’s 1966 northern soul stomper (Ain’t That) A Lot of Love is reworked as deep house. Visuals of the stricken planet remodel Come To My Aid into a climate change anthem and it’s hard not to admire how 1987’s The Right Thing cheekily sneaked the line “I’m getting harder now!” into the Top 20. The socialist singer’s yell of “It’ll get a lot worse!” before Money’s Too Tight (To Mention) seems to reference the cost of living crisis, but the crowd come for old hits and get them. Sole other original member Ian Kirkham blows up a sax storm on the slinky, underrated Thrill Me. Stars, Fairground and the rest start dancing in the aisles, before Harold Melvin’s If You Don’t Know Me By Now becomes the celebratory singsong of a band and audience enjoying growing old together. • At Utilita Arena, Newcastle, 8 February. Then touring.The Biden administration set out 70 recommendations to encourage union membership in the US on Monday, including making it easier for many federal employees to join unions and eliminating barriers for union organizers to talk with workers on federal property. The report, compiled by the White House Task Force on Worker Organizing and Empowerment, reiterates Biden’s robust backing of unions. “At its core,” the report says, “it is our administration’s belief that unions benefit all of us.” It adds: “Researchers have found that today’s union households earn up to 20% more than non-union households, with an even greater union advantage for workers with less formal education and workers of color.” The report comes amid a surge in interest in unions in the US and follows a wave of high-profile industrial actions last year. The taskforce, which includes 13 members of Biden’s cabinet and is chaired by Vice-President Kamala Harris, calls for stepping up enforcement to ensure that money going to federal contractors – whether manufacturers, food-processing companies or other contractors – is not spent on anti-union campaigns. The taskforce calls for requiring disclosure of any instances when federal contractors use anti-union consultants or lawyers to persuade employees working on a federal contract not to unionize. While corporations typically prohibit union organizers from setting foot on company property – as Amazon has done recently in Alabama – the taskforce recommends removing many barriers that block union organizers from being able to talk with employees on federal property about the benefits of unionizing. This applies not just to federal employees, but also to employees of private contractors on federal property, such as a grocery store on a military base or in a national park. Biden said the taskforce’s charge was to identify executive branch policies, practices and programs that could be used “to promote my administration’s policy of support for worker power, worker organizing, and collective bargaining”. The taskforce said the range of policies and programs “that can be leveraged is significant”. Its recommendations include making the federal government a model employer in terms of shaping jobs, ensuring that federal employees know their labor rights, and improving labor-management communications. The federal government is the nation’s largest employer, with more than 2.1 million non-postal employees. Of those, 1.2 million are represented by unions, but only 33% of those workers pay union dues – that small percentage limits the power of federal employee unions. Noting that screeners for the Transportation Security Administration (TSA) are largely excluded from having the collective bargaining rights available to other non-military federal employees, the taskforce instructed the Department of Homeland Security to issue expanded bargaining rights for TSA’s screening workforce. The report is likely to strengthen the notion that Biden is the most pro-union president since Franklin Roosevelt – and perhaps the most pro-union president in US history. That might help Biden when he seeks to persuade and mobilize union members to vote for Democrats this November. At the same time, the report’s pro-union tone and substance might result in more opposition from business. In its first sentence, the report says: “The Biden-Harris administration believes that increasing worker organizing and empowerment is critical to growing the middle class, building an economy that puts workers first, and strengthening our democracy.” The report catalogues several executive orders and other pro-union steps by the president and his administration. It reads: “Unions have fought for and helped win many aspects of our work lives many of us take for granted today, like the 40-hour work week and the weekend, as well as landmark programs like Medicare.” The report adds that research has shown that increased economic inequality, growing pay gaps for women and workers of color, and the declining voice of working-class Americans in the nation’s politics “are all caused, in part, by the declining percentage of workers represented by unions”. The taskforce calls on the Department of Labor – whose secretary, Martin Walsh, is the taskforce’s vice-chair – to become a resource center that provides materials on the advantages of union representation and collective bargaining.From Laura Bush’s famous radio speech declaring that the invasion of Afghanistan would liberate its women, to the Trump administration’s invocation of women’s rights as it pulled out of the nuclear deal with Iran, war-making in the modern world is often linked to gender equality. Those who push the west to take a muscular approach to advancing its interests in distant places, through bombing, droning or economic warfare, like to weave sepia-tinted images of women in miniskirts into their advocacy. Whatever the actual motives, accompanying them with rhetoric about securing women’s freedom has become standard practice during western interventions. These cynical moves are often what come to mind when we hear the words “ethical foreign policy”. But a whole realm of quiet work lies beyond them. As it stands, much of western foreign policy is concerned with shoring up peace and stability in areas of strategic interest to governments. That includes dispatching advisers to improve developing countries’ militaries, supporting healthcare and education through development aid, and doing diplomatic work to get disagreeing parties to negotiate before things deteriorate too far. For years now, various governments have woven gender equality into these efforts. When development aid sits formally in the same department as foreign policy, as it now does in Britain, those efforts can get serious political backing. The notion that feminism should inform foreign policy has deep roots. Activists from around the world, but especially in developing countries, have gathered for decades to demand that states listen to their needs and create foreign policies that actually address them. Those efforts took concrete shape at the United Nations, leading to successive resolutions concerning women, peace and security. Feminist movements in the west also clamoured for governments to help implement abroad the kinds of reforms they were enacting at home. Underpinning all of this was a hard-nosed calculation about the pay-offs: that improving the wellbeing of women and girls would make countries more successful and less likely to experience hellish civil strife or to attack others. So has it been effective? Apart from less contentious measures, such as an increase in female peacekeepers, the drive for clean cooking stoves for the world’s poor and the push to involve women in security decision-making and peace negotiations, the answer partly depends on the strain of feminism you support. The legal scholar Catharine MacKinnon, for instance, has written: “In the American war against the Taliban, for a brief moment women had a foreign policy, or briefly became part of a pretext for one.” Hillary Clinton, who made women the centrepiece of US foreign policy, claims some progress has been made, and calls for more women in higher office, arguing that female leadership “contributes to greater cooperation, equality and stability”. But as Rafia Zakaria writes in her book Against White Feminism, politicians pursuing “feminist” foreign policies may simultaneously be making other choices that badly harm women, fuelling the conflicts that lead to their rape and impoverishment. How useful and feminist is it, she asks, for governments to demand Yemeni women be included in stalled peace talks, while selling arms to Saudi Arabia to use in that war? Even the development aid that governments earmark to advance gender equality, Zakaria argues, often ends up sapping women’s grassroots activism, incentivising people to pursue the largesse of NGOs rather than mobilise politically. There are even more sinister consequences to the west’s tendency to package together the use of armed force with promotion of western feminism. In many battlegrounds, it has allowed insurgent groups from Isis to the Taliban to repeat the trick in reverse, bundling their rallying cries of “anti-imperialism” together with anti-feminist ones. So would governments be better off dropping gender equality as a pillar of foreign policy entirely? Some prominent voices have said just that. Professor David Wood recently argued in an article that the quest for gender equality is fundamentally a domestic struggle. Not all conflicts, he believes, are driven or shaped by gender imbalances. By demanding that gender empowerment be baked into every effort to end wars, governments and donors may be chasing unrelated problems, and getting in the way of their efforts to stop violence. But to veer in this direction, even with the aim of overcorrecting faulty interventions and harmful policies, would be a mistake. Neither feminism nor gender equality can truly sit apart from global politics, when the conduct of dominant states so intimately shapes the lives and security of women and girls around the world, and especially in the global south. While there is much to criticise in the double standards and hypocrisies of some policies that invoke feminism, women’s wellbeing as an indicator of a society’s economic and political health remains crucial and revelatory. In Afghanistan today, for example, either the lives of Afghan women and girls matter, or they do not. If states are serious about their commitment to justice, they must first slow their immiseration and bring about some kind of deal with the Taliban, at least in its capacity as the present custodian of the Afghan state. Some find this prospect unacceptable, and doubtless there are passionate advocates on both sides. But only one will result in the material protection of women and girls, keeping the lights on in maternity wards and preventing the sale of girls as child brides by hungry families. A truly feminist foreign policy should not be a call to arms, or a new cold war against states that disagree with western values. Empowerment means listening to what people want, and helping them to achieve it. • Azadeh Moaveni directs the Gender and Conflict Project at the International Crisis Group Further reading Against White Feminism by Rafia Zakaria (Hamish Hamilton, £14.99) Butterfly Politics: Changing the World for Women by Catharine A MacKinnon (Harvard, £15.95) Hood Feminism: Notes from the Women White Feminists That a Movement Forgot by Mikki Kendall (Bloomsbury, £9.99)Scientists and politicians “probably killed hundreds of thousands of people” by damaging the reputation of the AstraZeneca vaccine, according to an Oxford scientist who worked on the jab. Prof John Bell said: “They have damaged the reputation of the vaccine in a way that echoes around the rest of the world.” “I think bad behaviour from scientists and from politicians has probably killed hundreds of thousands of people – and that they cannot be proud of that,” he told a BBC Two documentary When the Oxford/AstraZeneca jab was rolled out in the UK government advisers recommended under-40s should be offered an alternative due to a link to very rare blood clots. Fears over the links to blood clots also led other countries, including Germany, France, Spain, Italy, the Netherlands, the Republic of Ireland, Denmark, Norway, Bulgaria, Iceland and Thailand, to pause their use of the vaccine. The AstraZeneca vaccine has also not played a significant role in the booster programme. The BBC reported it accounted for only 48,000 of the more than 37m booster doses given in the UK. The AZ vaccine was celebrated as a UK success story and billed as “Britain’s gift to the world” when it was developed. It was designed to be cheap, and developers had the ambition that it should be available at low cost. Unlike the mRNA vaccines, it could be transported at low cost and stored at fridge temperature. Nearly half of the adult population in the UK received two doses of the vaccine. The AZ vaccine’s approval in the UK coincided with Britain’s separation from the EU. “I don’t think it made relations with Europe any easier that it was promoted as the British vaccine,” Bell told the documentary, AstraZeneca: A Vaccine for the World, to be broadcast on the BBC on Tuesday at 9pm. Before European regulators made their decision, Germany decided it should not be given to those over 65, and France’s president, Emmanuel Macron, called the vaccine “quasi-ineffective” in people over 65. The European Medicines Agency approved the jab for all adults of all ages. Both France and Germany later reversed their positions, the documentary says, but the reputation of the vaccine had been damaged. There were also major rows about distribution. The vaccine was being manufactured in both the UK and the EU, but because the UK had been guaranteed priority in a deal signed before the rest of Europe, the company was unable to send vaccines from British plants to supplement EU stock. The overall risk of blood clots is very low – estimated at one in 65,000 overall – but slightly higher in younger adults. When European regulators declared that the vaccine’s benefits outweighed its risks, most lifted their suspension – but put age restrictions on the vaccine, the BBC said. When it came to deciding on booster doses in the UK, the clots issue and the simplicity of the Pfizer or Moderna mRNA jabs not being age-restricted, sealed the AZ vaccine’s fate. It is registered as a booster vaccine in the UK, but it proved simpler to give the majority of people Pfizer or Moderna – even though this was a more expensive option. Since then, evidence has shown that mixing different types of vaccine may offer better protection, according to the documentary.Julian Nagelsmann has missed this kind of competition and so, in recent months, has the Bundesliga. This felt just like a Saturday night Top-Spiel should, a meeting of minds, of wills, of guts. RB Leipzig have not shone this season like the upstarts they have been since promotion in 2016 – they have been “playing below their potential … it’s no secret”. as Thomas Müller put it at full-time – but they came to Bayern Munich with what a lot of teams leave at home. Hunger and bravery. On a weekend when Borussia Dortmund underlined that their nominal title challenge is barely even that, this was a ray of light tentatively pointing towards a more competitive future race at the top. Germany’s football critics relished it too. “The fact that [Domenico] Tedesco’s team had stood up to Bayern for so long with a courageous and attacking approach was remarkable,” wrote Süddeutsche Zeitung’s Philipp Schneider. That’s right, Tedesco. His presence on the Leipzig bench is exactly why this was so keenly anticipated, with he and Nagelsmann coming face to face for the first time since the former’s Schalke visited the latter’s Hoffenheim in December 2019. The two were famously coursemates at the DFB’s coaching school, graduating from the same class in 2016 – and naturally the Bayern coach was asked yet again in the buildup to the game about Tedesco getting the higher mark on their course. If Nagelsmann recalled and regretted trying to be too cool on his first day, turning up late to find the only seats left were under full teacher scrutiny at the front – “the others could watch the Lord of the Rings trilogy 44 times while I couldn’t even Google anything” – he was clear about relishing the battle here. This was the pair locking horns at the top table for the first time which German football might well have anticipated, but the two protagonists themselves were looking forward to a heck of a lot more. Tedesco and Nagelsmann are competitive spirits as well as friends. Schalke’s time under Tedesco seems like decades ago because so much has happened there since. It had started brilliantly before going south in the second season and just as it is now clear that the slump was the tip of a much bigger iceberg at the club, we have seen since that with different players and in a different environment, the coach isn’t all about caution. Nagelsmann had warned in the days before the game that under his friend, Leipzig are “much more about possession”, and their refusal to be cowed made this a game to savour. Bayern took an early lead, so André Silva hit back after a Leipzig swarm in the home side’s box. They conceded the inevitable goal to Robert Lewandowski just before half-time, so they came back with a fine second equaliser from Christopher Nkunku. Only a Joško Gvardiol own goal, unfortunately flicked in when trying to block a Serge Gnabry cross, sealed the deal. This was a sign of hope, rather than a gauntlet laid – “think positive, stay realistic,” as Leipziger Volkszeitung’s Norbert Wehtstedt wrote – but set intentions. Bayern’s hunger is different, a combination of their potential to become something even greater under Nagelsmann and the possible upheaval to come, with a line of thorny contractual issues to sort out. The most immediate of those are Gnabry and Corentin Tolisso, who continued his run of fine form and was involved in the first two goals. Yet with Niklas Süle on the way out (which Manuel Neuer said had left the team “annoyed”), it is clear that some tough decisions will have to be made, and not everyone will get what they want. In the short-term Neuer’s meniscus operation, which will keep him out of the Champions League ties with Salzburg, gives the coach something extra to deal with. Even with that concern Nagelsmann would be forgiven a wry smile on Saturday night over what Tedesco is already doing with his old team – and, for the Bundesliga’s sake, over what might develop into a satisfying rivalry in the coming weeks, months and years. Talking points • Dortmund’s “disastrous day” (as per Marco Reus) followed as they slumped to a 5-2 home defeat against Leverkusen – with relatively little material consequence as nobody is expecting them to catch Bayern and they are still five points clear of Gerardo Seoane’s team in third – but spoke loudly of their inertia. This match, and performance, was a near-twin of the home defeat by Stuttgart, less than 14 months ago, which brought the end of the Lucien Favre reign. Every time Marco Rose’s team lost the ball, they looked like conceding, making one wonder what exactly they had done in the mini-hiatus. As Rose led his players to the Südtribune to applaud the fans, loud booing echoed around from the 10,000 fans present, and he was confronted by a supporter behind the dugout (“when children have to hear that stuff, it’s difficult”). The absence of the injured Erling Haaland was the last thing on minds, with BVB having plenty to ponder. • Borussia Mönchengladbach began the post-Max Eberl era with a strong indication of how much work they have ahead of them in a 1-1 draw at Arminia Bielefeld, salvaged by Alassane Pléa’s first goal since November. “What is encouraging,” wrote Bild’s Dirk Krümpelmann, “is that the team finally seem to have understood they are in a relegation battle,” and maybe the emotional shock of the popular Eberl’s is the impetus Gladbach required. “It was a step forward,” said Yann Sommer. “We wanted to play with courage despite our situation.” They now move on to to a crucial game with fellow strugglers (and current play-off place occupants) Augsburg, who are now just a point behind Gladbach after beating Union 2-0, with Michael Gregoritsch gifted an opener before André Hahn drove in a magnificent second from range. • Wolfsburg got the win they – and coach Florian Kohfeldt – desperately needed, beating Greuther Fürth 4-1. It wasn’t overwhelmingly impressive but a first win in two months was fired by a double from teenager Aster Vranckx, who showed signs of clicking with the newly returned Max Kruse. The sort of fun that might come with Kruse was flagged when his wife Dilara revealed the fee that Die Wölfe paid to bring him back from Union (€5m, since you ask) on an Instagram live Q&amp;A. • With Köln coach Steffen Baumgart quarantining after a positive Covid test, his assistant André Pawlak took charge for the game with Freiburg (“I won’t wear a flat cap,” Pawlak had deadpanned before the game). He didn’t need to, with Baumgart doing his usual furious pacing in front of the television at home, giving WhatsApp voicenote instructions to the team analyst, all as shown on his daughter Emilia’s TikTok account, complete with the trademark cap on and his dog resting on his shoulders like an attentive member of backroom staff. Anthony Modeste’s stylish winner eventually ensured a happy afternoon at home for the Baumgarts. “My attitude on game day doesn’t change just because I’m at home,” he later admitted to Bild. “My wife knew what to expect.”Kenneth Branagh’s semi-autobiographical film Belfast, is about a young boy growing up in the city in the late 1960s as the Troubles began, and how he and his family, eventually decided to go to England. Branagh’s family left Belfast to move to England when he was nine-years-old and we want to hear from people who left Belfast during the 60s and 70s and find out what their experience was like. When did you leave and why? How did you and your family feel about leaving? What does it feel like when you go back? How do you feel about the decision looking back now? Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.For a short period in the 1990s, it seemed that Labour would launch a communitarian counter-revolution to bring the curtain down on the Thatcher era. Listen to a youthful Tony Blair in 1996, addressing the Women’s Institute: “At the heart of my beliefs is the idea of community,” said Blair. “I don’t just mean the villages, towns and cities in which we live. I mean that our fulfilment as individuals lies in a decent society of others. My argument to you today is that the renewal of community is the answer to the challenges of a changing world.” That zeal for a politics which challenged the individualism of the age did not last. As the Labour MP Jon Cruddas ruefully noted in his recent book, The Dignity of Labour, in power Blair and his party swerved off in a different direction. Choice, individual aspiration and the imperative to adapt to the consequences of globalisation became New Labour’s guiding themes. The party lost its focus when it came to protecting the self-esteem and interests of places in its post-industrial heartlands, although it did its best to keep many of them financially afloat. Disillusionment and a sense of anomie grew, paving the way for the red wall Brexit vote in 2016. Damaging divisions – cultural as well as economic – emerged between more prosperous, younger cities and declining, ageing towns; between the highly educated and those without a degree, and between an asset-rich generation and those who would never own their own homes. Faith in a social contract that bound the nation together – and in Labour’s ability to secure it – faded. Cruddas believes it could have gone differently. Last month, delivering a speech on the concept of the common good at St Mary’s Catholic university in Twickenham, he confessed to his audience: “To me with hindsight, 1996 is a story of paths not taken, of missed opportunities.” The result, he argued, “was a sense of powerlessness that people feel, of exclusion and estrangement, a lack of participation; a lack of virtue in our institutions and our politics”. Could the Labour party now resume the mission that Blair abandoned? Suddenly, the early 2020s have begun to feel a little like the mid-1990s. Like John Major’s government a quarter of a century ago, Boris Johnson’s is beset by scandal. The prime minister is a wounded, diminished figure. While Major suffered byelection humiliation in the safe Tory seat of Christchurch, Johnson has endured Chesham and Amersham, and North Shropshire. And, as last week’s underwhelming “levelling up” white paper laid bare, Johnson’s own version of a communitarian project – designed to consolidate the new red wall intake of Tory voters – is being starved of cash by a party that no longer trusts him. If he is replaced between now and the next election, none of his potential successors (other than possibly Michael Gove), have an authentic instinct for the concerns of the northern Labour voters who helped deliver an 80-seat majority. There is an opportunity here for Keir Starmer that goes beyond the outcome of the next election. Johnson’s essential unseriousness – and his party’s faithfulness to the Thatcher legacy – means that he is destined to squander the chance to forge a genuine Tory One Nation response to a divided country. But multiple signs of our times suggest that a yearning persists for a vision which recognises that “our fulfilment as individuals lies in a decent society of others”. In Labour’s tradition, this sense of the “we” being as important as the “I” used to be expressed in the collective solidarity and self-help movements that drove the working-class politics of the industrial age. It was found in the commitment to the idea of the common good which was taught from the pulpits of “Labour churches”. In our liberal, secular and more atomised age, it is the inner meaning – the overlapping DNA – of phenomena as apparently disparate as the rise of leftwing Scottish nationalism; towns that yearn for the restoration of civic pride; the desire for a dignified social care system; pride in the armed forces and the British flag; the consistently strong support for enhanced forms of public ownership, and the solidarity shown by communities towards key workers and vulnerable members during the Covid pandemic. The root intuition, sidelined for 40 years, is that as political, social animals we are about far more than the pursuit of self interest, and our mutual dependency defines us as much as our individual liberties. How can Labour open up this ethical seam in the landscape that was so vividly glimpsed by the early Blair? Some ideas are offered in Labour’s Covenant, an ambitious pamphlet released last month by the Labour Together group in which Cruddas is involved. The essay is a precis of two years’ worth of discussions with academics, policy experts and Labour MPs, mayors and councillors. Covering the piste from the future of the union to foreign policy, its scope is wide. But the essential spirit of Labour’s Covenant is local. Proposals range from the promotion of regional banks and vocational colleges to drive local economies – and to give young people options to stay in places where they grew up – to the need to invest in locations where people from different backgrounds meet, talk, argue and laugh – the “post offices, pubs, community centres, art galleries, parks, nurseries, hospitals and schools”. The abstract term for this kind of thing is “social infrastructure”. It requires far more investment in people and institutions than the Conservatives’ levelling up programme is offering. And if places and regions are truly to be empowered, Whitehall will have to give away revenue-raising powers and resources to an extent that no government has contemplated in the past. But as the Conservative party reverts to type, Labour should draw on its own rich heritage to do the job of “renewing community” properly and with conviction. In a society that knows itself to be fractured and divided, this task can unite red-wall and blue-wall aspirations and appeal across the generations. Seeking to claim one-nation politics for the left in 2012, Ed Miliband brought the philosopher Michael Sandel to the Labour party conference. In an address that proved startlingly prescient given the Brexit psychodrama that would soon unfold, Sandel told delegates: “Democracy does not require perfect equality. But it does require that citizens share a common life. What matters is that people of different social backgrounds … bump up against one another. Because this is how we come to negotiate and abide our differences.” This was true then and remains so now, and Sandel’s insights were heavily drawn upon by Germany’s new chancellor, Olaf Scholz, in the Social Democratic party’s election campaign. A radical politics of place can enable a renewed common life to flourish and prosper. The Tories will not deliver it. Labour could. Julian Coman is a Guardian associate editorFew will challenge Alcina’s claims to contain some of the finest vocal writing that even Handel ever penned. The problem is with staging it. Under the skin, Alcina engages with serious stuff – desire, betrayal, rejection and trust. But the plot – an island enchantress battles to retain power over her lovers – is wrapped in artifice and improbability. Many productions fall short. Tim Albery’s intelligent staging for Opera North – the first of several Alcinas in the UK over the coming months – is, ultimately, another of them. Albery’s achievement is to have cleared enough of Alcina’s clutter to ensure focus on the work’s emotional core. The score is heavily cut, reshaped into two acts, not three. Hannah Clark’s perky designs, stripped back and sustainable, consist of 1960s upholstered chairs and a bearskin rug. Costumes are contemporary, save the occasional sword and breastplate. Ian Galloway’s video backdrop initially suggests an island of dreams but morphs into an oppressive heart of darkness jungle. The theatrical impact, however, is fitful. That’s partly the doing of Handel’s Ariosto-derived libretto. But it is also because the tensions between the principal emotional triangle – Alcina, her lover, Ruggiero, and his wife, Bradamante (disguised as a man), all remained here at too low a key. The subsidiary relationship between Alcina’s sister Morgana and her suitor Oronte, by contrast, was very effectively done. All this could be resolved, as it often is in Alcina, by standout singing. Here, however, vocal standards were satisfactory but unexceptional. Máire Flavin seems to possess the voice for the title role but, at least on the opening night, her outbursts of passion and anger against Ruggiero did not wring the withers as they should. The US countertenor Patrick Terry has the big role of Ruggiero well within his compass. He sang his famous farewell to the island impeccably, but the intonation wandered a little at other times. Mari Askvik’s tastefully sung Bradamante was too vocally discreet to seize the gender fluid opportunities in Albery’s direction. It was left to Fflur Wyn’s Morgana to bring a bit more life to the proceedings, and not just in her showpiece act one aria (which some Alcinas steal for themselves). She and Nick Pritchard’s Oronte provided the most touching performances of the evening. The excellent Laurence Cummings conducted with a good mix of Handelian vigour and langour. • Alcina is at Grand theatre, Leeds, on 8, 15 and 17 February, then touring until 24 March. Live streamed on 17 February on www.operavision.euA Cornish fishing village familiar to fans of gentle comedy drama is facing a crisis because part of its sea defences are crumbling and there are no longer enough working boats to fund the repairs. Householders in Port Isaac, the setting for the long-running ITV show Doc Martin, are worried that if one of the breakwaters that protect the picturesque village are not repaired, homes could be inundated when Atlantic storms sweep in. For a century, fishing boat owners have clubbed together to maintain the breakwaters, but there are only two full-time working vessels left in the harbour and they cannot afford to pay for the work. The Port Isaac harbour commissioners have launched an online appeal to try to raise £40,000 for the work. Dugald Sproull, the chair of the commissioners, said: “It’s very sad. When I was a lad the whole place was about fishing. The industry has died a death. The problem now is there are only two full-time commercial fishing boats left. We have lost half a dozen or more in the past few years, more by coincidence that anything else – people have got old or had an accident with a lobster pot or whatever. The fishing is going down the pan.” A chunk of the eastern breakwater, built in the 1920s to protect the exposed port on the rugged north coast, has collapsed. The final cost of repairs is not known yet but Sproull said it was is clear it would be “eye watering”. Sproull said homes and businesses would be at risk if the breakwater was further damaged. “The bottom of the village is really at risk,” he said. In their appeal, the commissioners say: “In recent years the commercial boats in Port Isaac have depleted from around 10 to just two. If there are no commercial boats left in the harbour, there will be no one around to look after the infrastructure, and it will be only a matter of time until the breakwaters fall in to disrepair and, with sea levels rising, the bottom of the village will be regularly flooded and become unsustainable and uninsurable.” They would also like to carry out repairs to the harbour’s 16th-century fishing cellars and a path that leads to the breakwaters. They conclude: “Your support would mean everything to this tiny corner of Cornwall and would benefit every local, holidaymaker, business owner and Port Isaac lover alike.” The commissioners do get paid by the people behind Doc Martin, which is filming this year for a new series. Some of the funds they receive for the right to film in the village are expected to go towards the cost of the breakwater. Each year tens of thousands of Doc Martin pilgrims throng to Port Isaac. There may also be help from the sea shanty and folk group Fisherman’s Friends, who are based in Port Isaac. Choirs helped raise money for the breakwaters 100 years ago, and it is a consoling thought that the group may come to the village’s aid in its hour of need now by holding charity events. The harbourmaster and fishing boat skipper Tom Brown said: “In years gone by we’d all get together to sort out the repairs, but the breakwater has been pretty badly damaged and it’s going to cost mega money to repair it.” Brown, a fifth-generation fisher, said: “If we get a 40ft or 50ft sea, without a breakwater there’s going to be big flooding problems. It’s feeling quite bleak at the moment.”Boris Johnson is “not a complete clown”, his new communications director has said, as he revealed that the prime minister initiated a defiant rendition of Gloria Gaynor’s I Will Survive when the pair met last week. Days after being appointed No 10’s chief spin doctor after a clearout of aides over the “partygate” scandal, Guto Harri said the government would be more “focused on delivery” with a beefed-up team of staff who were more experienced and less ideological. Speaking to Golwg.360 in comments translated from Welsh to English, Harri then recounted the conversation that led to his hire, saying: “Although I haven’t seen him in person for years, we picked up where we left things, in terms of the tone of our friendship. I walked in, I saluted to the PM and said: ‘Prime minister, Guto Harri reporting for duty.’ “He stood up from behind his desk and started to take the salute but he said: ‘What am I doing? I should take the knee for you.’ The two of us laughed. Then I asked: ‘Are you going to survive, Boris?’ And he said in his deep voice – slow and purposeful – starting to sing a little while finishing the sentence and saying: ‘I will survive.’ “I inevitably invited him to say: ‘You’ve got all your life to live,’ and he replied: ‘I’ve got all my love to give,’ so we had a little blast from Gloria Gaynor. No one expects that, but that’s how it was.” Harri said there was “a lot of laughing” and the pair had “a serious conversation about how we get the government back on track and how we move forward”. He added: “Everyone’s focus has been on recent events that have caused a lot of hurt, but in the end, that’s nothing to do with the way people voted two years ago. He’s not a complete clown, but he’s a very likable character … He is not a vicious man as some misrepresent him.” Angela Rayner, the deputy Labour leader, responded by questioning the seriousness of Johnson and his new hire. “Did I mention that there are no serious people left to serve? They think it’s all just one big joke, don’t they?” she said. On Sunday, Harri had said he was joining a “grownup” and “pragmatic” operation. Downing Street would not comment on the interview, with Johnson’s official spokesperson saying he would “not get into private conversations” that the prime minister had with Harri. He also said there was no conflict in the role with Harri’s previous work for Hawthorn Advisers, a lobbying firm founded by the Tory co-chair Ben Elliot that counts the Chinese tech firm Huawei as a client. “He provided advice to the clients of a private company. That is entirely legitimate and we would not exclude from government someone with valuable experience and expertise. Our position on Huawei is clear. We have strict controls on how Huawei is currently deployed,” the spokesperson said. While it is rare for senior advisers to make public comments, Harri also broke cover over the weekend to tackle Dominic Cummings – a former No 10 adviser who has been deeply critical of Johnson – on Twitter. Harri revealed he was called in to see Johnson at 5pm on Friday, 24 hours after it was announced that Jack Doyle had resigned as communications director. Doyle is understood to have been at a Downing Street Christmas party on 18 December, and previously offered his resignation, though it was rejected. Harri’s appointment follows the news that Steve Barclay, the Cabinet Office minister and chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster, will fill the No 10 chief of staff role vacated by Dan Rosenfield at the end of last week. The prime minister is expected to distribute some of Barclay’s Cabinet Office portfolio to other ministers this week, and may conduct a mini-reshuffle, particularly of the whips’ office. He is also set to appoint a new top civil servant to oversee the office of the prime minister, but this may not happen until next week.Born Peter James Andrea in Harrow, London, in 1973, and raised in Sydney, Australia, Andre is one of the quintessential 90s pop stars. After winning the TV talent show New Faces in Australia aged 16, he signed to a record label and launched his career in the UK, finding fame with the breakout hit Mysterious Girl and the accompanying video in which Andre body-rolls in a pair of jeans in the tropical sea. After two No 1 singles, Andre retreated from the limelight before appearing on I’m a Celebrity … in 2004. On the show he met model and entrepreneur Katie Price, whom he married in 2005 and divorced in 2009. After a decade of reality TV, with multiple fly-on-the-wall franchises, Peter now lives in Surrey with his wife, NHS doctor Emily MacDonagh, and children. He is the co-founder of the “no guilt” health and fitness app #itsfine, available via Apple App Store and Google Play. Back in 1996, I was under the impression that proper fashion came in the form of incredibly baggy clothes. Instead of wearing tight stuff that showed off all my hard work training, I’d wear things that made me look completely shapeless. Like this “sauna suit” – it was my outfit for the Top of the Pops Weekend festival at Wembley Arena. I couldn’t bear the heat of it on my skin, so it would inevitably come off mid-song. Growing up, I used to study live footage of Prince and Michael Jackson; when I did my own shows I made sure to use similar lighting as I loved how it contoured their faces. Ironically, the night I did this gig Michael Jackson was playing Wembley Stadium and some of his dancers later told me that to try to make him laugh they put posters up around the venue with his face stuck on to photos of my shirtless body. As for my wet-look hair, I used this gel called Dark and Lovely. I’d buy massive tubs of it from a shop in Fulham in London when I lived there in the 90s. My apartment was right above PJ and Duncan’s. They used to bang their brooms on the ceiling late at night because I had parties all the time. This was before they became Ant and Dec, before they were TV gods, and had just done Let’s Get Ready to Rhumble. We were in competition with each other. But how life changed! Years later I remember seeing them heading off to the afterparties while I was the one going back home because I was over it. At the start of my career I had noticed guys like Marky Mark and Jean-Claude Van Damme were taking their tops off, and I wanted to do the same thing for pop. It was already happening in places like the UK with Take That, but my label wasn’t into it – they thought Aussies wouldn’t get it. My parents weren’t too keen either. When I was offered a deal aged 16, my mum was absolutely petrified – she said: “No, no, no, please no!” And I see why: they’re Jehovah’s Witnesses and were concerned my life would be all sex, drugs and rock’n’roll. I never took drugs, but I liked to party, had lots of girlfriends and made taking my shirt off my trademark. Throughout my life I’ve been accepted and rejected for my appearance. As a kid, I felt isolated because I was Greek and a “greasy wog”, as the kids and teachers used to call me. I took a lot of beatings for looking different; some were with fists and some were with stones. The knife that was pulled on me never went all the way in, but it certainly scared me enough to know that things could be over very quickly. What happened when I became famous and started attracting girls was another problem. The 90s were very image-based and no one knew me as a person, so I used to walk down the street and get called a wanker. Men would shout at me: “Who the f- do you think you are? If you look at my girl, I’ll kill you.” I don’t hold any grudges because I understand how it must have looked at the time: who is this guy walking around with his shirt off? Thankfully, as the years have gone on I’ve become a family man and do more interviews; people can now see that I’m not actually a little shit. At the peak of my pop powers I was polite to people, but I think I had a sense of arrogance that I now regret. I can kind of see how it happened: I was No 1 and the hysteria from the fans was crazy. I went from being a shy kid to having this huge confidence, touring the world and travelling to incredible places. We shot the video for Mysterious Girl on the Phi Phi Islands in Thailand; we arrived, set up the speakers, blasted out the song and shot footage of the local people dancing. I ended up going out with the girl in the video – a Swiss Thai model called Champagne X, who was a big star at the time – for a year and a half. She was such a sweet person, and it was only distance that made us break up. I’ve definitely got a complex emotional attachment to food. I don’t know if I’d consider it a disorder, but from the age of 15 until I was nearly 30, I watched everything I ate. I used to eat egg whites, protein powders, creatine and amino acids. I would get up in the morning and do sit-ups and push-ups before I even went downstairs. These days if I don’t have my double espresso I can’t even talk, let alone do a sit-up! But when you’re so focused on your ambitions you’ll do whatever it takes, sometimes to your own detriment. Then I had a funny few years in my 30s when I came out of the I’m a Celebrity … jungle and put on 3st. I fell into ex-footballer syndrome: I had the attitude of: “I don’t care. I’ve been training all my life, I don’t want to be told what to eat.” I needed a break. But I didn’t like how that made me feel either. I tried every fad diet to lose the weight: Atkins, Keto, no fat, no carbs, and all of it did the same thing. All of it made me lose weight, put it back on and then some. When I hit 40, everything changed. I found a balance, the one we are always told about, but that seems so hard to achieve. I generally eat healthily, but some days I do want to have a doughnut with my coffee. Am I as ripped as I was? No, but I’m not in bad shape for my age. That doesn’t mean I’d have the confidence to take my shirt off now though. The problem with being so motivated to have such a ripped body when I was young was that I built a rod for my own back. Even though I am decades older, I still think: “Oh no, keep your clothes on, people will just compare your body to the body in your younger photos.” You’ll never see me walking around a beach with my top off. Or on stage. Maybe for a laugh, but it’s unlikely. During that first part of my career I was on top of the world, but I recognise how fragile fame can be, what a vulnerable position you’re put in. You can easily believe your own hype and go either of two ways: off the rails and completely lose the plot; or have the moment, step away from it, come back and enjoy it the second time. Or the third time. Which is where I’m at now.Sprouts are sweeter nowadays; technology has been used to wean out some of the bitter notes. Even so, there are ways you can cook sprouts to bring out their milder notes: one is to pan-fry them, another is roasting. The latter makes them taste almost nutty when they come out of the oven, making them delicious with this fiery harissa and soothing yoghurt. Harissa roast sprouts with lemon-tahini yoghurt Prep 10 min Cook 25 min Serves 4 2 tbsp rose harissa, plus 2 tsp extra, to serve 1 tbsp soft brown sugar 1 small garlic clove, peeled and roughly chopped Sea salt and black pepper 4 tbsp olive oil, plus a little extra to drizzle 800g sprouts, cleaned and trimmed 50g skin-on almonds 1 tsp sumac Flatbreads, to serve For the lemon-tahini yoghurt 1 tbsp tahini Zest and juice of ½ lemon 300g Greek yoghurt, drained Heat the oven to 220C (200C fan)/425F/gas 7. Put the harissa, sugar, garlic and half a teaspoon of salt in a mortar, and bash to a paste. Work in three tablespoons of the oil and season with pepper. Line a baking tray with greaseproof paper, add the sprouts and the harissa mixture, and toss to coat. Roast for 15-20 minutes, until the sprouts are caramelised, slightly charred and tender. Meanwhile, toast the almonds in a warm pan for a few minutes, then roughly chop. In a bowl, make the lemon-tahini yoghurt. Using a fork, beat the tahini with the remaining tablespoon of oil and the lemon zest and juice, then slowly combine with the yoghurt, and season. Warm the flatbreads in an oven or on a griddle. Spoon the yoghurt on to a platter, top with the sprouts, dot with dollops of the harissa mix and sprinkle over the almonds and sumac. Serve with the breads for scooping. The simple flex … Vegans can easily substitute coconut yoghurt for the Greek yoghurt. Or, if you need a meat fix, try these as a side for merguez. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from OcadoEven Olivier Giroud was starting to wonder if he might have jinxed himself. The Frenchman had no hesitation in accepting Milan’s No 9 shirt after he joined last summer, shrugging off the fact that no player in a decade had hit double figures while wearing it in Serie A. Ten players had tried and failed – among them such talented goalscorers as Gonzalo Higuaín, Fernando Torres and André Silva – but Giroud insisted: “I’m not superstitious.” By the turn of the year, he was sounding a little less confident. “I don’t believe in the curse of the No 9 shirt,” he told Milan’s in-house TV station in January. “But I have thought about it a few times after all these physical issues I’ve been having.” Giroud had begun confidently, scoring twice in his home debut: a 4-1 win over Cagliari. Since then, though, his season had been a constant stop-start. He missed time due to Covid, then lower back pain, then a hamstring injury. Prior to Saturday’s derby against Inter, he had started seven league games in six months. He had scored five times, yet Giroud’s most memorable involvement might have come during a 1-0 loss at home to Napoli in December, when he was ruled offside in the buildup to what would have been an equalising goal from Franck Kessié. That decision was contested, and the chance would never even have materialised without the striker’s smart knock-down, but since when have hexes been fair? Milan’s manager, Stefano Pioli, continued to show confidence in Giroud, naming him in the starting XI to face Inter and describing him as a player of “international character”. Then again, what choice did he have? Zlatan Ibrahimovic and Ante Rebic were both unavailable. Giroud was the only fit striker in the first-team squad. Inter planned to make him irrelevant. The Nerazzurri arrived for this fixture as Serie A leaders, four points clear of their neighbours at the top and holding a game in hand. This was their chance to deliver a knockout blow in the title race, and for 75 minutes on Saturday it appeared they would do exactly that. From the opening whistle they dominated Milan, dictating where the game would be played even while holding a smaller share of possession. Pioli had set out to claim the middle of the pitch, deploying Kessié as a muscular No 10 to shut down Marcelo Brozovic’s lines of distribution. Inter simply shuttled their attacks down the flanks instead, Ivan Perisic and Denzel Dumfries launching continuous assaults. It was the Croatian who broke the deadlock in the 38th minute, volleying home from a corner, but Inter ought to have scored sooner. Only a string of reflex stops from the Milan goalkeeper, Mike Maignan, prevented the champions from putting the game to bed within the opening half hour. He was called on less frequently after the interval, yet there was still no hint of an imminent Milan fightback. Giroud was doing the best he could as a target-man, playing with his back to goal and winning the high balls, but he was starved of support, Perisic and Dumfries pinning Milan’s full-backs, Davide Calabria and Theo Hernández, in their own half. Then, with 20 minutes to go, Inter began to retreat into a more defensive stance. Simone Inzaghi withdrew Perisic and Lautaro Martínez together in the 70th minute, and Hakan Calhanoglu in the 73rd. On came Alexis Sánchez, Federico Dimarco and Arturo Vidal. Each of these decisions could be justified. Perisic had asked to come off after feeling a calf muscle tighten. Calhanoglu had been brilliant against his former club, and set up Inter’s goal, but was on a yellow card at a point when the game was becoming more fractious. Lautaro was disappointingly anonymous. Collectively, though, those changes felt like a retreat. Giroud accepted the invitation to lead an immediate counter-charge. Sánchez was still getting his bearings when his former Arsenal teammate thundered in to steal the ball off him in the middle of the park. The pair collided violently, spilling to the floor, but Giroud was immediately back on his feet and chasing forward as Sandro Tonali seized possession and advanced to the edge of the Inter box before squaring a pass to Brahim Díaz. The Spaniard’s shot was blocked by Alessandro Bastoni but spun away to the left-hand corner of the six-yard box where Giroud, still running, arrived to slide it home. Against the run of play, Milan had equalised. Three minutes later, Giroud put them in front. If his first goal was a reward for single-minded commitment, then this was a reminder of the striker’s underappreciated technical craft. Closely-tracked by Stefan De Vrij as he ran on to a Calabria through-ball down the right channel, Giroud lost his man with a Cruyff turn before sweeping a shot across Samir Handanovic and into the bottom of the net. The keeper could have done better, but that should not take away from the quality of the goal. You could hardly call this a fluke for Giroud, who scored from an almost identical turn against Liverpool at Anfield six years before. Outplayed for so long, Milan nevertheless had little trouble defending the advantage once they had earned it. The 21-year-old Tonali set the tone, throwing himself into every challenge and fronting up to Inter players – at times more than he probably should – who tried to talk back to his teammates during breaks in play. This is the Milan that Pioli wants: a group who cannot yet match Inter for squad depth and experience but who can bridge that gap with furious commitment. A young team – the average age of their starting XIs this season is 25.6 years old – learning what it takes to win a big game. Sometimes it takes an older head to help you take the first steps. Giroud still needs another three goals to become the first Milan No 9 since Inzaghi to hit double figures in Serie A. But he hardly looked cursed by the shirt that he wore on Saturday evening.Hong Kong has reported a record 614 new cases of Covid-19, the vast majority of them the highly transmissible Omicron variant, but authorities are sticking to their guns on the territory getting back down to zero. On Monday, the authorities reported the city’s highest daily number of cases since the pandemic began, a doubling of the previous day’s total, with more than a third untraceable. Another 600 cases were recorded as preliminarily positive. The sharp rise was attributed to last week’s lunar new year festivities, although the overall outbreak began late last year. But government officials said they remained optimistic that Hong Kong’s tracing and containment strategies, which include snap lockdowns of buildings and mandatory testing and quarantine, would bring the outbreak under control. They urged people to “minimise mixing and stay home”. “If you continue with such gatherings the epidemic will not stop, but if we all work together and minimise social gatherings hopefully from today we can actually suppress the spread of the disease,” said the controller of the Centre for Health Protection, Edwin Tsui. Much of Hong Kong has already been shut down. Entertainment and public venues – even open spaces such as playgrounds and beaches – have been closed or told to suspend operations. Restaurants are barred from serving after 6pm, and gatherings of more than four people are banned. Charlie, a 26-year-old Hongkonger from North Point, said he worried the outbreak was out of control and feared further restrictions. “It affects me a lot in my life. Like the increased restrictions and buildings lockdown, or the forced [isolation] in Penny’s Bay [despite] no symptoms: It makes me worried every time I go out,” he said. “I have taken the vaccine (including booster shots), but there is no exception for that. These measures and controls affect my mental health a lot, and I wish to leave Hong Kong one day if I get the opportunity. I have been trying to stay strong, as I know life has to go on.” The city’s government must be at zero-Covid before mainland China agrees to open borders with it, a step which the Hong Kong government has prioritised over reopening to the rest of the world. Polls suggest the public support this approach. It has maintained one of the world’s best Covid responses in terms of keeping case numbers low, but has also sparked widespread frustration and confusion among the population with frequently changing and sometimes illogical measures. Hong Kong’s policy of sending all positive cases to hospital has also put a strain on resources, with CPH officials on Monday admitting bed availability was “becoming really tight”. More than 1,600 cases were at the North Lantau hospital infection control centre, including two in critical condition. In response to the strain on hospitals, some mild, asymptomatic or vaccinated Covid-19 patients would now be moved to the Penny’s Bay quarantine centre to recover, officials said. Some close contacts would also be allowed to isolate at home instead of the centres. Lawrence, a Hong Kong resident originally from overseas, said most people he knew “wouldn’t dream of getting tested and coming forward” because of the strict requirements and possible lengthy separation from family, children and work, even if they weren’t ill. He said the government “singlemindedly obsesses with getting back to zero Covid” in order to please Beijing, despite advances with vaccines and treatments greatly reducing mortality rates. “It’s crushing, after two years,” said Lawrence, who did not want his surname to be published. “It [was] a wonderful safe place while the rest of the world figured out what to do … but [the fear of ] admitting we were wrong means they’ll probably lock us down and then realise Omicron can’t be controlled.” Hong Kong is also battling low vaccination rates among the elderly population, many of whom had heeded earlier advice that with no cases they were better off not risking side-effects. The authorities have renewed pleas that all eligible people get the shot. Hong Kong has now reached a rate of 80% double-dosed, but less than 32% of those aged 80 or above have received at least one. Speaking from a vaccination hub where he was receiving his booster, Lawrence said it appeared busy with people getting their first dose, suggesting some were now taking the advice. Prof Ben Cowling, an epidemiologist at the University of Hong Kong, said that Hong Kong was in the more challenging phase of its “dynamic zero” strategy, which allowed the city to relax when it was at zero but required an agile switch to containment when there were cases. “If you have cases in the community and don’t realise it, and you didn’t switch to the zero phase, then it’s going to be worse off,” he said last week. “In Hong Kong now it’s going to be challenging to get back down to zero.” Cowling said the number of cases in Hong Kong was likely to be far higher than what was being reported. Cowling noted the near daily detections of unknown cases via the sewage surveillance process, which randomly targets about 100 of Hong Kong’s numerous high-rise buildings each day. Additional reporting by Xiaoqian ZhuBeer drinkers are going to have to pay more for their pints because the industry faces a “vicious cycle” of surging costs, the founder of Cobra Beer has said. Lord Bilimoria, who has turned Cobra into a household name since founding the brand in 1989, said soaring costs across the supply chain, from manufacturing and energy to freight and staffing, meant prices would have to rise. “Our input costs in every way – bottling, energy – are up,” he told BBC Radio 5 live’s Wake Up to Money programme. “Freight costs have soared, sometimes 10 times. Wages are increasing and on top of that there are labour shortages. It does mean that businesses have to put up prices. But the consumer is already feeling the squeeze. It is a really challenging situation for everyone.” Bilimoria, who would not be drawn on how much more drinkers would have to pay for a bottle of beer, joins a chorus of business leaders warning that consumers would soon face another round of significant price rises. On Sunday the Tesco chairman, John Allan, said the “worst is yet to come” on food price inflation as he predicted it would reach 5% by spring. Households face a significant hit to finances with inflation at a 30-year high of 5.4%, energy bills set to soar under new price cap rules from April, and tax increases expected. “Price rises are a necessity, there is no running away from that,” said Bilimoria, who reiterated his opposition to the government’s plan to increase national insurance in April. “This is completely the wrong time to do this,” he said. “It will stifle investment, it will stifle growth.” Late last year hospitality bosses urged consumers not to desert their local pub during “dry January”, when many people make a new year pledge to abstain from alcohol, as venues struggled to recover from poor Christmas trading. Takings over the festive period, seen as crucial for pubs, bars and restaurants, slumped as much as 60% compared with pre-pandemic levels as the industry suffered for a second Christmas in a row. In November, members of the Wine and Spirit Trade Association warned of a potential Christmas alcohol shortage owing to supply chain chaos caused by a lack of HGV drivers.Why is gas an issue in the Ukraine crisis? Gas is not just a source of energy, sometimes it is a political weapon. As western countries weigh possible sanctions against Russia for an invasion of Ukraine, the future of the Nord Stream 2 pipeline hangs in the balance. But it’s complicated. The EU gets 41% of its gas from Russia; Russia earns 60% of its import revenues from the bloc. The crisis over Ukraine comes as Europe is struggling to deal with soaring gas prices and internal divisions over how to wean itself off fossil fuels in response to the climate emergency. What is Nord Stream 2? Nord Stream 2 is a 750-miles pipeline connecting Russia and Germany, with the potential to supply 26m German homes. The pipeline has been completed but has not yet certified by Germany’s energy regulator. It’s much more than another engineering project. The Baltic Sea pipeline bypasses Ukraine and is seen as depriving Kyiv of lucrative transit fees. One former Polish foreign minister even likened it to the 1939 Molotov-Ribbentrop pact that carved up eastern Europe between Nazi Germany and Soviet Russia. What happens to Nord Stream 2 if Russia invades Ukraine? The US has insisted the pipeline will not move forward if Russia invades Ukraine. Somewhat less emphatically, Germany’s foreign minister, Annalena Baerbock, has said the pipeline would be up for discussion as part of sanctions measures. The EU needs unanimity among 27 member states to impose sanctions. While Germany’s voice would probably be decisive, stopping Nord Stream 2 would need support from other member states, such as Austria and Bulgaria, that are highly dependent on Russian gas and nervous about antagonising Moscow. They are among 10 member states in central and eastern Europe that import more than 75% of their gas from their eastern neighbour. EU officials fear any move against Nord Stream 2 would trigger retaliation from Moscow. Will Russia turn off the pipes? That’s impossible to answer without seeing inside the mind of Vladimir Putin, who likes to keep the world guessing. But the Kremlin has shown previously it is ready to use gas as a weapon, during the supply crises of 2006 and 2009, which had a severe impact on central and eastern Europe. Russia is heavily dependent on fossil fuel revenues, but has made efforts to increase supplies to China, a big and powerful customer, over the last 15 years. Last week Moscow agreed a 30-year contract to supply China with gas and build a new pipeline. But the EU remains a lucrative customer, for now. Can the EU cope without Russian gas? Gazprom already stands accused of market manipulation in Europe in an effort to pressure European regulators to grant a swift approval to Nord Stream 2, which needs to clear regulatory hurdles. The Russian state energy company has dismissed the charges as lies. With the support of the US, EU officials are searching the globe for alternative gas suppliers. The EU foreign policy chief, Josep Borrell, and energy commissioner Kadri Simson are holding talks on energy security with the US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, in Washington on Monday. The US is the biggest supplier of liquefied natural gas to the EU. Talks are under way on increasing LNG supplies to the EU from Norway, Qatar, Azerbaijan and Algeria. Analysts at the Brussels thinktank Bruegel argue that the EU could get by without Russian gas supplies until the summer with increased imports, a few logistical headaches and some effort to reduce demand. In the longer term, Bruegel writes, the EU would face more painful political choices, including costly action to reduce demand, such as emergency closures of industrial plants. Will the crisis force the EU to reduce dependence on Russian gas? Despite successive gas disputes with Russia and the huge diplomatic fallout over the annexation of Crimea and downing of flight MH17 in 2014, the EU has done little to wean itself off Russian gas. Borrell said in a blogpost before his Washington trip that the EU had not done enough to “enhance our capacity to face potential gas supply cuts”, while Russia had been building up its foreign currency reserves, a measure to insulate itself from western sanctions. The latest crisis could force a reckoning, as should the EU’s climate policy, which has a legally binding target of net zero emissions by 2050. The problem is many member states see gas as a bridge away from coal or nuclear power. The need for a “gas bridge” is disputed by environmentalists, but the policy choice has already been made in many European capitals. Europe’s thirst for gas, it seems, is not going to disappear anytime soon.Boris Johnson has said he is “absolutely not” worried about Rishi Sunak’s loyalty as chancellor as they made a joint appearance to announce two new targets for reducing cancer waiting times after the pandemic. The prime minister said nobody would have to wait for more than two months for a cancer diagnosis and they wanted the “vast majority” of people to get a diagnosis within 28 days. After the Treasury delayed publication of the plan to reduce the post-pandemic backlog, the prime minister made a joint visit with Sunak to a cancer centre in Kent to announce the targets related to cancer, but not the wider plan for reducing waiting times for operations. The numbers of cancer patients facing delays in seeing a specialist for the first time and starting their treatment have hit record highs in England, amid fears that overstretched NHS services can no longer provide prompt care. The elective care plan to deal with 6 million delays is now likely to be revealed later in the week, amid rows about how stretching the targets should be and what they might cost to address. The disagreement centres on the deadline by which NHS trusts will have to have treated all those who have been waiting either one year or two years for care, usually an operation. “Conversations about the targets have become protracted and difficult. The Treasury wants a certain scale of ambition, they want tougher targets than NHS England thinks is feasible,” said an NHS source. Tensions between Johnson and Sunak have arisen over the No 10 parties, with the chancellor giving only lukewarm support to the prime minister. Sunak also distanced himself from Johnson over the prime minister’s slur against the Labour leader, Keir Starmer, falsely linking him to a failure to prosecute serial child sex abuser Jimmy Savile. Tory MPs said Sunak is on manoeuvres, drumming up support for a potential leadership bid – in common with many other cabinet minister including Liz Truss and Michael Gove, even though he denies wanting to run. But speaking to broadcasters at the Kent oncology centre at Maidstone hospital, Johnson said: “Everybody in No 10 and the Treasury are working together in harmony to deal with the big problems that the country faces and clearing the Covid backlogs.” After weeks of turmoil in No 10 over the parties during lockdown, which are now under police investigation, Johnson claimed people wanted the government to focus on life “beyond Westminster”. His premiership is still under threat, but the prime minister attempted to steady his operation by making new appointments over the weekend. Asked if he has had to reassure new Downing Street staff that their jobs have good long-term prospects, Johnson told broadcasters: “I think what people want is for the government to focus, not on stuff going on at Westminster, but to focus on life ... beyond Westminster, and to focus on the needs of the country. And that is what we’re doing.”As high-wire openings to a standup show go, this will take some beating. David Cross begins I’m from the Future with the narrative of a woman’s journey to, and experience in, Auschwitz. The anticipation in the room ebbs into anxiety: what’s he up to? Distressing details pile up, and you feel queasy that he’s using this material, presumably, just to tee up a punchline. Can he pull it off? He does: the tension is released, and it’s not Cross who is left looking crass for abusing the memory of the Holocaust. Neat trick, that – although you’re soon reminded that Cross can do crass too. Much of the show addresses Covid, and the schism between law-abiders and libertarians. There’s some fine, heavily sarcastic material here, as the Brooklynite turns vaccine phobia on its head (who wouldn’t want to have magnet powers?) and, ranting in character as an anti-vaxxer, flags the paranoia of those who bang on about their refusal to live in fear. Points duly scored, with some cathartic laughs for liberals along the way. But sometimes Cross’s contempt for his ideological opponents is a little off-putting. It’s about fine margins. The direction in which Cross takes a routine about vaccine-sceptic blowhards who then die of Covid (“It’s OK to wish them dead”) feels legit, just about, as a riff on liberal schadenfreude and the confrontational tenor of the times. But when a substantial section of the show is delivered in the same sneering register, the fun starts to wane. I felt similarly when Cross (born Jewish, now atheist) gratuitously mocks Orthodox Jewish men for being ugly, which – even if he wants to expose religious fundamentalism to ridicule – feels beside the point. There are more weak jokes about excrement, too, than you’d expect from a Grammy nominee – or from a grownup. I prefer the title routine, when Cross travels back in time to tell rightwingers’ childhood selves what they’ll grow up to be. Its qualities of human sympathy and self-mockery – as Cross sends up his suitability as a life coach – give it a basic likability not always conspicuous in this smart but cynical show. Available online from 12 February.Israel’s police minister has announced the formation of a cabinet-level inquiry after a newspaper alleged that police had used powerful Pegasus spyware against a wide range of public figures including politicians from the left and right, businessmen, officials and activists. Pegasus, a mobile phone hacking tool made by Israel’s NSO Group, was used to “phish for intelligence even before any investigation had been opened against the targets, and without judicial warrants”, Calcalist newspaper said in an unsourced report. Among those allegedly identified as targets were the former prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu’s son Avner and other members of his inner circle, including figures who have given evidence against Netanyahu in police investigations into corruption. Omer Barlev, the minister for police, said he was setting up a cabinet-level commission of inquiry. “There won’t be such failings on my watch,” he tweeted about Calcalist’s allegations, casting them as predating the current government. At least three of Barlev’s cabinet colleagues demanded a more independent, extra-governmental commission of inquiry. Commenting on the report on Army Radio, Avner Netanyahu said he was “in shock … Apparently it doesn’t matter whether or not I’m involved in politics – it will happen to you, too,” he said. Lawyers for Benjamin Netanyahu – who denies wrongdoing – urged that proceedings against him be suspended. Calcalist set off a fierce political storm last month when it alleged that police had conducted warrantless phone intercepts of Israeli citizens, including politicians and activists, using Pegasus spyware. The prime minister, Naftali Bennett, who unseated Netanyahu in June, deemed Calcalist’s latest findings “very serious, if true”. “[Pegasus] and similar tools are important tools in the fight against terrorism and severe crime, but they were not intended to be used in phishing campaigns targeting the Israeli public or officials, which is why we need to understand exactly what happened,” he said. The police commissioner, Kobi Shabtai, said any “irregularities and failures” should be “dealt with in accordance with the law”. Also named as targets by the paper were the heads of a number of government departments including the ministries of transport, finance and justice, as well as West Bank settlers who were allegedly targeted before evacuations of illegal outposts by security forces. Calcalist said other targets included Rami Levy, who runs a chain of popular discount supermarkets, a senior union official at Israel Aerospace Industries, journalists including the former editor-in-chief of the Walla news site, and leaders of protest movements for Ethiopian and disability rights. Commenting on the latest report, the Israeli president, Isaac Herzog, said: “This is not an easy day. The law enforcement system cannot be careless when it comes to following the law. We must not lose our democracy. We must not lose our police. And certainly – we must not lose the public’s trust in them. This requires a thorough and foundational examination.” The country’s rightwing interior minister, Ayelet Shaked, was equally damning. “If these things are right then we are talking about an earthquake, acts that fit dark regimes from the previous century that we must not be like,” Shaked said. “Mass intrusion into the privacy of many people is lawlessness that must be stopped today. An external commission of inquiry is required … The Knesset and the entire public deserve answers, today.” On Monday morning, police spokesperson Eli Levy told the Kan public broadcaster that he would not be commenting on the latest reports and that the service was open “to a full transparent investigation”. The report suggested that among justifications for the bugging were allegations that officials at ministries were leaking material to journalists, cross-checking evidence in investigations and – in the case of protest organisers – needed to see which road junctions might be blocked. NSO has previously said that all its sales are government-authorised and that it does not itself run Pegasus. Reuters contributed to this reportThe far-right French presidential candidate Eric Zemmour has said of all world leaders he is compared to he feels most like the British prime minister, Boris Johnson. The former journalist, who is often compared to Donald Trump, was speaking on France Inter’s morning news programme when asked about “populist” foreign leaders. The interviewer mentioned Trump, the Brazilian president, Jair Bolsonaro, and Italy’s former deputy prime minister Matteo Salvini and asked if they were models for Zemmour. “You have not mentioned Boris Johnson and I am astonished because he is without doubt the leader I feel I am closest to, culturally, intellectually … and he’s obviously a European like me but English,” Zemmour said. It is not the first time Zemmour has rejected comparisons to Trump and likened himself to the British PM. He has pointed out that both he and Johnson are former journalists, both have written history books – Zemmour on the history of France, De Gaulle and Napoleon, Johnson on Winston Churchill. He said in November: “We do have a lot in common and above all he pulled off an electoral strategy that I propose to implement: an alliance of the working class and that part of the patriotic bourgeoisie who wish to restore French sovereignty and defend an identity tragically under threat.” Zemmour did not meet Johnson when he visited London last year, ostensibly to publicise his new book La France n’a pas dit son dernier mot (France hasn’t had its last word) but also to drum up support among expatriate French voters. His team said “there were phone calls” between his advisers and members of the British cabinet. On returning to France, Zemmour told journalists: “I met a lord and I revisited the historical English parliament, the mother of all parliaments.” Zemmour is running on an ultra-nationalist, French first programme calling for “zero immigration” and warning of a clash of civilisations “not just between east and west, but between Islam and the Christian world in Europe”. Zemmour told France Inter: “I am not part of an international populist (movement). For a long time my definition of populism has been it’s the cry of people who don’t want to die and I am the candidate of the French people who don’t want to die.” The latest opinion poll by Ipsos suggest Zemmour and the far-right Rassemblement National (National Rally) candidate, Marine Le Pen, could both reach 14% of the vote in the first round of the April presidential election behind Emmanuel Macron and the centre-right Les Républicains candidate, Valérie Pécresse. A second Ifop poll suggests Pécresse, Le Pen and Zemmour are all hovering around the same level. • This article was amended on 7 February 2022. Matteo Salvini is a former deputy prime minister, not a former prime minister as stated in an earlier version.New Zealand prime minister Jacinda Ardern has announced the easing of the county’s Covid-19 border restrictions in stages starting from late February. Vaccinated citizens and visa holders coming from Australia will be able to return from 27 February, and those who are in other parts of the world can return on 13 March. In Australia, Scott Morrison has announced that the nation will open to all fully vaccinated visa holders, including tourists, on 21 February. What does the opening of New Zealand and Australia’s borders mean for you? Have you been stranded outside of either country? Have you been stranded abroad or not been able to leave to see friends and family? Are you planning a reunion? Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.The government agency charged with protecting the marine environment has dropped its case against Greenpeace over a protest intended to obstruct destructive fishing practices in UK coastal conservation areas. The judge in the case rebuked the Marine Management Organisation over the case, saying that the licensing regime, under which the case was brought, “could be better used as a source of protection against those who actively seek to harm the marine environment”. Greenpeace has called for the government to ban the practice of bottom trawling, and other heavy industrialised fishing, in response to the ruling. Marine protected areas (MPAs) are designated by the government to protect marine life in UK waters by curbing fishing and allowing species to recover. Ministers have pledged to protect 30% of the UK’s sea areas, as part of a wider commitment to conservation. But some fishing is still allowed, including the practice of bottom trawling, which tears up the seabed and which experts have said is extremely destructive to many species. Bottom trawling is also a significant source of releasing carbon, as the seabed normally acts as a valuable carbon sink to absorb greenhouse gases from the atmosphere, but turns into a carbon source when disturbed. In 2020, Greenpeace protesters dropped large boulders on to the sea bed in the Dogger Bank marine protected area, a key fishing area for bottom trawlers, and the following year dropped more in the Offshore Brighton MPA. The large granite rocks were harmless to marine life and surface fishing, but they get entangled in the weighted nets of bottom trawlers, obstructing the practice. The MMO took out a prosecution against Greenpeace, arguing that the licensing regime prohibits protesters from taking such action. However, the judge in the case, Edward Bindloss, criticised the body. He asked: “The 2009 Act introduced a licensing regime to protect the marine environment and Greenpeace were also seeking to protect the marine environment. Should the MMO be prosecuting in the name of marine protection the defendants’ actions in trying to raise awareness of the government’s perceived failures in relation to marine protection?” He added: “One of the ironies of this litigation is that both the MMO and Greenpeace are committed to improving the marine environment.” “The parties in this case should be allies, not antagonists. They should be acting in harmony given their stated purpose and objectives are the same. Greenpeace should be a supporter of the licensing regime and the MMO should support the prevention of any harmful deep sea fishing methods over important marine seabeds. It touches on the absurd that this litigation is happening at all.” On Monday morning, the MMO decided to offer no evidence against Greenpeace, resulting in verdicts of not guilty being recorded. John Sauven, the outgoing executive director of Greenpeace, who was charged under the prosecution, said: “The MMO’s role is to protect our marine ecosystems, a vitally important job in a climate and nature emergency. Our action was designed to safely protect nature from destructive fishing in an area designated as protected but where the MMO is miserably failing to do its job. For them to waste court time and public money prosecuting us for doing exactly that is, as the judge said, absurd.” He added: “This is a clear signal for the environment minister to take the urgent action needed to actively protect our oceans from industrial fishing and stop licensing destructive ships and fishing methods in all of the UK’s MPAs.” The MMO said in its submission: “Very exceptionally, the MMO has, in all the circumstances and taking particular note of the depth and the extent of the learned judge’s comments on the matter, decided that the appropriate course of action is to propose to offer no evidence to all charges on the indictments against both defendants.” Last year, the conservation group Oceana argued that licences for bottom trawling in UK waters could be unlawful. The government has taken the first steps towards curbing bottom trawling in conservation areas, but Greenpeace said more was needed. An MMO spokesperson said: “The findings of law in this case made clear that the MMO had jurisdiction to prosecute, and that Greenpeace are expected to comply with the marine licensing regime. It is noted that since initiating proceedings, Greenpeace have not carried out any further unlicensed activity. “The MMO has decided not to continue with the prosecution. In doing so, we fully expect that Greenpeace will, in accordance with the comments made by the learned judge, support and comply with the marine licensing rules in future. “Should unlicensed activity occur in the future we will continue to investigate and will consider enforcement actions in line with our published compliance and enforcement strategy.” The MMO did not respond to a Guardian query asking how much the prosecution had cost, but the cost to taxpayers is likely to be at least in the tens of thousands of pounds.“I think it will hurt but that’s curling for you,” Jen Dodds whispered, her voice struggling to be heard even in the eerie quiet of an empty Ice Cube, as she sought to process how an Olympic semi-final that was going so well slipped away. Britain’s mixed curlers could almost sniff a gold medal match against Italy on Tuesday but a few errant shots turned a 4-2 lead into a 6-5 defeat. The added gut punch? The match came down to the final stone. No wonder the pain was etched on her face. Now Dodds, and her mixed doubles partner, Bruce Mouat, need to find an urgent pick-me-up before a bronze medal playoff against Sweden on Tuesday afternoon in Beijing. It surely helps that Britain beat Sweden 9-5 when the teams met in the group stage. “It will be tough to get over but there is a medal still up for grabs and we are hungry for it,” said Mouat. For much of their nervy semi-final against the Norwegian husband and wife Magnus Nedregotten and Kristin Skaslien it looked as if Britain was making a confident stride towards its first curling gold medal for 20 years. During the opening five ends the Team GB coach, David Murdoch, reckoned his team were performing at their highest level of the whole tournament. But then the Norwegians took their powerplay on the sixth and things began to unravel. A few loose shots – including a difficult takeout attempt from Dodds – left Skaslien the chance to roll in for three and turn the game around. “The powerplay changes the dynamic a little bit and you’re trying to play shots you wouldn’t play in the first five ends,” said Mouat. “We were just over-icing a few things and we didn’t make any of the doubles that we were trying.” That blip need not have become a disaster, as Britain were able immediately to take their power play in the seventh end. However, they scored only one, which left them needing a miracle with the Norwegians having the hammer, or last shot, on the eighth and final end. “When you don’t have the hammer it’s quite a scary position to be in. We just tried to play as good as we could and fair play to her [Skaslien] for playing the draw to the button to win,” said Mouat. “With Jen’s last we just needed to put it in a really good position to force Kristen into playing a really tough draw but unfortunately we over-swept it a bit, so we’re disappointed with how we handled that.” Murdoch, who won a silver medal in the men’s curling in 2014, said: “It’s going to hurt. It was a really well controlled game. Jen and Bruce were doing everything we asked. It was the best I’ve seen us play this week and for five ends we were clearly the better team. “But unfortunately when it comes to the powerplay, if you have a couple of small errors you can easily lose three. That was the deciding point of the game. When we had the powerplay back at the seventh end and we just didn’t make the shots we were looking for. Trying to steal the last end is always quite difficult. “I’m gutted for them. Because they are so talented they’re going to have a great shot against Sweden. It’s going to hurt but we’ll bounce back.” A bronze medal would still be a great achievement, marking the first time Britain has won a mixed curling medal; the discipline was introduced to the Olympic programme only in 2018. Mouat believes that, whatever happens, Team GB’s performances have attracted a whole new audience to the sport. “I’m excited that curling is being talked about and we can show off our sport on such a big stage. I’m proud of how we made the play-offs and that’s an achievement,” he said.Long coronavirally delayed, Kenneth Branagh’s latest Agatha Christie movie puffs effortfully into harbour. It’s the classic whodunnit about a murder on a steamer making its way down the river in Egypt with an Anglo-American boatful of waxy-faced cameos aboard. The horrible homicide means that one of the passengers will have to spring into action, and this is of course the amply moustached Hercule Poirot, played by Branagh himself. It is Poirot who interviews suspects, supervises corpse-storage in the ship’s galley freezer cabinet and delivers the final unmasking – and all without the captain insisting that the Egyptian police should possibly get involved. Screenwriter Michael Green has adapted the 1937 novel with some new inventions: some people of colour are introduced, and Christie’s intense dislike for her wealthy-hypocrite leftwing character has been dialled down. Most startlingly, Green invents a very good prelude showing the young Poirot’s service in the trenches of the first world war, and the origin of that moustache. Nothing in the rest of this rather stale and two-dimensional tale matches the brio of that opening. Among the passengers, Dawn French and Jennifer Saunders play lady’s-companion Mrs Bowers and her wealthy socialite-turned-socialist employer Marie Van Schuyler, and the presence of this venerable comedy duo makes the movie look weirdly like a laugh-free version of the spoof they might have created for their erstwhile TV show. Russell Brand keeps his comedy stylings under wraps as the deadpan Dr Linus Windlesham. Sophie Okonedo and Letitia Wright play jazz singer Salome Otterbourne and her manager-slash-niece Rosalie, who is also a boarding school pal of glamorous heiress Linnet Ridgeway-Doyle, played by Gal Gadot, who is on the cruise with her new husband Simon – unfortunately played by Armie Hammer in what may be the last movie role of his career. Emma Mackey is Simon’s jealous former fiancee Jacqueline, Ali Fazal is Linnet’s lawyer and cousin. Rose Leslie is a regulation pinch-faced lady’s maid and Tom Bateman returns as Poirot’s cheery helpmeet Bouc (last seen on the Orient Express). He is here with his intimidating mother Euphemia, played by Annette Bening. After one of these people is offed, the clockwork grinds into action, bringing up in due course more dead bodies like the ship’s paddlewheel, but there is no sense of crescendo and climax. Branagh brings something spirited and good-humoured to the role of Poirot, but the film’s attempt to create some romantic stirrings to go with the activities of those little grey cells is not very convincing. He’s incidentally supposed to have been a would-be farmer in his extreme youth – whereas screenwriter Sarah Phelps, in her adaptation of The ABC Murders for BBC TV, more interestingly made Poirot a former priest. But this film may well be sufficiently successful to justify another Branagh/Poirot outing: I suggest Christie’s postmodern masterpiece The Murder of Roger Ackroyd.A once vilified royal mistress perceived as a threat to the stability of the monarchy, Queen Camilla, as she will be crowned, is now seen as a guarantor of that institution’s future smooth running. The Queen clearly believes the Duchess of Cornwall possesses key traits of past successful consorts, such as quiet supportiveness and a determination not to outshine the principal. The monarch stressed in her 70th accession day message – when she expressed her “sincere wish” that Camilla would be queen consort – the crucial support she and her father had received in marriage. “I was blessed that in Prince Philip I had a partner willing to carry out the role of consort and unselfishly make the sacrifices that go with it. It is a role I saw my own mother perform during my father’s reign,” she said. Hugo Vickers, the royal historian and author, said: “I think that was probably one of the strongest points that the Queen made.” Seventeen years after Camilla – whom the Queen reportedly once referred to as that “wicked woman” – married Prince Charles, her public image is worlds away from “the rottweiler” she was portrayed as after the death of Diana, Princess of Wales. Those who have observed her transformation at close quarters believe she has not put a foot wrong as the royals’ second most senior woman, and will not do so as queen consort. “When you consider how horrible people were about her before she married Prince Charles – they hurled abuse at her, they accused her of everything – she is not vindictive or vengeful,” said Vickers. “She has never given a hint of being anti anyone who was nasty about her before. “She seems to have a laid-back quality, which I think comes from what you might loosely call the Gloucestershire hunting set, which is a world of its own, where they rise above the jibes of the media and just get on with life.” When Camilla has publicly addressed the abuse, it has been with humour. The broadcaster Gyles Brandreth once recalled an occasion when, as president of the Oscar Wilde Society, he invited her to make a toast at the group’s annual meeting. She plunged in: “There is only one thing in the world worse than being talked about and that is not being talked about,” quoting Wilde, before adding to laughter: “One of the few maxims of the great 19th-century writer Oscar Wilde that I am not sure I would entirely agree with.” The BBC’s former royal correspondent Peter Hunt believes Camilla has played a “canny game”. “She has kept the media close and the Daily Mail even closer,” he wrote. She is far more relaxed with the media than Charles, those who cover the royal family would attest, joking with photographers, and happy to comply with requests for quotes on subjects she feels strongly about. “She understands the game and gives them what they want without losing any dignity in the process,” Vickers said. Subjects close to her heart include promoting literacy, and the campaign highlighting violence against women, the latter a particularly gritty subject that she has embraced and championed, often well away from the cameras. As the daughter of a major, she is well schooled in the military, which is also a handy attribute for a queen. She has progressed from being a nervous bride – evident at the blessing of her 2005 marriage to Charles at St George’s chapel, Windsor – to confidently undertaking her own solo engagements. But it is at Charles’s side where, observers have noted, she is particularly effective, and will remain so when he becomes king. “Prince Charles has very good qualities, he also has occasional tendencies towards petulance. And I know she is very good at defusing that,” said Vickers. He recalled one incident when Charles was taken aback as someone suddenly shook his hand. Charles did not immediately respond, “but her hand shot out and with ‘how very nice to see you again’ she just defused the thing completely”. “I think all she really wants to do is make things easier for him. I don’t think she’s got any particular personal ambitions. There is no evidence she will be political at all. She will not outshine him. And he looks much more relaxed. She’s matter-of-fact and straightforward, and that’s exactly what he needs.” Charles now has what he wants. As the Queen once reportedly drily observed of the special nugget of Welsh gold used for royal wedding rings: “There is very little of it left – there won’t be enough for a third wedding.”Labour has dropped an investigation into an 82-year-Jewish woman for alleged antisemitism after she threatened to sue the party for unlawfully discriminating against her based on her belief in anti-Zionism. Diana Neslen, who regularly attends her local synagogue and keeps a kosher home, was being investigated by the party for the third time in less than three years for tweets she posted about Israel and Zionism. In a letter to the party, her lawyers, Bindmans, said the investigation was unjustified and disproportionate, resting on a single tweet by Neslen from 2017, which said “the existence of the state of Israel is a racist endeavour and I am an antiracist Jew”. The letter said that if Labour did not back down, Neslen would bring a lawsuit for discrimination and harassment, claiming anti-Zionism is a protected philosophical belief under the Equality Act. Labour did not initially respond to Neslen’s lawyers, but after the Guardian published details of the case it told her it was discontinuing the investigation. “It is a big victory,” said Neslen. “I’m pleased that they dropped it because it exposes the fact that they shouldn’t have done anything in the first place. But I also feel that I would have liked the issue of protected belief to have been addressed because I believe there are a lot of people who also, like me, are anti-Zionist, believe that it’s a perfectly legitimate belief, and they have no recourse.” Neslen was sent a “reminder of conduct” by Labour in 2018, the same year that the party – under pressure to act on allegations of antisemitism – adopted the International Holocaust Remembrance Alliance’s (IHRA’s) definition of the term. The IHRA definition of antisemitism includes as an example: “Denying the Jewish people their right to self-determination, eg by claiming that the existence of a state of Israel is a racist endeavour.” In February last year Neslen was given a formal warning, again relating to comments on social media. Bindmans said all bar one of the tweets cited in the latest investigation were excluded under party rules either because they dated to before she rejoined the party in 2015 or had been considered in the previous investigation. Neslen said Labour had not apologised, despite her request for it to do so, and had told her she was not entitled to talk publicly about it. But Neslen, who says she was a “committed Zionist” before she visited Israel, said she would not be silent. “I want the conversation to continue, I want Jewish people to be able to be as free talking about anti-Zionism as they are about Zionism,” she said. “You shouldn’t silence people who you disagree with, and although Zionism is for many Jews a sense of identity, [it’s] not for all and we all have a right to our views.” Neslen called on Labour to withdraw complaints against other party members under similar investigation. Jewish Voice for Labour, of which Neslen is a member, says it knows of 46 Jewish Labour members, two of whom have since died, who have faced or are facing disciplinary charges relating to allegations of antisemitism. “To say that we are insulting Jews is wrong,” said Neslen. “We are acting in accord with what we regard as Jewish values and Jewish ethics, and I’m not going to change that.” Labour did not respond to a request for comment.A million UK adults went an entire day without eating over the past month because they could not afford to put a meal on the table, according to research highlighting how the cost of living crisis has driven up food insecurity. Soaring energy and grocery prices – along with the removal in October of the £20 Covid top-up to universal credit – were having a devastating impact on the food consumption of millions of people, the Food Foundation thinktank said. More than one in five households said they have already faced a ”heat or eat” dilemma, cutting back on the quality or quantity of food to pay energy or other essential bills, while 59% of households fear the cost of living squeeze will leave them with less to spend on food in the future. Altogether, nearly one in 10 UK households reported experiencing some degree of food insecurity over the past month – defined as skipping meals, going hungry or not eating for a whole day – because they were unable to afford food. “There is little doubt that the cost of living crisis is putting very real pressure on the ability of many to afford a healthy diet and is set to widen health inequalities,” the foundation said. Millions of households are under increasing financial pressures as a result of soaring energy bills and rising inflation. Gas and electricity bills will rise by an average of £700 a year from April, pitching 5m households into fuel poverty, despite measures introduced by the government to ease the strain. Grocery bills have also risen sharply, up 3.8% in January and potentially adding an extra £180 a year to the average household’s grocery bill this year. The strain on low-income family budgets is reflected in soaring demand at food banks and cut-price food clubs. The anti-poverty campaigner Jack Monroe recently revealed how food price rises had pushed up the price of the cheapest 500g bag of pasta in her local supermarket from 29p to 70p (an increase of 141%), rice from 45p a kilo to £1 for 500g (344%), and baked beans from 22p to 32p (45%). The Food Foundation survey was undertaken online between 18 and 20 January, polling 4,200 adults. It found 8.8% of all households, containing 4.7 million adults, reported that they had experienced food insecurity, up from 7.3% in July, when the last survey was undertaken. About 2 million children were living in households that do not have access to a healthy and affordable diet, putting them at risk of diet-related diseases such as obesity, and poor physical growth, the foundation said. Some groups were more likely to have experienced food insecurity over the last six months than others. People with serious disability were five times more at risk than those without a disability. People on universal credit were five times more likely to be food insecure than those not claiming. “The rapid escalation in disabled people experiencing food poverty is truly shocking. It is disabled people facing the biggest barriers to independence and inclusion that are in the worst situation; how can this possibly be acceptable?” asked Kamran Mallick, the chief executive of Disability Rights UK. A Government spokesperson said: “We know this has been a challenging time for many people, which is why we’re providing support worth around £12bn this financial year and next to help households with the cost of living, including putting an average of £1,000 more per year into the pockets of working families, and we have announced a further £9bn to protect against the impact of rising global energy prices. “Our £500m Household Support Fund is also giving more help to the most vulnerable with essential costs such as food this winter, and our holiday activities and food programme is providing healthy food and enriching activities to disadvantaged children during major school holidays.”Dwayne Johnson, the actor and former wrestling star known as The Rock, has retracted what had seemed his unconditional support for Joe Rogan, amid continued fallout from the controversial podcaster’s use of racist language. Rogan apologised after the singer-songwriter India Arie posted to social media a video montage of him saying the N-word about 20 times on his podcast. The video includes Rogan making a joke about the movie Planet of the Apes and Black neighbourhoods. Johnson had publicly praised Rogan’s response to a growing Spotify boycott triggered by the dissemination of Covid misinformation. But in response to a tweet from the author Don Winslow, reprimanding him for defending Rogan, Johnson, who has almost 16 million followers, wrote: “I hear you, as well as everyone here 100%[.] I was not aware of his N-word use prior to my comments, but now I’ve become educated to his complete narrative. Learning moment for me.” Rogan said he was wrong to use the N-word but insisted he was not racist. “I can’t go back in time and change what I said. I wish I could. Obviously that’s not possible, but I do hope this could be a teachable moment for anybody that doesn’t realise how offensive that word could be coming out of a white person’s mouth, in context or out of context,” Rogan said in a video statement. That mea culpa did not stop the former presidential candidate Andrew Yang defending the host – at least briefly. The tech entrepreneur and politician, who appeared on Rogan’s show in 2019, during his campaign for the Democratic presidential nomination, published and then apparently deleted a tweet defending Rogan. “I don’t think Joe Rogan is a racist – the man interacts with and works with black people literally all of the time,” Yang said on Sunday. “Do I know black friends of Joe’s who would swear by him? Yes I do.” Yang did not immediately explain why his tweet had disappeared. The racism scandal comes on top of growing pressure on Spotify to censor Rogan for including on his podcast dangerous Covid misinformation including anti-vaccine content, as the US pandemic death toll has hit 900,000. Neil Young and Joni Mitchell are the most prominent musicians to remove their music from Spotify in protest. Backlash against Covid misinformation knocked more than $2bn off the streaming platform’s market value last week. While Rogan’s guest lists have long included a wide variety of political and “expert” opinions, white men have been given disproportionate airtime. Over the weekend, Spotify deleted about 70 episodes of The Joe Rogan Experience. The company’s chief executive, Daniel Ek, later said it was the host’s decision to remove them after the racist slurs were broadcast. In a statement on Sunday, Ek said: “While I strongly condemn what Joe has said … I want to make one point very clear – I do not believe that silencing Joe is the answer … We should have clear lines around content and take action when they are crossed, but cancelling voices is a slippery slope.” Rogan, who signed an estimated $100m exclusive deal with Spotify in 2020, reportedly brings in an estimated 11 million listeners per episode.The home nations and Ireland are to launch a joint bid for the men’s European Championship in 2028 after plans to host the 2030 World Cup were abandoned. The decision was made after a feasibility study into the 2030 tournament found “many areas of uncertainty” according to the Football Association’s chief executive, Mark Bullingham. A 2030 bid was proposed by the Conservative government in its 2019 manifesto and was described last year as “the right time” to “bring football home” by the prime minister, Boris Johnson. “We think it’s a brilliant opportunity for the five federations and governments to come together,” Bullingham said of the 2028 bid. “This is the third biggest sports event in the world and we’ve got a good opportunity to bring it to our collective countries and make a massively positive impact.” Bullingham said the feasibility study had concluded there was little financial difference in bidding for the World Cup over the European Championship. “We’ve looked at two fantastic events in the World Cup and men’s Euros, both of them are multibillion impact events to our country, they’ve also got a similar return on investment,” he said. “The World Cup is more expensive to bid for and to host, but also generates more revenue. “We’ve got a very clear bidding landscape and timeline for the Euros. When we assess everything we know we can put together a highly competitive bid. With the World Cup there’s many areas of uncertainty, in terms of the timeline [and] in terms of the frequency of the events and so on.” The expectation that a feasibility study would find against a 2030 bid has been growing for months, largely due to the political background that often determines the choice of the winners. Spain and Portugal are expected to make a joint bid for 2030 which has already garnered favour with Uefa, while a joint South American proposal, on the centenary of the first World Cup in Uruguay, is likely to gain strong backing. There also remains broader tension between Uefa and Fifa over the latter’s plan for a biennial World Cup. Bullingham, who claims to have received positive noises from Uefa over a 2028 bid, said competing to host the Euros in the same year as Fifa has proposed to launch a biennial World Cup shows how unlikely it is to happen in the view of the FA. “We don’t believe that [will] come to fruition,” he said. Bullingham’s confidence in a 2028 bid was shared by the heads of the Scottish, Welsh, Northern Irish and Irish associations, which will all contribute even though Northern Ireland does not have a stadium large enough to host tournament football and the total number of matches remains uncertain. All are enthusiastic regarding the benefits the tournament would bring, not just in terms of direct revenues but also in helping to regenerate the coffers of Uefa, whose resources have been drained by Covid and whose funding mechanisms offer vital support to smaller federations such as Wales. While the English FA has made its decision known to the UK government, the full backing of Westminster has yet to be confirmed. A statement from the Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport said: “Following a full feasibility study, and in light of the current uncertainty around the future format of the tournament, we accept the conclusion of the five Football Associations that now is not the moment to proceed with a bid. We remain passionate about bringing a World Cup to the UK and Ireland when the time is right. “Meanwhile, the Uefa European Championships are one of the biggest global sporting events. Hosting the full tournament would be an exciting opportunity, bringing significant benefits to the whole of the UK and Ireland. That is why we have initiated work to explore the possibility of bidding to host Euro 2028. We hope to be able to confirm government support for a bid in the coming weeks.”We asked readers what they wanted to know about the energy cap price rise. Hilary Osborne, our money and consumer editor, has the answers. I’m on a fixed deal, will any part of my bill/charges increase? – Susan, Oxford No, not while the deal lasts. The cap relates to the energy providers’ standard variable tariffs – these are the tariffs that customers are on as a default and have traditionally been more expensive than the fixed-rate deals on offer. The reason the energy cap was introduced was to stop these customers paying high prices because of their loyalty. If you are on a fixed deal, you will carry on paying the same rate until the end of the term – unless your provider fails and you get switched to a new company. Households are in a strange place at the moment because moving to a new fixed deal would mean paying higher prices. It is likely that if your deal ends soon you will be better off moving on to your provider’s standard tariff than going on to a new fixed rate. Does the price cap refer to the combined cost of gas and electricity as in a dual fuel cost? How is it applied if a different supplier is used for gas and electricity? Also, if the fixed dual deal has just ended is it better to renew or revert to price capped variable contract? – R Price, retired, Hampshire The annual prices that are being widely quoted are for what a dual fuel customer with average energy use might expect to pay – they are not the caps themselves. So no household is currently guaranteed that their bills won’t go above £1,277. What is capped by the regulator, Ofgem, is the unit price that can be charged for gas and electricity (see above), and these apply to any supplier you use. If you do use an average amount of gas and an average amount of electricity, you can expect to pay around that figure. According to Ofgem, average use is 12,000 kWh of gas a year and 3,100 kWh of electricity. British Gas publishes averages on its website that are based on different-sized households and properties – these suggest that one or two people living in a flat will use 8,000 kWh of gas and 1,800 kWh of electricity while four or five people in a five-bedroom house will typically use 17,000 kWh of gas and 4,300 kWh of electricity. Currently you are very likely to be better off reverting to the price-capped deal. Lots of energy providers are quoting very high prices on their fixed rate deals – above even the new price cap. What’s the planned capped pence per kWh for electricity and for gas? And the current capped price? Using arbitrary increases of £600-700 annually makes it hard to compare the cap v fixed plans. – Padraic, 31, works for the NHS, West Yorkshire The price cap varies around the country and according to how you pay for your energy. Customers who pay by direct debit pay the least, followed by those who are on prepayment meters, then customers who settle their bills with cash or a cheque. The caps are based on the cost of supplying the energy, along with other factors. The cap for electricity paid for by direct debit averages out at 28p a kWh across Britain, including VAT. On top of that are standing charges (a fixed daily charge just for being a customer), capped at 45p a day. For cash and cheque customers the cap is 30p, while standing charges are 51p and for prepayment the unit charge cap is 28p, while standing charges are 50p. Direct debit customers in London pay the lowest standing charge, at 31p while customers in northern England and Yorkshire have the lowest usage cost at 26p a kWh. The caps for gas follow a similar pattern. The average across Britain for direct debit customers is 7p, plus a standing charge of 27p, while cash and cheque customers pay 8p a kWh and 32p a day, and prepayment customers 7p and 37p respectively. I want to know how prepay customers will get their £200 loan in October. You always forget us. We don’t get a bill. Will it be a cheque? A voucher? – Anonymous The Treasury says prepayment customers who have remotely accessible smart meters will receive the money automatically. Those who have older prepayment meters will get a voucher issued by email or post, a cheque by post or a special action message to a retailer where they top up which will credit they key. Customers who pay by cash or cheque will have their accounts with their energy provider credited in the same way as direct debit customers. Will there be any way not to take part in the government’s proposed council tax rebates and the £200 cut in energy bills to be repaid in the future, and just pay now? – Ana, London The Treasury says this will not be an option – it says having an opt-out will complicate the process and delay money getting into people’s accounts. If you pay by direct debit this may not be an issue – you could make sure that don’t reclaim or run down any credit in your account so when bills go up to cover the £40 you will have the money. It is not yet clear exactly how the energy rebate and repayment scheme will work but – probably because there are all kinds of potential problems around linking the clawback of the money to individuals or properties – the government has said it is expected to be through an increase in standing charges. That option, which would add about 11p a day to standing charges, would mean for five years all brand-new energy customers would be paying for this year’s rebate. If you are in the position where you can afford the £200 toward your bill now but are worried that you might struggle to pay £40 more over the next five years you could tuck away some cash now in a savings account to draw on at a later date. You won’t get much interest but as there is no interest on the loan that should not be too much of a concern. Why isn’t oil included, when so many rural-dwelling people already have greater expenses than townies. – Julie Switsur, 80, retired, Kirkwall Heating oil costs are not regulated by Ofgem, so aren’t included in the price cap – which could be why as you point out, this bit of your energy bill will not be subject to a payment. Another reason is likely to be because the mechanism for helping households that the Treasury has come up with uses domestic and gas electricity providers to pay and recover the assistance. Arranging a £200 loan to customers will be harder than doing so for people with accounts with an energy firm, because the debt cannot be recovered through standing charges. However, if you have an electricity account, you should benefit from the £200 payment through that. Householders who use heating oil will be eligible for the £150 council tax discount – assuming they meet the criteria of living in a band A-D home in England.And with that, I’ll bid you farewell. A brilliant evening session to close out the first Monday of these Olympic Winter Games. To stay in touch with everything that’s coming on Tuesday (and there’s plenty), sign up to the daily updates. Of course, we’ll be here throughout on the live blog and I’ll take the baton for the same shift tomorrow. On behalf of all of us in Beijing and beyond, goodnight. Ice Hockey: A third for Switzerland early in the final period, up 3-1 to keep their notional quarter-final hopes alive. I say notional because they require the ROC to lose by about 13 goals to Finland tomorrow to make that so, the team they are beating at the moment. In the other group, Sweden lead their dead rubber over China 2-1. I trust we all saw Zoi Sadowski-Synnott’s gem of a dad after she won New Zealand’s first winter gold yesterday? Give him a TV show. At the other end of her Olympic journey, Kamila Valieva. A name we better get used to over the next couple of weeks. Stunning stuff. On Monday, the 15-year-old Valieva offered the world a sneak peek of why next week’s Olympic women’s singles competition is little more than a formality, becoming the first woman to land a quadruple jump at the Olympics – then doing it again moments later – to punctuate the Russian Olympic Committee’s runaway gold in the team event at Capital Indoor Stadium. But the story of Monday, without doubt, is Ireen Wüst. She’s the first athlete to win individual gold at five separate Olympics. Wow. The 1500m triumph earned her a sixth gold, all in individual events and spread out over all five of the Olympics she has competed in during her remarkable career. On the biggest stage, Wüst always seems to shine. “I don’t know what it is,” she said. “I just see the rings and something magical happens.” Wüst had been part of an elite group of winter and summer athletes to win individual golds at four Olympics, along with icons such as Michael Phelps, Carl Lewis and Al Oerter. Now she stands alone, but the enormity of her accomplishment has yet to sink in. A quick write-up of Team GB’s loss in the mixed curling earlier. I’m sure there’ll be a longer piece to come from our writers in Beijing. Sign up to the daily briefing. Just as it was with the Tokyo Games last year, this is a superb product, written and curated with care by Martin Belam. Here is today’s edition, fresh from the laptop. Ice Hockey: The Group B game has less riding on it with China’s women already through to the quarter finals and Sweden already unable to progress to the final eight. However, it’s the latter currently leading 2-1 deep into the second period. Japan, Canada and the USA are the three undefeated teams so far in the competition. Ice Hockey: A tidy finish finish from Nelli Laitinen for Finland draws them level 1-1 with Switzerland early in the second period. Oh, scratch that - the Swiss get it straight back to 2-1 via a long-range tracer-bullet by Dominique Rüegg. Despite the fact that neither team has won a game in Group A, one of the two could make the quarter-finals by winning here and potentially overtaking ROC. Speed skating: An update from the frenetic finish to the men’s 1000m short-track final earlier. Liu Shaolin Sandor (HUN) was penalised not only for the finish but also for an illegal lane change earlier on. Thanks to Stan de Greef for bringing this to our attention. And that’s it for the medals at Beijing today. Sweden have only won three medals so far, four fewer than the ROC, but all of them are gold so they sit on top of the table. A lovely quirk. Slovenia, China and Italy all added to their gold columns during tonight’s session. Curling: Jennifer Dodds and Bruce Mouat are shattered. The latter blames himself for the fade out: “Jen played amazing throughout. That’s the hardest bit for me: I let the team down.” Dodds won’t accept that, praising her partner, but what can you say? They will play Sweden for the bronze medal tomorrow after Italy - participating in this format for the first time - hammered them 8-1. Curling: Not a great final end from GB, giving Norway a paddock to work with to take the shot and the win. And Skaslien pops it on the Olympic rings! Perfect to finish! Indeed, a stirring come-from-behind effort from where they were after five ends, down by two shots. But they nailed their powerplay, hit the lead and never looked back. Curling: we have the grandstand finish here. Team GB only managed to take one shot from their powerplay leaving it 5-5 going into the eighth and final end. With four stones to go, only two are on the dancefloor. Find a telly, this could be a wild conclusion. Ski-jumping: The Mixed Teams final. I haven’t been able to keep an eye on this until now, the last jumps. Can Slovenia’s main man Peter Prevc stick the landing with the final jump of the night? He sure does, and it in some style too. The ROC are easily overtaken, taking silver, with claiming Canada bronze. There was some controversy earlier with equipment control - Germany, the world champions going into the event, kicked out for a suit violation. More to come. Curling: The powerplay worked, Norway banking three shots in the sixth end to pinch the lead 5-4 with two ends to go! Team GB’s turn to respond, pulling the powerplay lever themselves. “A massive opportunity missed,” says Steve Cram on commentary when Bruce Mouat’s stone doesn’t curl enough to deflect into shot. It allows Norway to pop a guard in with their final stone - also a mistake, we’re told. A sport of strategy, that’s certain. Team GB have called a timeout to consider their options before this vital final stone. Oh, the drama. Liu Shaolin Sandor (HUN) did everything right for 999 metres but is knocked off by the TV referee for changing lanes when the Ziwei Ren challenged on the final turn. Goodness me, the infringement must be with no more than a metre to go, as the Hungarian thrust his skate in the air to pass the line first. Brutal. Extraordinary scenes to end a thrilling night of speed skating. We’re nearly away in the men’s 1000m final. They’ve been pulled up on safety grounds at their first attempt. Now, something similiar how this event was won at Salt Lake City in 2002? Go on, do it. That could have been a lot worse for Norway, but they complete a bad end giving up just one shot, GB leading 4-2 with three to play. Norway use their powerplay! The place stones are moved off to the left, while they hold the hammer. In summary, it gives them a better chance to rack up multiple shots in one end. And they’ll need to. A staggering ten Olympics medals for the 31-year-old champion, two of them gold in this 500m event. She made the move with one and a half laps to go, finding an inside angle on Suzanne Schulting, and that was that. What a mighty performance in both the semi and the final. GOLD - Adrianna Fontana (ITA) SILVER - Suzanne Schulting (NED) BRONZE - Kim Boutin (CAN) They’re about to jump in the women’s 500m final. Buckle up! I can’t speak with real authority on the career of Kristin Skaslien, but on the available evidence, she is a clutch performer. With the final stone here, she steals the win over GB who had three shots in position. After four ends - the halfway mark - Dodds/Mouat lead 3-2. Meanwhile in the other semi, Italy are thumping Sweden 5-0. “It’s not over until the bloke with the clipboard sings,” writes Mysterion_Voice on twitter of the short-track speed skating. And so it goes with the second-semi of the men’s 1000m with Hungarian Liu Shaoang getting the nod and Juneso Le (KOR) given the flick by the TV official with the latter tripping the former in their battle for second, so it was decided after several minutes of deliberation. The five finalists are: Ren Ziwei (CHN), Shaolin Sandor Lui (HUN), Li Wenlong (CHN), Wu Dajing (CHN) and Liu Shaoang (HUN). First up though, the women’s 500m final - all the stars made it: Adriana Fontana (ITA), Kim Boutin (CAN), Suzanne Shulting (NED), Zhang Yuting (CHN) and Hanne Desmet (BEL). It’s punch for punch in the curling. Skaslien didn’t get it right in the first end but did with the decisive stone of the second, knocking the Team GB pair out of shot. But they’ve bounced back in style in the next end, getting three shots in place early. It’s up to Skaslien again who drives with the precision of Rob Parella in the gold medal game of the lawn bowls at the Auckland 1990 Comm Games. She’s succesful in knocking two away from danger - nicely played. But can Dodds slot in a second with the final stone? She sure can! Centimetre perfect grom the Scot! So, after three ends, the GB pair lead 3-1. Supreme work from Arianna Fontana (ITA). The defending champion overtook Kim Boutin (CAN), the world record holder, with a thundering turn of pace at the start the last lap. They both advance to the final of the women’s 500m. A fall in the second semi, Desmet (BEL) hitting the deck when in second spot but she was well behind Suzanne Schulting (NED) who is through easily. There’s a review to determine what happened to Desmet... and she’s saved by the television ref! The push was detected, the penalty issued. Zhang Yuting (CHN) makes the cut too. Five skaters will race for gold. The pressure on Skaslien, she has to thread the needle with the final stone of the first end... and doesn’t come close - gave it too much welly. A top start for Team GB, they lead 1-0. Brendan Corey is out of the men’s short track speed skating. The Australian was in third when the bell rang, tried to find a gap that wasn’t there to enter the top two and finished in the wall instead. And while we’re back at the skating for a moment, here are the semi-final start lists for the women’s 500m - coming up shortly. Semi-final one: Kim Boutin (CAN) Adrianna Fontana (ITA) Adrianna Valcepina (ITA) Elena Sergina (ROC) Alyson Charles (CAN) Semi-final two: Suzanne Schulting (NED) Hanne Desmet (BEL) Qu Chunya (CHN) Petra Jaszapati (HUN) Zhang Yuting (CHN) To the curling! A huge moment for Team GB’s mixed doubles pair Jennifer Dodds and Bruce Mouat - time for their semi-final against Norway’s Kristin Skaslien and Magnus Nedregotten. It’s the best of eight ends with the Norwegians holding the hammer for the first of those on the basis that they finished higher on the table. Dodds has the first stone and lands it right on the Olympic rings. We’re away. The men’s 1000m quarters begin. And three skaters are on the ice with laps to go, Andrew Heo (USA) and Jordan Pierre-Gilles (CAN) able to walk to the line and the semis. Yikes, that was a big tumble for Korean Janghyuk Park - the medical team are taking him away with a banged-up wrist. He’s not in a good way, the poor fella. “Are you out in Beijing Adam?” asks Michael Simpson. “Slightly colder sporting disciplines than the usual for yourself!” True enough - not conventional cricket weather; currently -1 in the Chinese capital. However, brilliant as it would be, I’m not in situ. Arianna Fortana has nine Olympic medals and she’s every chance of adding a tenth for Italy later tonight, cruising through her quarter final while her competitors took each other out in pursuit. “Oh dear” says the caller after a second false start to the fourth race, wiping out another Italian, Martina Valcepina. “That’s a tough one to take.” Now a broken skate when they have a fourth crack at starting the race. I might leave it there for now but if the rest of the night at the Capital Indoor Stadium runs like that, it’ll make brilliant TV. Some drama to start the short-track quarters! Naturally. Women’s 500m to begin. Kim Boutin, Canadian superstar, is through easily and it is a Canadian one, two “but not the two we were expecting” says the race caller after Alyson Charles hits the deck during the final lap! Upstairs we go with the television referee to decide what went on and he decides it was the third Canadian, Florence Brunelle, at fault. Thus, he gives Charles a ticket to the semi-final along with Italian Arianna Valcepina. The TV official will be a busy boy tonight. I neglected to mention, there is also an Australian in the 1000m short-track speed skating - quarter-finals starting shortly. Brendan Corey, a 20-year-old who was born in Canada before moving with his family a couple of years ago, broke the national record in the heats. Of course, it is 20 years since Steven Bradbury won Australia’s first gold medal in Winter Games history in the same event. A lovely fella and true pioneer in his field - an awful lot more than the meme of that wildly bonkers final at Salt Lake City. Still, what a moment. Nice job, Luke. Hello everyone. It’s 7pm Beijing time on the first Monday of these XXIV Winter Games, and I assure you there’s plenty coming between now and the close of play in the Olympic City. Firstly, from a Team GB perspective, in about an hour we’re up to the business end of the mixed doubles curling with Jennifer Dodds and Bruce Mouat in their semi-final against Norway’s Kristin Skaslien and Magnus Nedregotten. But it’s worth noting the married Norwegian duo (we’ll talk more about this later, I’m sure) accounted for the Scots them comfortably, 6-2, in the round-robin stage. Throughout that clash, we’ll also have a close eye on the chaos of the short-track speed skating, from the quarter-finals, starting in half an hour, to the medal races in the women’s 500m and men’s 1000m. Can Canadian superstar Kim Boutin add gold to her silver and two bronze medals at Pyeongchang? For the men, Wu Dajing is looking to defend his Olympic crown in this event and secure the host nation their second gold of these Games so far. Just before 9pm in China we’ll be off to the mixed team ski-jumping as well - the first time that it has been run and won at the Olympics. It is an event where four competitors jump for each nation, two men and two women. Germany go in as world champions from 2021. Then deeper into the night, at Yanqing Sliding Centre, the women will be in the early stages of their single luge competition. And lastly, more women’s ice hockey at the national indoor stadium – China v Sweden and Swizerland v Finland – to round out the night. Keep me company by dropping me a line or pinging me a tweet. That’s all from me. I’ll hand you over to my colleague Adam Collins to take you through to close of play. Another member of the Sadowski-Synnott family has struck gold after Zoi Sadowski-Synnott’s dad Sean went viral on social media for a sweary live television interview in New Zealand, in the wake of her winning the nation’s first ever Winter Olympics gold medal. See below for links to all the Winter Olympics content we’ve published today ... plenty more to come: Daniel Hemetsberger. As I said, ouch. Evocative images from day three. I was going to say beautiful, but there is one of the skier Daniel Hemetsberger, of Austria, with blood all over his face after he hit a gate in the men’s downhill. Ouch. The medal ceremony for the women’s 15km biathlon is ongoing now. There is a huge smile from Denise Herrmann of Germany as she takes the top step of the podium. She jumps up and down in delight and waves to the camera. A fine effort – the first German to win gold in the event since 2002. Denmark close out a 3-2 win against Czech Republic in Group B of the women’s ice hockey. A Polish short-track speed skater recalled on Monday “crying like crazy” in the back of an ambulance after a 3am knock on the door of her isolation hotel room at the Winter Games by employees wearing cameras on their belts. The speed skating great Ireen Wüst swept around the Beijing oval in a time of 1:53.28secs to win the 1500m at the Winter Games on Monday and claim her sixth Olympic gold medal. Wüst, the reigning champion, set the pace with an Olympic record time in her race and watched on as world record holder Miho Takagi of Japan failed to match it in the final pair. Takagi claimed the silver behind Wüst for the second successive Olympics in 1:53.72 and Dutchwoman Antoinette de Jong took bronze in 1:54.82. Wüst is the most decorated Dutch Olympian, and adds another gold medal to the five that she has won over four previous Games since her Olympic debut in Turin in 2006. The 35-year-old has said the Beijing Olympics will be her last before she retires. (Reuters) On to ice hockey, now ... Denmark lead Czech Republic 3-2, with under three minutes to play in the third period, in Group B of the women’s competition. Japan, China and Sweden are the other nations in the group and Japan are currently top with three wins out of two. In 90 minutes or so, the Great Britain team go into action in the curling mixed doubles semi-final, against Norway. Italy and Sweden contest the other semi-final. Here’s a more recent piece, which I confess I missed at the time, by Paul MacInnes on Cornelius Kersten and Ellia Smedding: “I believe Ellia Smedding is training and living in Heerenveen, where the world-class Thialf ice arena is, since she was a teenager,” writes Stan de Greef on email. “Thanks for your reports on Wüst!” Thanks for the email, Stan. There were 89 starters in the 15km biathlon. A couple of competitors are still out on the course but no one is going to trouble the medal positions now. Denise Herrmann of Germany takes gold. Anais Chevalier-Bouchet (France) wins silver, with Marte Røiseland (Norway) winning bronze. Vanessa Voigt of Germany misses out on a podium place by less than a second. Denise Herrmann of Germany has 15km biathlon gold wrapped up, it seems. It looked like she might have left the door open for someone to overhaul her time, a little earlier, but I don’t think anyone can catch her now. Inge Kersten emails from the Netherlands, celebrating Wüst’s incredible success, and also wondering where Ellia Smeding of Great Britain does her training. I confess, I have no idea. Can anyone tell me? Email me! Here’s a piece from back in 2018, by Andy Bull, on why the Dutch are so good at skating: The sheer physical effort being expended by the competitors in the 15km biathlon is plain to see. They are, mostly, collapsing in exhaustion at the finish line. Combine the skiing with the mental application and calmness needed for the shooting and it’s an insanely demanding event. Anyway, as it stands, Herrmann, Chevalier-Bouchet and Røiseland are taking gold, silver and bronze respectively. Wüst’s gold-medal streak at the Winter Olympics stretches back to 2006. What a phenomenal achievement. Vanessa Voigt, of Germany, narrowly misses a podium spot in the women’s 15km biathlon! She comes home less than a second behind Røiseland. Herrmann stays top. Herrmann, Chevalier-Bouchet and Røiseland are in the medal positions in the women’s 15km individual biathlon at the moment. Dzinara Alimbekava comes home in 44’44”4 to place fourth, as it stands, and pushes the world champion Marketa Davidova down to fifth. That’s a sixth career gold medal for the 35-year-old – and she’s now won a gold medal at the last five Winter Olympics. Incredible ... that’s the first time, in the Summer or Winter Games, that an athlete has won individual gold at five different Olympics. History. Miho Takagi (Japan) takes the silver medal again, with Antoinette de Jong, Wüst’s compatriot, taking bronze. Ellia Smeding of Great Britain eventually finished 27th. Herrmann comes home with 19/20 in the biathlon ... she collapses in exhaustion just after the finish line. The German’s mark of 44’12” is currently leading time. That’s 15” ahead of Marte Røiseland of Norway, as it stands. Will it be enough? Ragne Wiklund, the 2021 world champion, cannot knock Wüst off the top of the standings in the skating. Chevalier-Bouchet misses for the first time! Her coach looks annoyed, it was all going so well. She notches 19/20 like Herrman. Herrman pushed down to sixth in the 15km biathlon ... but finishes strongly with a perfect final shoot, and registers 19/20 overall. Ireen Wüst of the Netherlands sets an Olympic record in the women’s 1500m speed skating final! 1min 53 sec. It’s all happening. Can anyone beat that? Anaïs Chevalier-Bouchet of France now leads the 15km women’s biathlon, with 15 out of 15 in the shooting! Herrman, the previous leader, missed a few moments ago. Davidova nails five out of five on her latest prone shoot and is in second place. Beautiful images from yesterday’s action: In the women’s biathlon, Denise Herrman of Germany is currently leading with two perfect shoots, in other words, 10 out of 10. The world champion, Davidova, is also going well. The most consistent downhill skier of all time finally added the lone piece of hardware missing from his trophy case on Monday when Switzerland’s Beat Feuz struck gold in the sport’s most prestigious event. “Hello Luke, Geoff Lemon was right to point out the splendidly named Mac Forehand in the list of qualifiers for the men’s Freeski Big Air,” emails Duncan Cooper from Stockholm. “His is not the only splendid name in the list, though. Qualifying from Sweden at the bottom of the list is Jesper Tjäder. ‘Tjäder’ is the Swedish word for capercaillie, so his name translates as Jesper Capercaillie. Tremendous.” That sounds entirely plausible. Thanks Duncan. Personally I think Beat Feuz is hard to, er, beat, when it comes to Winter Olympics names. Great Britain’s curling semi-final against Norway is coming up at just after 12pm UK time. A little less than three hours away, in other words. Bruce Mouat and Jen Dodds will be assured of a silver medal if they can win it. The women’s 15km biathlon is under way. Marketa Davidova of Czech Republic, the reigning world champion, has just sped out of the starting gate. Makayla Gerken Schofield, who produced a brilliant run to finish eighth in the women’s moguls yesterday, is having a chat with the BBC now. You can see the schedule here: Coming up in the next little while: Women’s 15km individual biathlon, short track skating, ski jumping (mixed team – normal hill), and women’s single luge (Run 1) Evgeniia Lalenkova, of the Russian Olympic Committee, has just gone fastest in the skating. Smeding of Great Britain is out of the top 10. There were strange scenes earlier in the women’s ice hockey. A preliminary round game between Canada and the Russian Olympic Committee was delayed by an hour – apparently because the ROC team had failed to provide Covid-19 test results to officials. The match eventually started with players from both teams wearing masks under their helmets: Ellia Smeding is now seventh-fastest in the 1500m long track speed-skating. I don’t claim to be an expert on this one, but Simon Brotherton on the BBC explained that there are no heats, the skaters go straight into the final, in pairs, and the final leaderboard is compiled that way. Belarus are currently in top position. Beat Feuz of Switzerland captured gold in the Olympic men’s downhill. The 41-year-old Johan Clarey of France was 0.10 seconds behind in second and two-time Olympic champion Matthias Mayer of Austria was 0.16 behind in third. The victory gave Feuz the one thing lacking from a career filled with accomplishments. He won a silver medal in super-G and bronze in downhill at the 2018 Olympics and is the four-time reigning World Cup downhill champion. Feuz is second in this season’s downhill standings. (AP) Ellia Smeding, the first Great Britain long track speed skater to compete at the Winter Olympics since 1980, has just contested the 1500m against Huang Yu Ting of Chinese Taipei. Smeding clocks 2min 01sec, 3/10ths slower than her opponent, but that seems to be a very competitive time. The final is continuing in a head-to-head format. In other news, Peng Shuai gave an interview to L’Equipe – her first to an independent news organisation since the controversy over her Weibo post – and she played the scandal down, calling it an ‘enormous misunderstanding’: Earlier today, Mikaela Shiffrin was dramatically DQ-ed from the giant slalom after missing a gate on her first run. Here’s our news story: Thanks Geoff and hello, everyone. Let’s find out what’s happening in the land of artificial snow. Righto, that’s me for the day. Luke McLaughlin will be your next ski instructor. The qualifiers in the men’s Freeski Big Air. Sweden - Birk RUUD USA - Alexander HALL Sweden - Oliwer MAGNUSSON Sweden - Henrik HARLAUT USA - Colby STEVENSON Norway - Christian NUMMEDAL Norway - Tormod FROSTAD USA - Mac FOREHAND Spain -Javier LLISO Italy - Leonardo DONAGGIO Canada - Evan McEACHRAN Sweden - Jesper TJADER I am sorry for not alerting you earlier that there is a man named Mac Forehand. Back to the Big Air for a minute. Nine qualified, a few to go. Here’s some spicy backstory to the Canada-Russians match. No surprises there! Recent dominance in the event at other competitions, and the fastest first-run time today. The main challenge for Hector was keeping her cool during the long wait, first with the men’s downhill event sandiwched into the schedule today, and then especially with that injury delay in this race, and having the composure to nail her run. It was slower than her first, 58.13 to 57.56, but that first run gave her the buffer. Wonderful racing. Brignone takes silver for Italy, Gut-Behrami bronze for Switzerland. Thea Louise Stjernesund, who clocked the fastest run of the day in the second round, ends up sixth. Katharina Truppe for Austria can’t knock off Brignone, but she does come in third. One to come. There we go. The Italian Federica Brignone matches her first run, 57.88 and 57.89, to go top of the table. With two racers to come, she’s guaranteed a medal. Three racers to come in the giant slalom, each with a second of time up their sleeves. Back underway at the slalom, with O’Brien taken off for medical attention. Ragnhild Mowinckel loses time, makes up time, and ends up in second place for Norway. Her compatriot Stjernesund is still in third. Over at the Big Air, the Italian skier we were looking at earlier, Leonardo Donaggio, has pulled out a big score on his third jump to get into the qualification bracket when he was out of contention. The top 12 scorers go through to the final. There’s a long delay with the injury to O’Brien. It must be bad. Looked horrible in real time, right at the end when she was at her fastest. The cameras have cut away to scenic footage. Unnerving. The final Canada-ROC hockey score is 6-1. I swear that it was 7-1 earlier. Maybe Putin got on the phone. A couple of nasty crashes as the last few slalom contenders push for everything they can find. Tessa Worley of France gets her arm caught in a gate and goes down hard. She limps off under her own steam. Nina O’Brien from the USA is in a worse way. She loses control right towards the end, is on course for a fast time but can’t hold it together, and crashes right into the last flag before hitting the deck and sliding into the finish area. To add insult to injury she gets disqualified for not clearing the last gate. I’m not entirely sure but she might have been on track for third place if not. At last, Stjernesund is knocked off. It was always going to be hard to hang on against the fastest racers at the bottom part of the field. Lara Gut-Behrami takes the lead for Switzerland. In the Big Air, the third round has just begun. These guys do three jumps and take their two best scores. Birk Ruud is back to the top with a 93.25 to add to his 94.5. So if you’re not clear, the slalom racers go twice, and their times are added together to form their final result. Stjernesund had a middling first run of 59.39, but blazed a 57.50 second time around. Her time sees off Michelle Gisin of Switzerland now, so that’s six skiers with a faster first round than Stjernesund who haven’t caught her. We’ve had 17 racers of 30 so far in the giant slalom. Stjernesund still in front, after five faster first-rounders now. As we get deeper into the field, these are the racers with the faster first-run times, meaning each of them starts with an advantage over Stjernesund. But so far four of them have failed to use that buffer to catch her second-run time. Another leader in the giant slalom, Thea Stjernesund for Norway with 57.50, the fastest time of the day. Hockey: The Canadians are leading 7-1 on goals. The Russians are leading 7-2 on penalty send-offs. Two minutes off the ice for each foul. Wow! Paula Moltzan (USA) nearly crashes, ending up balancing on one leg with her ski waving around in the air, then somehow recovers to get through the next gate and finish the course. Not only that, she ties for first place! A dead heat. If you don’t know how slalom works, they have to zigzag back and forth across a slope while going between flags that are placed here and there on the way down. Very fast, and if you miss a gate you’re gone. Won’t be a shared gold though. New leader Ana Bucik puts the Slovenian flag up top. Frasse Sombet is suddenly out of the medals. So there were 60 giant slalom skiers who got through the first run, of which the fastest 30 get to tackle the second run. Four of those have already crashed out second time around. Austria’s Ramona Siebenhoffer looks set to take top spot but loses her purchase with three gates to go. Tina Robnik of Slovenia goes second behind Frasse Sombet, then Norway’s Maria Tviberg passes them both. Canada go up 5-1 in the hockey preliminary round over ROC. Alex Tilley for Great Britain is ahead of the pace through the first half of her run, but slips just behind Aicher on time towards the bottom. Tilley is currently second but there are faster racers to come. There’s a crash to follow, the Swedish skier Hilma Loevblom catching her wrist in one of the slalom gates and hurting herself quite badly by the look of it. Coralie Frasse Sombet clocks the second-fastest run of the day, 57.69, to go top. The women’s giant slalom second run has begun. These run times get added to their first run to decide the medals. Emma Aicher of Germany starts well with 59 seconds flat, far better than her first run of 1:01:52. But seven racers in the first round went under 59. This is from Reuters. New Zealanders were in ecstasy on Sunday when Zoi Sadowski-Synnott won their first-ever Olympic gold medal - none more so than her dad Sean, whose emotional and slightly profane TV interview has since gone viral. “I’m pretty fucking excited to be honest,” he said of his daughter’s victory in the Olympic slopestyle competition, adding another couple of spicy anecdotes in a joyous TV appearance. “Yeah, I think really that he had a few too many drinks at that point, but you can’t really blame him, it was Waitangi Day in New Zealand (a national holiday) and his daughter just won the Olympics so...!” she told Reuters, laughing. “The last 24 hours has been a whirlwind, super-stoked to be standing here with gold around my neck.” New Zealand prime minister Jacinda Arden also got in on the act, sending a slightly more formal message of congratulations to the snowboarder. “Honestly the reaction has been absolutely insane, I haven’t been able to keep up with all the support and love that I’ve got and then I got a shoutout from Jacinda. So yeah, I told her that we say hi from the whole team here in Beijing, and we hope to make them proud.” Her dad’s reaction was a reflection of Kiwi delight all over the country, Zoi’s coach Sean Thomson said. “He’s amazing, it just was so cool to see the emotion coming out of him in that clip,” he told Reuters. “We loved it and we loved all the support from back home with friends and family. It’s just really special what Zoi has done here, and to see everyone react the way they have been doing is just something else.” The victory comes just a few weeks after the 20-year-old won two gold medals at X-Games in Aspen, Colorado, and she will go for Olympic gold again in the Big Air event, which starts on Monday Feb 14. Two periods gone, 4-1 Canada. And as soon as I type that, the Russians score! They finally get a breakaway from the siege at their goal, stream down the ice, and their captain Anna Shokhina puts a flick past the tender from the left side of goal. It’s 4-1. Canada really monstering the Russian women in the hockey. In the whole time I’ve been watching the Russians haven’t got near goal. They’re spending the whole game in their defensive third, slapping the puck up the ice without much plan. Three minutes left in the middle third. We’re on to the second run in the Big Air. Everyone gets three goes and then takes their best two scores. Birk Ruud from Norway was top in the first round. When you invert his name on the leaderboard is looks like Rude Berk. Unflattering. Can ski though. Canada up 4-0 now in that hockey game, the Russian coaches looking very stern. In the men’s downhill, it is the Swiss skier Beat Feuz who wins in a time of 1:42:69. He won bronze in this event in 2018, and silver in the Super G. Completes his set this time around. And quite the story for second place: the 41-year-old Frenchman Johan Clarey, having qualified for three previous Olympics but having never finished higher than 18th, wins a silver medal in his fourth Games. Previous winner Matthias Meyer takes bronze for Austria. Canada go up 3-0 over the Russian team in the women’s ice hockey, after a frenetic period of attack. On the Big Air, this skiing commentator’s favourite thing to say is “tweaking out the grab”. I don’t know what it means to tweak out a grab, but every competitor has tweaked out the grab at least once per jump. I wonder if he drops tweaking out the grab into conversation in his normal life? Ordering pizza, jumping in a taxi. “So just tweak out the grab and then take that next left.” Here’s a line from the US figure skating team. For context, Zhou is the only skater to have beaten the juggernaut that is Nathan Chen in the last four years. “As part of yesterday’s regular COVID-19 screening, Vincent Zhou tested positive. Under the guidance of the USOPC medical staff, Zhou is undergoing additional testing to confirm his status. If the results are negative, Zhou will be able to compete in the men’s short program, which begins Tuesday. At this time, we ask you respect his privacy as we await the results.” Here’s that piece about Peng Shuai. Leonardo Donaggio, a young skier from Italy, has just nailed a 90+ score to go to second place in qualifying with five full spins and a decent landing. But Henrik Harlaut of Sweden goes one better with the next jump. Three qualifiers above 90 so far. Since I don’t know all that much about winter sports, I’m going to describe them like someone who doesn’t know much about winter sports. Freeski Big Air? Does what it says on the tin. Some guys are coming down to a huge ramp and then spinning a lot. I would argue though that the conventional aerials comp, where they use that ramp that ends up as a vertical, gets bigger air. This is a flatter ramp, and the spins are mostly lateral corkscrew style rather than adding flips into the equation. Now... the first dude as I switched over just went down the ramp backwards. Matej Svancer, Austrian. That seems bold. Wait, now some other guys are landing backwards. Is this a thing now? Backwards skiing just for extra flair? Sure, why not. The snowboard slopestyle is quite the spectacle. If you liked the street skate event in Tokyo then this is the same idea but on ice. A long downhill run littered with jumps, rails, ramps, and even a snowy Chinese pagoda with a roof that competitors can get on top of and go flying off. Flips, spins, all the good stuff. The Canadians go gold and bronze, China silver. Mark McMorris has won two bronzes in this event already, and he scorches his last run in an effort to knock off his countryman Max Parrot from the top spot. But needs a couple more points. Settles for his third bronze, Parrot gold, Su Yiming silver. There’s also a women’s prelim round ice hockey match going on: Canada leading I Can’t Believe It’s Not Russia 2-0. In the women’s Big Air qualifiers, Canada’s Megan Oldham finished top. For Great Britain, Kirsty Muir qualified but Katie Summerhayes missed out by one spot. On-course news from the day so far: American favourite Mikaela Shiffrin crashed out of the giant slalom qualifying, missing her first shot in a program that was aiming for five gold medals. Alex Tilley for Great Britain is in the mix. That second run is due later today, not sure on time yet as strong winds yesterday meant another event has to be squeezed into today. In other news related to China, sport, and the application of state power - our reporter Helen Davidson in Taipei is working on a story about Peng Shuai, the tennis player who has had the close attention of the Chinese government ever since accusing a prominent politician of assaulting her. Hello, frost fans. Welcome to Narnia as the white witch would have envisaged it, all crystalline ice structures and chilly diplomatic relations. The Beijing Winter Olympics. Not much action today for the Australians or the Brits, but plenty happening on the snow nonetheless. All times below will be UK time, which is currently GMT. Add eight hours for Beijing, add 11 hours for Sydney. Subtract five hours for New York, or eight hours for of LA. Curling: In the mixed doubles, Great Britain beat the USA to qualify for a semi-final against Norway, which will take place at 12.05pm. Men’s downhill skiing: started a day late, and is happening in between the women’s giant slalom runs, the first tranche of which is over. Bryan Graham is at the venue for us. Snowboarding: the men’s slopestyle final starts just before 4am. Freeskiing Big Air: on its Olympic debut, the women’s qualifying run has already happened, and the men will be at 5.30am. Speed skating: The women’s 1500 metres is at 8:30am, with American start Brittany Bowe among those in action. Ireen Wust of Netherlands will go for a fifth solo gold in five games, having won in either the 15000 or the 3000 in each of the past four. Ellia Smedding is there for Great Britain. Women’s biathlon: The women’s 15 kilometre shoot-and-scoot starts from 9am. Short track speed skating: Medals are up in the women’s 500m at 11:30am, and the men’s 1000m at 12.40pm. Ski jumping: the mixed team final starts shortly before 1pm.Presidential records including “love letters” from Kim Jong-un had to be retrieved from Mar-a-Lago after Donald Trump improperly removed them from the White House, the Washington Post reported on Monday. According to the Post, advisers to the former president “denied any nefarious intent and said the boxes contained mementos, gifts, letters from world leaders and other correspondence. “The items included correspondence with North Korean leader Kim Jong-un, which Trump once described as ‘love letters’, as well as a letter left for his successor by Barack Obama.” Presidents traditionally leave a note for their Oval Office successor. Despite claiming the election was stolen from him, Trump left one for Joe Biden, which the current president has called both “very generous” and “private”. The National Archives and a Trump spokesman did not comment on the Post report. The records were returned to the Archives in January, the Post said. Trump’s treatment of White House records has been under the spotlight, amid a House investigation into the January 6 insurrection he incited. Trump went to the supreme court but failed to stop records being transferred to the House committee. Some records the panel obtained were reportedly ripped up and taped back together – according to Trump’s widely reported practice. Lindsay Chervinski, a presidential historian, told the Post: “The only way that a president can really be held accountable long term is to preserve a record about who said what, who did what, what policies were encouraged or adopted, and that is such an important part of the long-term scope of accountability – beyond just elections and campaigns.” Lack of access to documents about issues of national security could “pose a real concern if the next administration is flying blind without that information”, Chervinski said. Trump’s correspondence with Kim, during attempts to negotiate with the North Korean leader over his nuclear ambitions and threat to the US homeland and world peace, was the subject of widespread conjecture – and ridicule. In September 2018, Trump told a rally in West Virginia: “We fell in love. No, really. He wrote me beautiful letters.” The Washington Post reporter Bob Woodward later obtained 25 letters between Trump and Kim for his second book on the Trump presidency, Rage. His publisher, Simon &amp; Schuster, described “an extraordinary diplomatic minuet”. In one letter, about a meeting in Singapore in June 2018, Kim wrote: “Even now I cannot forget that moment of history when I firmly held Your Excellency’s hand at the beautiful and sacred location as the whole world watched.” After a summit in Vietnam in February 2019, Kim wrote that “every minute we shared 103 days ago in Hanoi was also a moment of glory that remains a precious memory”. The summits did not reduce tensions with North Korea. On Monday, Stephanie Murphy, a Florida Democrat on the 6 January committee, told the Post that the Trump White House “didn’t follow rules is not a shock. “As for how this development relates to the committee’s work, we have different sources and methods for obtaining documents and information that we are seeking.”Marcella Detroit, singer/songwriter Stay came to life one morning in my converted garage in the back of my house in LA: a very unassuming studio, all knotty pine and carpet, my recording equipment in a cupboard. Siobhan Fahey lived down the road and her then-husband Dave Stewart [ex-Eurythmics] had given her a lift over, then he came in, because he had an idea. The idea came from these amazing parties Dave and Siobhan used to have. You would not believe the crew that would show up – Tom Petty, George Harrison, Jeff Lynne from ELO, Timothy Leary. Eventually, we would all start singing and jamming, and I would always end up doing ballads. Dave said: “You know how you always sing those ballads at our parties? Wouldn’t it be great to style a song like that to feature you?” And he had an idea for chords and a melody. Stay was rewritten maybe four times – it sounded like a Prince song at one point – before Siobhan and I went back to the original, developed it, and made a cassette of it. We played it to Chris Thomas, the producer of Roxy Music and the Sex Pistols, who was staying at Dave and Siobhan’s. We weren’t expecting anything, but I remember the room was completely silent: everyone was listening really intently. After it stopped, Chris stood up, and he went: “No 1 smash!” And we were like: “Yeah? Really?” Later, when the final mix wasn’t working, we asked Chris to help. He rescued that song and made it sound incredible. Jennifer Maidman, from Penguin Cafe Orchestra, came up with the great synthesiser parts for the chorus, and Steve Ferrera, the drummer, also did great things. It entered the charts at No 27. Then we played Top of the Pops and it kept steadily going up. When it got to No 1 and stayed there for eight weeks, it was really unexpected. But it was incredible that that could happen. I think it’s still one of the longest-running No 1s by a female band. Siobhan Fahey For our second album, Hormonally Yours, we’d had this lofty idea to acquire the rights to Cat-Women of the Moon, a fabulously kitsch 3D B-movie from 1953, and build songs around its narrative. The record company said no – they’re not known for their creative thinking are record companies – but we’d written half a dozen songs already, so carried on. If I remember rightly – 30 years is a long time – the idea for Stay’s lyric came from a woman in the film who had to go back to her planet and leave her human love behind. I was worried about it being too saccharine, but alongside Chris Thomas we had Alan Moulder. He’d recently worked with My Bloody Valentine and the Jesus and Mary Chain, who I loved. At that point, we were the only “pop” band Alan had ever worked with – and he went on to work with Marilyn Manson and Nine Inch Nails. It meant there was nothing sugary about the production. Sophie Muller , who was my best friend at the time, made the video. We were muses to each other. I’d been getting into gothic ringlets and sparkly glam-rock catsuits, enjoying becoming an unhinged Victorian heroine meets Suzi Quatro meets Labelle! Now that look was combined with me becoming the angel of death in the video, in dark makeup coming down the stairs from another dimension, trying to steal Marcella’s human love away from her – the video had a slightly different concept to the song. We only had a day for the shoot. Most of it involved recording Marcy singing, so by the evening I was getting bored – but also the clock was ticking. At 8pm, I hit the vodka and by the time we filmed, I was, shall we say, in high spirits, in full deranged splendour. Performing as a darker character is always more fun than being peaches and cream. I loved coming down the staircase, which was inspired by one of my favourite films, Powell and Pressburger’s A Matter of Life and Death. That character seemed to register with lots of people, which was amazing – there were lots of ludicrous takes on it [by French and Saunders as well as David Baddiel and Rob Newman]. I found that funny and the greatest compliment. Funnier still is how people expect me to be just like the angel of death in real life, 30 years on. They’re bitterly disappointed when I’m not. Hormonally Yours is released in a 2-CD deluxe edition and coloured vinyl on 17 February, the 30th anniversary of its release.Ivan Rakitic had the ball in his hands and Sevilla’s fate in them too, or at least that’s how it felt. On moments like this titles turn, so it goes. They had spent the last two months hanging in there, the team still standing even as players were falling, clinging on for a chance like this. But time was running out on the first day of the rest of their season, the opportunity they had waited for untaken and slipping away again. Until suddenly, almost out of nothing, it was given back. All they now had to do was score a last-minute penalty and they really would be in the race for La Liga. Yeah, all. And no, they didn’t. On Saturday night Rakitic’s injury-time spot kick was saved by the Osasuna goalkeeper Sergio Herrera to see out a 0-0 draw and 24 hours later Real Madrid defeated Granada 1-0, the finest of margins bringing the greatest of changes and, all over Spain, the most definitive of judgments: from a point behind and Game On to six points off and Game Over. Sevilla left Pamplona with a feeling of what might have been. “We’re sad,” coach Julen Lopetegui said. This, after all, had been the moment that might decide how far his side could go. Yet there are still 15 weeks left and that they had come this far said something, reason enough to believe it could still be. Defeated just twice all season, Sevilla are unbeaten in nine since a 2-1 loss at the Bernabéu in November: a game they led, dominated for 70 minutes and lost in the 88th, one that had felt oddly inevitable somehow, a missed opportunity that was sort of predictable, another almost but not quite. But they had followed it by beating Villarreal, Athletic and Atlético in a row, a last-minute Lucas Ocampos goal finally seeing off Diego Simeone’s team, before drawing 1-1 with Barcelona, and beating Cádiz and Getafe. On the face of it, it hadn’t always been that impressive, a hint of yeah but about them; contradictory though it sounds, there was a sense of Sevilla playing within themselves and yet also permanently on edge. Four of those five wins were 1-0, the other 2-1. And just as that put them back within touching distance, it evaded them again with two consecutive draws. There’s nothing really wrong with finishing 1-1 with Valencia and 2-2 with Celta, but both were matches they might have won – against Valencia they scored early and wasted chances to make it safe, against Celta they came back from 2-0 down and then hit the post – and both felt like opportunities lost, like they suffer vertigo when the top is in sight, like something’s missing. A lot has been missing. And the good news, the thing that really was impressive, was that the league hadn’t already gone, that Sevilla were still close enough for a challenge to remain possible. Jesús Navas has been able to start just eight league games all season; Suso and En Nesyri, six; Érik Lamela, five. They had spent two months with absences in double figures every week, those that were able to play pretty much having to play every game. And as soon as En Nesyri was fit again, he was off to the Africa Cup of Nations. Goalkeeper Yassine Bono was joining him, as was Munir. This weekend they were back and others came with them, giving this the feel of a fresh beginning in which they were ready to step up. In the winter window Sevilla signed Anthony Martial and Tecatito Corona, but just as important as what they had done was what they had not done: like with Jules Koundé in the summer, they had not sold Diego Carlos, the club that always lets go holding on. That seemed like a statement, like they knew this season was an opportunity that might not be back again; although they wouldn’t say so publicly, this was a league they could compete for. “Fans keep telling us ‘you have to catch Madrid’,” Rakitic admitted last week and it coincided with the first real hint that Madrid’s lead needn’t be unassailable: held by Cádiz, beaten by Getafe, needing a late comeback to draw with Elche, Madrid had won two from five in La Liga and had just been knocked out of the Cup by Athletic, vulnerability revealed. Karim Benzema was injured, others were tired, and PSG awaited round the corner. Beat Osasuna and Sevilla would be just one point behind, piling the pressure on a team in which cracks were at last appearing. Trouble was, it was happening again. Fernando, quietly going about being the best deep midfielder in Spain, was out. Ocampos got injured in the warm-up. Gonzalo Montiel, returning from international duty with Argentina, was forced off after six minutes. Koundé wasn’t fit enough to start, not introduced until the 58th minute. The same went for Papu Gómez. And they only went on because there was no choice. If Osasuna were the better side and Sevilla had seemed happy enough to let the first half go by, trusting that chances would present themselves and time was on their side – a recurring theme this season – it was slipping away from them. There had been very little from Martial on the left – “he has not played much and bit by bit has to integrate,” Lopetegui said afterwards – and Sevilla had to force this. But while they had the ball, although their ability to bring it out impressed, much as they quickened the tempo and sharpened their intent, and despite Osasuna’s manager admitting his team felt their strength sap away, they created little. Another chance seemed to be escaping them, which is when it really did. There were 29 seconds left when another cross was swung in from the left and Koundé went down, challenged by Manu Sánchez. At first Valentín Pizarro Gómez ignored it but a voice came from the VAR room and so he stopped, listened and eventually set off to take a look, studiously ignoring the crowd of players shepherding him to the sideline with helpful suggestions. There, he saw a swipe of Sánchez’s foot and contact with Koundé’s boot. It wasn’t much, but with 91.30 on the clock, it was enough for him to draw a telly with his fingers and point to the spot, where Rakitic was waiting. The league was alive, Sevilla had been saved. They were in their captain’s hands now, which was about the best place they could be. The nearest thing to a sevillano in the team, the man who fell in love on his first night in the city, meeting his wife to be in a hotel 50 metres from the Sánchez Pizjuán, the player who went away and insisted on coming back again, his return met with rejoicing. The first foreign captain there since Diego Maradona, he is the player who proudly tells the story of his wife’s grandfather refusing to take off his Sevilla watch, dying with it on. He tells the story too of his mother-in-law sending him a text after he had missed a penalty against Rayo a decade ago, saying: “The dog takes them better than you do.” But he’s also the man who had not missed one in eight years. Since then, Rakitic had taken nine and scored them all. During normal time that is: he had also become the first player to twice score the winning penalty in World Cup shoot-outs: his spot-kicks took Croatia to the quarters and the semis in Russia, displaying nerves of steel. As for the last time he had taken one in La Liga, he had coolly rolled in a late penalty at Real Madrid on a wild weekend, keeping alive their hopes of winning the title with three games to go. He had been here before, in other words, no one better to rely on to score now to take them even closer. This really was a new start; for all their problems they’d got to here somehow, now they could begin. No, it hadn’t all come to this, and there are still four months left, but it felt that way; like belief depended on this ball hitting the net, which is why it felt so bad when it didn’t. “This is the penalty that could decide the title!” shouted the commentator on one radio station. On the bench, Lopetegui sat alone, rubbing his face, blinking rapidly. Marcos Acuña couldn’t look, standing near the centre circle facing the other way. Rakitic gazed at the ball. One shot to have a shot. He hit it left, but Herrera dived to saved, leaping up to block the rebound from Gómez too, roaring with El Sadar as another opportunity escaped Sevilla, the title candidates who just won’t let go but just can’t quite hold on either.Jonathan Van Ness is best known for fabulous hairstyles, for killer styling tips, and for treading a path that keeps them firmly on life’s glam side. Their new TV show may change that. “Being pooped on by a millipede is a lot,” they exclaim. “It stained my hands for days – there’s tar or resin in their poop!” The 34-year-old is talking via Zoom from their home in Texas about their new Netflix series, Getting Curious With Jonathan Van Ness. Based on their long-running podcast of the same name, each episode sees Van Ness – along with a coterie of experts and friends – tackle a topic, from skyscrapers to snack foods. As well, obviously, as assessing the kind of insects that go to the toilet on your hand if you pick them up in a laboratory. Or as Van Ness puts it: “Are bugs gorgeous or gross?” As one might expect, it’s very camp and extremely fun. But it’s also instructive, at times emotional, and underpinned by Van Ness’s infectious enthusiasm and appetite for information. As well as scenes where they battle their fear of heights to take in the Manhattan skyline from the Edge observation deck at Hudson Yards, they delve into an inspirational exploration of binary gender that sees them visit the historic Stonewall Inn. So profoundly did it touch Van Ness that even recalling it gets them choked up. “I think it was one of the most healing conversations of my life,” they say, taking a deep breath to calm themselves. The episode sees them hold a group discussion about identity, with guests including Geo Soctomah Neptune, the first person to run for public office in Maine while identifying as two-spirit – an indigenous North American term for fulfilling another gender role outside the binary of man and woman. It’s a rare moment in media: non-binary and gender-non-conforming people talking about their identity and experiences without the antagonism of transphobia. “I obviously went through a lot of bullying growing up, and survived a lot of stuff,” Van Ness says of a high-school career that saw them face physical violence for their gender expression. “And one thing that I’ve always thought about, even when I was young, is that if some day I can ensure no other kid has to feel what I did then it would be worth it. I really wanted to speak to my experience of the gender binary, because it has affected my whole life, and I see the violence that the gender binary causes every single day.” Another of Van Ness’s passions is politics, especially when it pertains to minority groups. They see the 110 anti-trans bills that were proposed in the US in 2021 as evidence of conservative lawmakers trying to distract from “the systemic racism, toxic masculinity and the capitalist greed that is driving our society”. They’re unable to talk about it without getting heated. “There’s record-breaking inequality between classes. The top 1% has gotten richer and richer, while people are struggling to put their kids in school, pay their medical bills, get access to clean water in so many parts of the United States,” they say. “But what Fox News is talking about is the 0.0003% of trans children who may or may not want to join a local sports team. It’s ridiculous.” Do they think that the liberation of people of colour, people experiencing poverty and queer people are possible within the structures that exist right now? “There is liberation for some people. It’s kind of like what [American politician] Ayanna Pressley says in Getting Curious: if hurt and harm can be legislated and codified, so can healing.” After sharing their HIV+ status in a memoir, Over the Top, Van Ness has talked publicly about the difficulties around accessing HIV treatment in the US. After an incident in which they misplaced their HIV medication and were charged $3,500 (£2,600) for a replacement, it led them to endorse Senator Elizabeth Warren in the 2020 election due to her support for universal healthcare. While they are delighted by the advances that have been made in preventive treatments like PrEP and the recent HIV vaccine trial by Moderna, they are still disappointed by how, even after the pandemic, people haven’t woken up to health inequalities. “When people say, ‘We’re all in this together,’ it’s like we’re all in the same ocean but we’re on very different boats,” they say. “Some people are on mega yachts and some people are on, like, Jack and Rose’s tipped-over headboard, trying to balance in the middle of a hurricane.” Van Ness got married during the pandemic, and is concerned as to whether their marriage will still be legal in the coming years. They bring up how the US supreme court recently refused to accelerate an appeal against the Texas law that prohibits abortions after six weeks. “They’re empowering civilians to turn in other civilians and doctors if people seek reproductive healthcare,” they add. “So who knows if marriage equality is going to remain settled law? It seems like this supreme court doesn’t give a fuck. I just hope we don’t lose our ability to be married.” Still, Van Ness says married life is “really great” and their British husband has even introduced them to gardening: “I love Gardeners’ World. Monty Don is where it’s at.” Indeed, there’s a video of Van Ness gleefully prancing around their garden on YouTube. Should Getting Curious get a second season, it feels as if they may already be sowing the seeds for what might work. “That’s the fun thing about curiosity,” they say. “It’s very fluid and, at least for me, it’s quick moving.” After speaking to Van Ness, you don’t doubt it for a second. Getting Curious With Jonathan Van Ness is on Netflix now. They are on tour later this month.There is a moment in Spencer, Pablo Larraín’s imagining of an ill-fated weekend at Sandringham for Diana, Princess of Wales (Kristen Stewart), when Prince Charles (Jack Farthing) tells his wife, “You have to be able to make your body do things you hate. For the good of the country.” Diana grips the edge of a billiards table as if trying to hold herself together; behind white knuckles, satin, and perfect hair, untapped rage is seething. Diana’s fight to contain herself – to remain statue-like, elegant, and prim – repeatedly threatens to boil over. When it does, she does not take Charles’s advice. Instead, she runs as if her life depends on it. In a surreal montage of her past and present selves, Larraín shows a 12-year-old Diana chasing her friends on the lawn, then at 17, flying past in a school uniform, and at 20, tripping on the hem of her wedding dress, but hurtling on regardless. She is wild, unrestrained, luminous, and free, and the sequence is one of the film’s most moving and exuberant moments – one that precipitates Diana’s decision to live on her own terms, not those of the royal family. Flurries of movement such as this one have acted as a signpost for freedom since the start of film. Yet in the past couple of months, a slew of new movies have made emphasised one kind of movement in particular, with scenes of women running. Since Paul Thomas Anderson’s Licorice Pizza was released, social media has been populated with gifs of its star Alana Haim running through Los Angeles – arms pumping, hair blowing, grinning widely (Haim has joked about becoming “so fit” on set). In the forthcoming Norwegian drama The Worst Person in the World, directed by Joachim Trier, the protagonist Julie (Renate Reinsve) runs down the middle of the street euphorically in a scene that is spotlighted by the film’s poster. Both Haim and Reinsve are relative newcomers to the big screen; the beauty of their performances lies in how unvarnished they feel, and running, specifically (unlike other kinds of movement, such as dance), adds to this uncalculated feeling – it’s more about letting go than looking good. In visual terms, running has an inherently cinematic quality: film is, after all, a medium that celebrates movement. But as Richard Dyer wrote in 1994 about the action movie Speed, the freedom to move and traverse space unquestioned involves a privilege “that is coded as male (and straight and white, too) but to which all humans need access” (we should add non-disabled to his list). He noted that the pattern of thrilling audiences with sensational movement was common to films that celebrated male power or machismo, and that therefore took bodily freedom as a given. For female performers, on-screen movement has tended to be more limited, often bound to stereotypes of docility and submission, or slowed-down moments of erotic display. In her 1975 essay Visual Pleasure and Narrative Cinema, film theorist Laura Mulvey wrote that “in a world ordered by sexual imbalance, pleasure in looking has been split between active/male and passive/female.” This division has a physical dimension – the requirement that a woman’s “beauty” be available to the camera might have interfered with any possibility of moving too quickly or freely. For instance, Léa Seydoux spent much of her screen time in Wes Anderson’s The French Dispatch naked, posing for a portrait by contorting herself into impossible shape after impossible shape, dangling above hot radiators and hovering on a stool, constantly struggling to keep still. As Anderson’s film cheekily concedes, inertia has, for centuries, been the essential style of women in visual culture, or as John Berger wrote 50 years ago, “Men act and women appear.” For the most part, however, women have finally begun to play a much more (literally) active role in film. The shift towards women who explode into movement suggests an important turning point in the culture of images that normalise, sanction, and direct ideas about gender, especially those that have so often limited the female body to the status of ornament. Women are now fronting superhero films such as Wonder Woman and Birds of Prey and even giving James Bond much needed back-up in No Time to Die. Watching women’s bodies in the throes of action, whether running, fighting, or flying, has a cathartic effect. However, this movement tends to be more spectacular – the product of a rigorously trained, aestheticised body – than realistic. To reduce this feeling of empowerment to moments of violence and combat, and in the context of films that otherwise say very little about gender or feminism more broadly, feels like a return to the problems raised by Dyer, in other words, to a reification of bodily power without acknowledgment of politics, or to a celebration of capacity carte blanche. If women now have more freedom to move on screen, what might they move towards? In Joanna Hogg’s semi-autobiographical sequel, The Souvenir Part II, young film-maker, Julie (Honor Swinton Byrne), struggles to complete her thesis film, plagued by trauma from a past relationship, creative indecision and professors who fail to understand her vision. When we finally get to see her completed project, she takes us on a surreal, singular journey through grief and heartbreak that triumphantly bursts into life as she sprints across a field, only stopping to pick up a Super 8 camera. Whereas Julie had been reticent to move forward, she now runs towards what she wants – that is, to make films, and to make them her way. The final leg of Spencer is likewise something of a marathon, replete with scene after vivid scene of running. Diana’s physical transformation, from highly surveilled by her handlers and wrapped in ornate gowns and jewellery, to sweatshirt-clad and sprinting, is a rejection of the obedient performance of wealth and hyper-femininity that she is conscripted to show to the world, as well as a symbolic escape from her fraught marriage. In new films such as these, the heroines aren’t simply running down well-trodden paths; rather, they mark a turn – or perhaps, a sprint – away from them. Physical movement precipitates larger departures, changes, or victories in these narratives; if running is meant to signify freedom, this also means freedom from the narrow ways in which gender gets embodied on screen, and other compulsory expectations that keep women figuratively and actually standing still, or following tired, normative scripts. At the end of Hogg’s film, Julie is advised by a director friend, Patrick (Richard Ayoade), to go “Onward. That’s my direction.” He then gestures down the street, but instead of following him, she stops and says decisively (perhaps for the first time in the film), “I’m this way.” Patrick pauses and adds, “Good decision.” They depart in opposite directions; Julie takes her own path.Margaret Atwood, Ben Okri and JM Coetzee have joined more than 100 writers from around the world in calling on the Rwandan president to intervene in the case of the poet Innocent Bahati, who disappeared one year ago today. According to human rights organisation PEN International, Bahati was last seen at a hotel in Nyanza district, in the Southern Province of Rwanda, on 7 February 2021. The poet, who is well-known in Rwanda and had published poetry on YouTube and Facebook, as well as regularly performing at live events, failed to return to Kigali, and his phones have been switched off since. Media reports state that his disappearance was reported to the Rwanda Investigation Bureau on 9 February, with a spokesperson claiming that he was not in the agency’s custody, but that an investigation was “ongoing”. Bahati is also a teacher at the Green Hills Academy in Kigali. Now more than 100 writers and artists have written to Rwandan president Paul Kagame to express their “grave concern” about Bahati’s life and whereabouts, stating their belief that Bahati’s disappearance is “in relation to his poetry and critical expression on issues affecting Rwandan society”. “We are bringing this matter to your attention, with a plea for urgent action because, one year later, Bahati is still missing and his situation unknown. We note with concern that the Rwandan authorities are yet to disclose any progress or outcome of investigations on his case,” say the authors, led by PEN International president Burhan Sönmez, and also including major international names from Paul Auster to Gioconda Belli, Jonathan Franzen, Yann Martel, Elif Shafak and Michael Ondaatje. They point to reports that Bahati disappeared in a similar manner in 2017 after posting a critical comment on Facebook, reappearing in police custody after several days, and subsequently being imprisoned without trial for three months, although he was not charged for any offence. Bahati was only freed after a court order. And they highlight media reports of a speech in March 2021 attributed to the Rwandan secretary of state in charge of culture, Edouard Bamporiki, in which Bamporiki is reported to have said that “when poetry loses its way, it can mislead the public. It is for this reason that I ask you to forget the difficulties that Rwandan poetry community has known in recent times, but rather to do our part to advise and reprimand those amongst who stray from the right path.” “Coming shortly after the disappearance of Bahati in 2021, these chilling remarks by an official of your administration are hardly coincidental. They suggest a pattern of intolerance to free poetic expression by officials, and they legitimately raise suspicions that Bahati may have been disappeared in relation to his poetry,” say the authors. “We believe that someone within the Rwandan administration knows about the whereabouts or fate of Bahati … Poetry is not a crime. The world awaits to hear the voice of Innocent Bahati, again.”Two years ago, I prayed that the government might make permanent the cancelling of GCSE exams because of Covid. This wasteful, costly, cruel and pointless ritual of teenage evaluation could at last be binned; schools could revert from being testing machines to actually educating children. No such luck. This week, thousands of young people will start their “mocks”, driving through to exams beginning in May, then results in August to prepare for further examination at A-level. For some, half a year will have been spent being measured. Ever since Michael Gove abolished continuous teacher assessment, the exam hall has become the high temple – or torture chamber – of schooling, the great God of metrics rules. This year, in case the chaos of the past two years has not been “fair”, the education secretary, Nadhim Zahawi, has decided to make things a bit easier. Maths and science exam papers will include formulas which are normally memorised, and humanities papers will allow a wider range of essay topics. In addition, examiners are being asked to be “more generous” to allow for the disruption of the pandemic. Lower scores can fit higher grades. We might ask if, in future, individual children can have their results upgraded if their personal year has been “disrupted”. On the other hand, Zahawi is angry that teachers who have been “informally” assessing their pupils over the past two years have been biased in their favour. How dare they think their pupils might have done better outside the diktat of Zahawi’s sacred regime? Indeed, how dare they know their pupils better than he does? That is a job for statisticians, not teachers. Zahawi is retaliating with proposed tests at 14 as well as at GCSE, with increased central inspection and with a state national tutoring company, costing £25m, whose “catch-up” tutors actually sit in schools. It should do wonders for teacher morale. The truth is, only exams matter. No other European country has subjected its state education to such total nationalisation. The irony is that China, whose dirigiste schools have long entranced Whitehall, is now moving in precisely the opposite direction. President Xi last year ordered an end to early years testing and homework. He cracked down on private tutoring and promoted practical courses at the expense of academic ones. Whitehall should catch up with its hero. We can only weep to think how much learning relevant to a child’s life in the community is being sacrificed in favour of Zahawi’s maths formulas – which not one child in a thousand will ever see again. I cringe to look at a GCSE curriculum. Compulsory maths and science, but no compulsory health, economics, law, civics, computing or human relationships. History and geography are mere “options”. What cult is in charge of this monastery? We have passed through three years of a golden opportunity. Without GCSEs we could have seen whether three years of a different sort of schooling – one involving home and school, online and in-person, individual as well as group experience – might have given a cohort of children a better preparation for life. Instead all we have demonstrated is that we have a public service in the grip of archaic interests and lobbyists with too much to lose – that, and an education secretary lacking the guts to stand up to them. Simon Jenkins is a Guardian columnistThe Chinese tennis player Peng Shuai has given her first interview to an independent media organisation since she alleged on Weibo that a senior Chinese official had coerced her into sex, saying it was an “enormous misunderstanding”. The interview with the French sports daily L’Équipe came as the International Olympic Committee said it was not up to them or anyone else “to judge, in one way or another, her position”. Peng also announced in the interview that she was retiring from tennis. Peng disappeared briefly from public life after the Weibo post in November, sparking a major international campaign calling for confirmation from the Chinese authorities that she was safe and well. Speaking to L’Équipe in Beijing, Peng said her original statement had been misunderstood. She said she had never accused the former vice-premier Zhang Gaoli of sexual assault and denied she had disappeared from public view afterwards. She was accompanied to the interview by the Chinese Olympic Committee’s chief of staff, who also acted as translator, the report said. L’Équipe was also required to submit questions in advance and publish her comments verbatim in question-and-answer form, as preconditions for the interview. Peng thanked everyone for caring about her wellbeing, but also questioned why it had been “exaggerated”. “I didn’t think there would be such concern and I would like to know: why such concern?” she said. Peng said there had been a “enormous misunderstanding” over her post, which she confirmed she deleted herself a little under 30 minutes after publishing it. “I erased it,” she said, adding: “Why? Because I wanted to.” She did not give further details. Peng’s latest statement – an apparent attempt to ease international concerns over her wellbeing – generated further suspicion. Teng Biao, a US-based Chinese human rights lawyer, said on Twitter: “The simple truth is, #Pengshuai is forced to say what the Chinese authorities want her to say.” The Women’s Tennis Association also admitted its concerns over Peng have not been alleviated. “It’s always good to see Peng Shuai, whether in an interview or attending the Olympic Games. However, her recent in-person interview does not alleviate any of our concerns about her initial post from 2 November. “To reiterate our view, Peng took a bold step in publicly coming forth with the accusation that she was sexually assaulted by a senior Chinese government leader. As we would do with any of our players globally, we have called for a formal investigation into the allegations by the appropriate authorities and an opportunity for the WTA to meet with Peng – privately – to discuss her situation. We continue to hold firm on our position and our thoughts remain with Peng Shuai.” Peng had posted an essay to Weibo in early November, describing an on-again-off-again consensual affair with the then 75-year-old, and an incident in which he allegedly pressured her into having sex after inviting her to his house to play tennis with him and his wife. Amid what she described as “complicated feelings”, they allegedly rekindled the affair, until an argument and his failure to meet her shortly before the post. In the L’Équipe interview, Peng reiterated comments she gave to a Singaporean state-controlled outlet in December, saying she never accused Zhang or anyone else of sexually assaulting her. “I hope that we no longer distort the meaning of this post. And I also hope that we don’t add more hype on this,” she said. “I never said anyone sexually assaulted me.” In her post, Peng had described Zhang pressing her into having sex and her not agreeing, before relenting. “After dinner I still did not want to, and you said you hated me! You also said that in these seven years, you never forgot me and that you would be good for me etc etc,” she wrote, according to a translation by What’s On Weibo. “I was afraid and panicked and carrying the emotions of seven year ago, I agreed … yes, we had sex.” The post went viral despite its quick removal from Weibo. With efforts to contact Peng proving fruitless, and the topic completely censored inside China, the head of the Women’s Tennis Association (WTA) Steve Simon went public with his concern for her welfare, and global tennis stars began advocating under the hashtag #WhereIsPengShuai. Even as the Peng saga has been widely reported by world’s media for a number of months, it remains off limits to people inside China. Mentions of Peng and the incident could not be found on Weibo, the country’s dominant social media platform. Late in November, almost three weeks after Peng’s post, China’s external English-language state media began disputing the global concerns, publishing a translation of an email said to be from Peng to Simon – and which Peng later said she did write – and videos of several apparently choreographed public appearances. In the interview with L’Équipe, Peng also said she “never disappeared” and she didn’t know why such concern spread. “It’s just that a lot of people, like my friends, including from the IOC, messaged me, and it was quite impossible to reply to so many messages,” she said, adding that she had responded to emails from friends and the WTA but she had difficulty accessing the organisation’s online communications system. The IOC spokesperson Mark Adams on Monday said it was doing “everything we can to ensure she is happy”. “I don’t think it’s up to us to be able to judge in one way, just as it’s not for you to judge, in one way or another, her position,” he said. Despite multiple attempts by the WTA, only the IOC has been able to meet with Peng. Questions have previously been raised about the IOC’s handling of the matter, with the organisation accused of too readily accepting Chinese government assurances as to Peng’s welfare ahead of the Winter Olympics. The IOC also announced on Monday its president, Thomas Bach, had met with Peng face to face on Saturday, alongside the former chair of the Athletes’ Commission and the IOC member Kirsty Coventry. “During the dinner, the three spoke about their common experience as athletes at the Olympic Games, and Peng Shuai spoke of her disappointment at not being able to qualify for the Olympic Games Tokyo 2020,” a statement said. It added that Peng had accepted an invitation to meet again in Europe and to stay in contact with Coventry. The statement did not mention the allegations or Bach’s recent comments that he would support her if she wanted an investigation into Zhang. In her interview, Peng urged against combining sport and politics, a key message of Beijing during the Olympics as it faces widespread scrutiny and criticism over its human rights records, with diplomatic boycotts and social media campaigns for commercial or viewing boycotts. “My sentimental problems, my private life, should not be involved in sports and politics,” she said. “Sport must not be politicised because when it is, most of the time that amounts to turning one’s back on the Olympic spirit, and it goes against the will of the world of sport and of the athletes.” Additional reporting by Vincent NiIn the sample clues below, the links take you to explainers from our beginners series. The setter’s name often links to an interview with him or her, in case you feel like getting to know these people better. The news in clues At prime minister’s questions last week, the prime minister gave a strong whiff of “you’re not still angry – I thought we’d agreed we were past that”. He would be advised not to turn to crosswords for escape. In the Independent, alone, we have, from Rodriguez (known locally as Picaroon), this clue … 9a Ideal Number Ten parties impossible to find out (14) [ wordplay: anagram (‘parties’) of IDEALNUMBERTEN ] [ definition: impossible to find out ] … for UNDETERMINABLE and from Tees, this clue … 16a Scandal: Tories for example shown exit? (9) [ wordplay: what the Tories are an example of + synonym for ‘exit’ ] [ definition: scandal ] … for the new term PARTYGATE. Looking forward, Wednesday will see the Guardian’s 100th puzzle from Imogen. Latter patter More prime ministers. Here’s a clue from Pasquale in the quiptic, the Guardian’s puzzle “for beginners and those in a hurry”: 19d Churchill is victorious – then not, after upset (7) [ wordplay: synonym for ‘is victorious’ + NOT backwards (‘after upset’) ] [ definition: Churchill ] It’s WINSTON, a name that has been given to various Churchills down the years and which, the Oxford Dictionary of First Names tells us, was invented by the Churchills. Unrelated to the old name Wynnstan, the first Winston was a 1620 Churchill who was given his mother’s surname as a first name, the surname itself coming from a Cotswolds village. Nowadays, you don’t have to be landed to pull off the surname-to-first-name switch, and the practice of assigning to a baby what used to be called its mother’s birth name is occasionally flagged up as the latest trend. A different quirk of naming seems to me to remain largely the preserve of the posh: the unexpected pronunciation. My favourite example, and the subject of our next challenge, belongs to another prime minister. According to family tradition, there is a perfectly good reason why it’s not pronounced the way it looks: when caught during a cattle-rustling expedition, the prime minister’s ancestor called out his name to alert his henchmen to his plight. They misunderstood him, and all went home, which is why the clan has since pronounced it “Hume”. So, reader: how would you clue DOUGLAS-HOME? Now is as good a time as any to recall this paper’s late journalist Simon Hoggart on the former PM: Sir Alec Douglas-Home, who was British prime minister for one year from 1963-64, used to produce crosswords for the Times of London, back in the 1930s. Once, he was sitting next to someone on a train who was struggling with a crossword he had compiled. The man asked for help, and was deeply impressed when his companion got all the answers, apparently without a moment’s thought. Cluing competition Thanks for your clues for ALBUM. The audacity award goes, of course, to Montano for “19 + 21 × 25 ÷ 30 = 33 1/3?”, a thing of sheer beauty that prompted a smashing discussion. Of those clues that make use of the last three letters of the answer, my favourites are Faiton77’s “This may contain photos of naked male buttocks” and Minusfifteen’s “Gangster behind collection”. The runners-up are Peshwari’s “Collection of songs used in musical bumps” and IanBrad’s “Rumours, for example, register”; the winner is TonyCollman’s Hofstadteresque “Could this be a cd?” Kludos to Tony; please leave entries for this fortnight’s competition – as well as your non-print finds and picks from the broadsheet cryptics – below. The latest in our collaborative playlist Healing Music Recorded in 2020-22 to Accompany a Solve or Even Listen to is from Fatoumata Diawara. Puzzling elsewhere We’ve discussed the Two Ronnies crossword sketch set in a railway carriage. Now, Dave of the crossword podcast Off-Grid, has created a new kind of cerebral challenge: is it possible to reverse-engineer a crossword from a novel or TV show, based on whichever clues we’ve heard about in the story? Here’s a masterclass in how to do it for the Two Ronnies puzzle; there’s plenty more fodder in our Top 10 of fictional crosswords. Clue of the Fortnight Nutmeg’s construction is of course delightful … 12a Who’s last to be welcomed by assembled crewmen? (8) [ wordplay: final letter of WHO (‘who’s last’) inside (‘to be welcomed by’) angram of (‘assembled’) CREWMEN ] [ O inside NEWCMER ] [ definition suggested by the whole clue ] … but, she still leaves me feeling for the snubbed NEWCOMER. Stay safe. • Find a collection of explainers, interviews and other helpful bits and bobs at alanconnor.com. • The Shipping Forecast Puzzle Book by Alan Connor, which is partly but not predominantly cryptic, can be ordered from the Guardian Bookshop.With just a few words, Andrew Bailey, the governor of the Bank of England, perfectly crystallised the state and the fate of the nation. Tone-deaf and socially oblivious, the voice booming out from the economic seat of power captured the history of the last lost decade. “We do need to see restraint in pay bargaining, otherwise it will get out of control,” Bailey told the BBC last week. As wages continue to fall, inflation is set to hit 7.25% in a couple of months, while pay will rise by far less. TUC leaders protest that “workers have been hammered and now they’re coming back for more.” “This is a very tough message to swallow when take-home pay is falling,” the Institute for Fiscal Studies director, Paul Johnson, tells me, pointing to a decade of lost pay – the longest period of pay stagnation in many years. The governor’s Marie Antoinette-style insouciance struck a wearily familiar chord. This authentic voice of social negligence has made the British economy one of the most unequal and unproductive among its European equivalents. Pre-pandemic, real wage growth in the UK became the weakest among the advanced nations in the G20. The prime minister and chancellor brag of the “fastest growth in the G7”, but only as we climb out of the deepest slump. When the governor says “we do need to see a moderation of wage rises”, he ignores his own prediction of falling incomes. “Why wages? Why didn’t he call for profits to be squeezed?” Torsten Bell of the Resolution Foundation asks with a rhetorical flourish. He tells me: “The big picture is that wages have been rubbish the whole decade, while productivity plummeted after 2016 due to Brexit uncertainty.” The governor’s destructive interest rate rises are a doomed response to global price inflation that lies beyond the Bank’s control. This kneejerk call to cut pay is just a natural banker’s reflex. A silent class war has taken place during the past decade, as the winners have carried off undreamed-of booty. Thanks mostly to the Bank’s quantitative easing which inflated assets, not productive investment, the decade created billionaires, whose wealth rose by 310% according to The Decade the Rich Won, a new documentary on BBC Two. There were no such calls for a modicum of “restraint” from those whose wealth ballooned after the financial crisis. Quantitative easing gifted such a vast asset bonanza to the already wealthy that it astounded even the English financier Guy Hands. “Those of us in private equity got incredibly wealthy. The effect was the rich got richer,” he told the BBC. Was he grateful? He removed himself and his company, Terra Firma, to shelter in Guernsey. This is the great levelling down: pay and homeownership is falling. Over the past decade, property prices have risen by around 60%. Public sector pay has been hit the hardest, falling 2.4% just in the year to November, says the IFS, despite Boris Johnson proclaiming the pay freeze to be over. Local government workers’ annual salaries are down by £1,600, with teachers 8% behind on their 2010 salaries, according to the TUC. Falling pay isn’t just about hungry families relying on food banks. It damages public services, too. In the NHS, with its impossible waiting list, nurses’ pay is already down by £2,700 a year. I talked to Ella, a highly specialised neurosurgery nurse, precious to the NHS; but she has just left, sad to go. She was paid £29,000 – around the national median – but now she earns more than £41,000 in a private hospital. It’s not just the money: in her NHS section there were 12 staff vacancies, and she alone cared for eight very sick patients. “It gives you nightmares and panic attacks that you’ll make mistakes. You do bank shifts to make up the pay and it’s very, very hard.” Now she cares for four patients with a senior nurse supervisor, in a department with no vacancies: nine other experienced nurses left her NHS hospital with her. “If they had the staff, if the work was manageable, if the pay was enough without overtime, none of us would leave the NHS.” Her story is a warning: an underfunded NHS that underpays and understaffs will break the health service if the contrast with private health grows too great. The governor’s spectre of wages rising “out of control” was greeted with such indignation that No 10 slapped him down, the prime minister desperately seeking popularity. However, the austerian chancellor’s silence was widely taken as approval for Bailey’s stance. His trope summons up scary 1970s folk myths, in which unions were blamed for striving to keep up with mushrooming inflation. In 1974, Labour forged a social contract to curb inflation by holding down prices if unions held back wage demands. It fell apart when wages still fell below prices. Nowadays the governor offers nothing in exchange for pay “restraint”, a sign of how weak unions have become. They are virtually absent in a private sector where an insecure, atomised workforce faces “fire and rehire” and temporary contract threats. Only a few niches, such as HGV drivers, gain anything from current labour shortages. Though unions are stronger in the public sector, pay is hardly “out of control” there. While nurses and teachers feel the moral arm-twisting of caring for their patients and pupils, the comparatively good pay of train drivers proves the value of flexing union muscles. Meanwhile, as Johnson woos his rightwing MPs by ditching any “lefty” policies, the government’s promised employment bill – which was supposed to ease the worst of gig economy brutality – has vanished. Expect no aspirant for Johnson’s job to to pay injustice. The one hope for wages, says the TUC, is a Labour government implementing Rachel Reeves’ pledge for fair pay agreements across every sector. Labour would end zero-hours contracts and bogus self-employment, with guaranteed access to a union and employee working rights from day one. Until that day, the boot is on the banker’s foot. Polly Toynbee is a Guardian columnistLata Mangeshkar, “the nightingale of Bollywood”, who has died aged 92 after contracting Covid-19, was a much-loved Indian national and international figure, whose songs provided the backdrop to the lives of millions for seven decades. Music sung by her was heard constantly across India, in shops, restaurants, taxis or on the radio, and she became known as “Didi”, or sister, because so many people identified with her often emotional songs. And yet she was best known as a playback singer, a vocalist who does not appear onscreen but provides the soundtrack for films in which actors lip sync to her singing. Her output was extraordinary – she is estimated to have recorded some 25,000 songs, which appeared in more than a 1,000 Hindi films, and she also sang in more than 20 different Indian languages. With an impressive vocal range, covering four octaves, she became massively popular with film directors for her ability to understand the context in which her songs would be used. Mangeshkar did not just sing, but made sure that her performance matched the storyline and the character, saying that she always read the lyrics and listened to the tune before agreeing to sing. She first came to national fame in India with the song Aayega Aanewala (meaning “the one who is destined to come will definitely come”), which she recorded in 1949 while still a teenager. A charming and dramatic song, which featured in the film Mahal that year, it was the start of a remarkable career in which she interpreted work by all the major Indian film composers. For more than three decades she recorded hundreds of songs by the composing duo of Laxmikant-Pyarelal (Laxmikant Shantaram Kudalkar and Pyarelal Ramprasad Sharma), including such hits as Sheesha Ho Ya Dil Ho (from the film Aasha, in 1980). She also worked with SD Burman, and later with his celebrated son the composer RD Burman (who would marry her sister Asha), recording RD Burman songs including Bahon Mein Chale Aao (from the film Anamica, 1973). Later she collaborated with the most internationally celebrated Bollywood composer, AR Rahman, and sang several of his best known songs including Jiya Jale (from the 1998 romantic thriller Dil Se) and Luka Chuppi (from the 2006 film Rang De Basanti), which she recorded when she was in her mid-70s. Rahman remembered how carefully she would rehearse: “She would sit with her assistant, and would start singing very slowly, with every lyric clear.” She was, he said, “part of a soul, part of a consciousness of India”. If she had any competition as India’s finest playback singer, it was from her younger sister Asha Bhosle. After all, it was Asha who had Cornershop’s 1997 hit Brimful of Asha written about her, and who had recorded the most number of songs (according to The Guinness Book of World Records Lata was ahead in 1974 but Asha overtook her), and it was Asha who recorded with the experimental Kronos Quartet. Lata insisted there was no sibling rivalry, saying; “we’re very close, we never competed with each other.” Mangeshkar was born in Indore, in what is now Madhya Pradesh state, the oldest child of Shevanti (later renamed Shuddhamati) and Pandit Deenanath Mangeshkar, a musician and teacher who ran a touring theatre company. Lata never went to school, as she quit on the first day when the teacher refused to allow her to bring her then 10-month-old sister Asha into the classroom. Much of her childhood was spent singing alongside her father at concerts. He died in 1942, when she was 13, and she then had to support her mother and four siblings. A close family friend, Vinayak Damodar Karnataki, offered her work with his film company Navyug Chitrapat, acting in minor roles. When the company moved to Bombay (now Mumbai) in 1945, she and her family moved with them. She said she disliked acting “because I was very small and hated putting on makeup and having to laugh and cry in front of the cameras”. But she loved playback singing, and was given her first break with a song in the film Majboor (1948). Then came the film Mahal, which included her hit song, and she rapidly became known as India’s Playback Queen. Though most celebrated for her film work, she also gave concerts in India and abroad. In 1963, shortly after the Sino-Indian war, she sang the patriotic Hindi song Aye Mere Watan Ke Logon (“Oh people of my country”) to an audience including Jawaharlal Nehru, the prime minister, who is said to have been moved to tears. In 1974 she performed many of her Bollywood hits at the Royal Albert Hall in London, backed by musicians including SD Burman, and was hailed as the first Indian artist to have performed there. Away from music, her passions included fast cars and cricket – she would insist on taking time off to watch matches. The former Indian captain Virat Kohli was among those who paid tribute to her, as did Imran Khan, another leading cricketer and now Pakistan’s prime minister. He wrote that “the subcontinent has lost one of the truly great voices the world has known” – a reminder that she had a vast following beyond India’s borders. Mangeshkar may have recorded thousands of emotional love songs, but she never married. Asked about her private life by the Hindustan Times, she said, “there are some things only for the heart to know. Let’s keep it that way.” In 2001 she received India’s highest honour for civilians, the Bharat Ratna. She is survived by her younger siblings Meena, Asha, Usha and Hridaynath, all of whom are singers or composers. • Lata Mangeshkar, singer, born 29 September 1929; died 6 February 2022This dull, stilted, suspense drama is not to be confused with either the excellent TV series of the same name starring Stephen Graham and Jodie Comer, or the Beatles’ larky 1965 collaboration with director Richard Lester (same title, but with extra punctuation). Perhaps this Help’s writer-director, Blake Ridder, and his producers were hoping that folks surfing streaming platforms might click on their production thinking it was either of these two far superior entertainments. Accidental viewers are not likely to stick with this unless they really want to know what happens to three or so thinly drawn characters locked in a psychodrama of suspicion, betrayal and unconvincingly faked lust. Having just split up with her long-distance lover, Grace (Emily Redpath) comes to visit her old friend Liv (Sarah Alexandra Marks) and partner Edward (Louis James) in the countryside. A neighbour, David (played by Ridder himself), who appears to either be autistic or have another neurodivergent condition, warns Grace enigmatically as she arrives that “it’s bad”. This, presumably, applies to Liv and Edward’s tempestuous relationship but could just as easily be a judgment on the film itself. Gradually, Grace realises that there is violence happening behind closed doors, but the big twist reveals that things are not as they seem. While we wouldn’t want to spoil the surprise, we can’t let it pass that the reveal is predicated on a very dodgy understanding of a particular type of domestic violence. This is Ridder’s first full-length feature after having made dozens of shorts (according to IMDB), on many of which he is credited as cinematographer, editor, producer and actor as well as writer-director. You would think after all that practice, this step-up to feature making would be a bit better. The biggest problem, apart from the turgid pace and confused screenwriting, is directing actors: the cast perform with the wooden, inert energy of hostages making a proof-of-life video. Worst of all, a cute jack russell terrier named Polly gets accidentally offed. Some cinematic crimes are unforgivable. • Help is released on 14 February on digital platforms.The mutual insurer LV= has launched a boardroom clear-out following the high-profile failure of its management to sell the company to a US private equity firm last year. The 197-year old firm, which failed in December to win enough support from its members for a plan to sell itself to Bain Capital, said its chairman would step down from the start of April, while three other directors would also leave. Alan Cook, who had faced heavy criticism over the demutualisation plan, will be replaced by Seamus Creedon on an interim basis. He is a non-executive director at the firm and will lead the process to reshape the board. The company confirmed that talks with its fellow mutual insurer Royal London had been reopened following the failure of the Bain Capital deal, reigniting a process that supporters of keeping LV= in mutual ownership said could have offered a better solution than selling to a private equity firm. LV= said three other non-executives would also leave as it reshapes the board, including David Barral, who will depart after reaching the end of his six-year term on 7 March, while Alison Hutchinson and Luke Savage will also step down. Hutchinson had faced criticism for sitting on the board of the member-owned Yorkshire Building Society at the same time as backing the demutualisation of LV=. However, LV= said its chief executive, Mark Hartigan, who had faced stiff criticism over the Bain Capital plan, would remain with the company. Creedon said Hartigan had been doing an excellent job of running the insurer. “The board takes full responsibility for the unsuccessful transaction, which Mark actively advocated on its behalf, and my colleagues and I have high confidence in him and his team,” he said. Creedon said the firm had common interests with Royal London in promoting a healthy and vibrant mutual sector. “We felt it right to take time to understand the message members gave the board. Put simply, our members told us that what they viewed as the modest financial advantages of the transaction were not worth the loss of ownership and voting rights for our million-plus members,” he added. Gareth Thomas, the Labour and Co-operative MP who chairs the all party parliamentary group for mutuals, said he hoped LV= would now be more open with its members about the risks and benefits in their talks with Royal London. He said: “After LV=’s dismal and thankfully unsuccessful attempt to demutualise and sell up to the controversial US private equity giant Bain Capital, it’s good to see the board have heard their members’ message and are now committed to a mutual future.”A man who was paralysed in a motorcycle accident in 2017 has regained the ability to walk after doctors implanted electrodes in his spine to reactivate his muscles. Michel Roccati lost all feeling and movement in his legs after the crash that severed his spinal cord, but can stand and walk with electrical stimulation that is controlled wirelessly from a tablet. The research team said the electrical implant had helped Roccati and two other patients – all men aged 29 to 41 – to stand, walk, ride a bike and even kick their legs in a swimming pool, raising hopes that small, implantable devices can help paralysed people regain more independence. Rocatti uses the device as part of his routine training and rehabilitation to help strengthen his muscles and keep fit. “Now it’s a part of my daily life,” he said. Developed by Prof Grégoire Courtine, a neuroscientist at the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Lausanne, and Prof Jocelyne Bloch, a neurosurgeon at Lausanne university hospital, the system uses a soft, flexible electrode that is laid on top of the spinal cord nerves, underneath the vertebrae. The electrode delivers electrical pulses to spinal cord nerves that control different muscles in the legs and torso. The pulses, in turn, are controlled by software on a tablet that issues instructions for a certain action, such as standing, walking, cycling, or kicking the legs for swimming. The device helped all three patients to stand within hours of the operation, but their performance improved with three to four months of practice and training. “It was not perfect at the beginning, but they could train very early to have a more fluid gait,” said Bloch. She added that she expected similar results in women. “Thanks to this technology, we’ve been able to target individuals with the most serious spinal cord injuries,” Courtine said. “By controlling these implants, we can activate the spinal cord like the brain would do naturally to have the patient stand, walk, swim or ride a bike.” The patients are following a training programme that has let them rebuild lost muscle and move around more independently, even allowing them to stand and drink in a bar. To perform a particular movement, the person selects the appropriate option from their tablet. The tablet then contacts a pacemaker-like device in their abdomen that sends signals to the implanted electrode. This stimulates the different sets of muscles for the right time and duration to push up into a standing position, or swing the legs to walk, for example. Details of the system are reported in Nature Medicine.Australia could resurrect its car industry in an “environmentally and socially transformative” way by drawing on its rich mineral resources to make electric vehicles, according to a new report. The plan for a new electric vehicle manufacturing sector is laid out in a report titled Rebuilding Vehicle Manufacturing in Australia, from the Australia Institute’s Carmichael Centre. The report says with 34,258 people still working in car manufacturing making components for the global supply chain and sections of old car factories still intact, Australia has a strong base from which to restart the industry. Even if Australia is unable to revive the industry to the point where it can make an electric car from scratch, there would still be much to gain from expanding into a portion of the global automotive supply chain such as batteries, the report says. Australia is already expanding its production of lithium and other critical minerals needed to build batteries and other electronic infrastructure that will underpin the global zero emissions transition. In 2017 the extraction of spodumene – crushed raw lithium – alone was worth $1.1bn, but processing it into precursor materials and then making batteries could create an industry worth $22.1bn. Australia’s domestic car industry shuttered in 2017 due to a high Australian dollar brought by the mining boom, as well as political opposition. Lead author of the report, Dr Mark Dean, said a new EV industry may not be a “panacea” to Australia’s lack of ambition on climate change, but building a new, hi-tech industry would make the transition easier by spreading the benefits. “For decades the auto industry was the glue that held communities together. It provided security and good standards of living,” Dean said. “What you’ll be doing is saying to all these different people in all these different communities that by creating an electric vehicle industry-driven future, you will benefit. “We need people to mine these commodities, process them, and we need them to be transported so they can be manufactured – everyone along the way benefits.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The report recommends a commission be set up with representatives from government, business and unions to map out how a new industry can be created. It also recommends any new industry be powered by renewable energy, clear incentives to encourage take up, including fuel efficiency standards, and efforts made to attract major car companies. AMWU national president, Andrew Dettmer, said making electric cars offered a “once in a generation opportunity” that would create a “virtuous cycle” of growing employment and innovation while lowering emissions. “As far as we’re concerned this is a great opportunity to rebuild from the bottom up a new vehicle industry in Australia,” Dettmer said. “But we need to see government take it up and, for once, be bold.” Dettmer said electric cars had fewer parts than petrol vehicles, but the complexity of guidance systems, suspension systems, batteries and collision avoidance and other systems required much more work. Behyad Jafari from the Electric Vehicle Council said Australia “absolutely has the opportunity to do large-scale industry manufacturing” but warned it wasn’t going to “fall into our laps”. With waiting lists growing and EV sales having tripled over the past two years, the biggest challenge facing the industry was supply. “We sell about 1m vehicles every year and we have 19m cars on the road to work our way through,” Jafari said. “We know that when someone buys a car, that will stay on the road for 15 years. If we plan to reach net zero emissions by next decade we need to be done with petrol and diesel. “Building electric vehicles here means we could ensure we’ll have a supply of electric vehicles available for us to buy, which would be a really big boost to decarbonising our entire market.” Bill Gillespie, president of SEA Electric in the Asia Pacific, an Australian company that makes and converts trucks and buses to electric, said when other governments worldwide were competing to attract new industry Australia lacked clear policy. “If you were in the US you wouldn’t look to Australia and say let’s establish a zero emission truck business, because the ground is not very fertile at the moment,” Gillespie said. “Like the world’s longest road trip, Australia will transition but it will be slow and companies will be left asking, are we there yet?”We know that just over half of all people who work in parliament say they have experienced at least one incident of bullying, sexual harassment or actual or attempted sexual assault in a commonwealth parliamentary workplace. And 1% say they have experienced some form of actual or attempted sexual assault at work. I was one of those people. As a university student I volunteered in the electorate office of a federal parliamentarian in the early 2000s. I volunteered because I wanted to help the party and because I hoped volunteering would be a stepping stone to my dream job as a political staffer. I did not volunteer for what happened next, which was that I was sexually assaulted and sexually harassed by the parliamentarian’s chief of staff. The man who assaulted me was the person who supervised my volunteer work and who I relied on for references – in effect, he was my boss. At the time the more serious incidents I experienced were generally not categorised as sexual assault. Instead, they were put into boxes labelled “dumb decisions made while drunk” or “bad sex with a guy who turned out to be a jerk”. These days I believe the actions of the man involved would be considered criminal behaviour. Back then, I did not report those incidents to anyone because I suspected that if I had the consequences would have been worse for me than him. He would have kept his job. I would have been portrayed as someone who was promiscuous and trying to “sleep her way to the top”. I did not keep quiet to protect him. I kept quiet to protect myself. I have stayed quiet for over twenty years. Now it is finally time for me to speak up. I am one of the people who made a submission to sex discrimination commissioner Kate Jenkins’s report Set the Standard: Report on the Independent Review into Commonwealth Parliamentary Workplaces. The release of the Set the Standard report has been met with shock from some people, while others – particularly women in politics – have been unsurprised by the report’s disturbing findings. The report makes it clear that these issues cut across the political spectrum. The prime minister, the leader of the opposition and other parliamentarians have acknowledged the need to address the matters raised in the report in a cross-party manner. The government has indicated that when parliament resumes this month, the statement of acknowledgment recommended in the report will be delivered. The statement will “acknowledge the harm caused by bullying, sexual harassment, and sexual assault in commonwealth parliamentary workplaces and a commitment to action and shared accountability”. While I look forward to hearing the statement of acknowledgement, our leaders’ words will ring hollow if they are not followed by immediate action. Firstly, all parties must commit to the full implementation of the 28 recommendations in the Set the Standard report. Secondly, there is an elephant in the room that needs to be addressed. You could say there are several elephants in a number of party rooms and parliamentarians’ offices. Our leaders lack moral authority on these issues while they continue to harbour and protect the alleged perpetrators of sexual assault, sexual harassment and bullying within their parties – and while they continue to rely upon those people’s votes. Allegations of sexual assault, sexual harassment and bullying are extremely serious. The report shows the trail of wreckage these types of incidents leave in their wake, for both the individuals who are affected and for their families. These allegations, both recent and historical, need to be investigated and, where substantiated, acted upon. In some cases, that may mean that the perpetrators lose their jobs. In others, it may also mean that they need to be dealt with by the courts. What cannot be allowed to happen is what has happened up until now – for these people to be protected and, in many cases, promoted, while only their victims have to face the devastating consequences of their behaviour. In my view, an under-reported aspect of workplace sexual misconduct is the link between those behaviours and other unethical behaviour. Often, it is the same people who are carrying out both sorts of activities. It should not come as a surprise to us that people who engage in one form of unethical conduct are often the same people who engage in other forms of unethical conduct. Stamping out any corrupt behaviour, including by the establishment of a commonwealth integrity commission, is therefore likely to reduce rates of workplace sexual misconduct. Likewise, I believe that the full implementation of the Set the Standard recommendations is likely to go some way towards reducing corrupt conduct in our parliament. As a survivor of sexual assault in a commonwealth parliamentary workplace, here is what I would like to say: To the parliamentarians who are people of integrity: sadly, many Australians believe that you do not exist. However, I know that there are good people at Parliament House across the political spectrum who are working hard to make our country a better, fairer place. Those people have nothing to lose and everything to gain from cleaning up politics in Australia. Doing so will create more career opportunities for people like you and will improve the governance of our country – a win-win situation. To my fellow survivors – those who have spoken out publicly at great personal cost, those who have spoken out anonymously like I have, and those who suffer in silence: never forget that you are strong, resilient and amazing people. Others may call me overly optimistic, but I believe that there is now real momentum for change. That change may take time, but it is coming. In the words of the civil rights leader Martin Luther King: “The arc of the moral universe is long, but it bends towards justice.” In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. If you or someone you know is impacted by sexual assault, family or domestic violence, call 1800RESPECT on 1800 737 732 or visit www.1800RESPECT.org.au. In an emergency, call 000. International helplines can be found via www.befrienders.org.At first glance, Chai Time at Cinnamon Gardens, the latest novel from prolific Australian author Shankari Chandran, may look like a light affair: a tale about a diverse group of elderly Australians living in a family-run nursing home in Sydney. But beyond the twee cover and cozy title, Chandran’s novel has serious heft, spanning several timelines and tackling complex topics like race, trauma and the structural inequality engendered in so-called multicultural Australia. The titular Cinnamon Gardens is a nursing home in Sydney, which was revamped in the 80s by migrant couple Maya and Zakhir after they fled civil war in their home of Sri Lanka. As Tamils and academics, the couple experienced persecution, torture and intimidation, forcing them to leave. Cinnamon Gardens offers a new beginning and the couple transform it into a sanctuary for culturally diverse seniors. Fast forward several decades to the mid-2000s and Zakhir is missing, presumed dead. Maya is a resident in the nursing home she developed which is now run by her daughter Anjali. Cinnamon Gardens, meanwhile, becomes the site of a culture war when local councillor Gareth – a longtime friend of Anjali – discovers that her parents once toppled a statue of Captain Cook which stood at the nursing home, in an act of anti-colonial rebellion. He accuses Cinnamon Gardens of racism and lodges a complaint with the Human Rights Commission, instigating a nation-wide backlash against “ungrateful” immigrant communities. This sets off a series of escalating events that unmasks the brewing discord in western Sydney’s multicultural community, and triggers the trauma of the residents and staff who have escaped persecution in their home countries. The novel is told through two timelines: the first in the present day, as Maya and Anjali grapple with the accusations brought to them, and the second through flashbacks to the Sri Lankan civil war. As each new piece of the puzzle of the family’s past is uncovered, we get closer to solving the mystery of Zakhir’s disappearance. If it sounds like there’s a lot to keep track of in Chandran’s novel, that’s because there is. There’s family violence; the tragic loss of a child; torture and displacement; a famous author hiding behind a pseudonym; a political battle for local council; extra-marital affairs; and to top it all off, a terrible and unexpected tragedy. The complexity of the narratives are partly to the book’s strength: every character gets a true and nuanced backstory, and Chandran is indisputably talented at creating characters that inspire empathy. But it does feel as though one or two storylines could have been cut; the complexity undermines the suspense of the novel opener and, by the time its mysteries are solved, you may find yourself having lost track of what was happening regardless. And while I love a sprawling, intergenerational epic, the balance doesn’t always sit right in Chai Time; the entire present-day timeline takes place over a short period, in contrast with decades in the flashbacks. Chandran possesses an incredible ability to immerse the reader in historical fact and detail that makes even the most unimaginable scenes in Sri Lanka feel real – but a simpler story may have made for a better book. Chai Time in Cinnamon Gardens is an enticing, if not entirely realised, opportunity for a wider conversation about Australia, the diversity of its people and the gaps in our collective cultural knowledge. This is a book that requires concentration and full immersion – but it will reward the reader for that investment. Chai Time at Cinnamon Gardens is out now through Ultimo PressLast week I visited a friend in Sydney and over four days we drove up the coast to Yamba, stopping to eat, sleep and swim along the way. The La Niña weather was warm, overcast and very humid, so nothing dried easily. Not our towels. Not our swimsuits. Not our t-shirts. Anything left on the floor of the car in between towns developed a musty smell. When we got back to his apartment in North Bondi it was the first time I noticed (and was grateful for) his dehumidifier. Unfortunately, humidity poses a threat to our bags, clothes and shoes – here’s how to mitigate it. The mildew smell If (like me) you’ve forgotten all your primary school science, humidity is the concentration of water vapour in the air. In warm weather when humidity is high the air holds more water vapour, so there’s nowhere for moisture to evaporate to. That’s why we feel sticky and everything takes longer to dry. This can be a problem, since clothes, shoes and bags that are damp for too long can develop mildew, a type of mould that thrives when things are warm and wet. According to Alice Payne, an associate professor of fashion at Queensland University of Technology, the first step to avoiding this is to make sure clothes, shoes and bags are never put away damp or soiled, because mildew feeds on dirt and food stains. Clearing any crumbs from your handbag is also key. As mildew grows, it can also eat plant-based fibres like cotton, linen and viscose, causing permanent discoloration and damage. This creates quite a dilemma: natural fibres are more comfortable to wear in humidity since they are breathable and absorbent, but they are more susceptible to mildew than synthetics. Synthetics are less susceptible to mildew (although they can fall prey to it when left damp or dirty for long periods) but are not comfortable to wear in humid environments. Humidity-friendly fabrics It might be counterintuitive in warm wet weather, but Payne suggests opting for garments made of wool because of the fibre’s antibacterial and moisture wicking properties. Less common fabrics like ramie and hemp are also naturally resistant to rot and mildew. Payne also suggests considering the weave of the fabric because “some weaves perform better in humid conditions”. Seersucker, the crinkly cotton fabric with a complex social history, has a practical reason for being associated with warm, wet climates. “The crinkle allows it to float over the skin more than flat weaves do,” Payne says. Drying in high humidity Payne says drying clothes flat and un-bunched on the line is the most effective way to ensure everything dries completely. If it is too humid or rainy to dry clothes outside, hang them on a rack inside with space between each garment. Use a fan to help circulate the air, or a dehumidifier to remove excess moisture. After you’ve done a load of washing, ensure as much moisture is removed from the clothes as possible. Either wring out each garment or put them on a high-spin cycle in your washing machine – but be mindful of delicate garments and their care instructions. For shoes and bags, run a towel inside anything leather to remove surface moisture and place it somewhere dry away from heaters and sunlight. Pull out the tongue and insole of canvas shoes and leave them to dry in the sun. Stuffing shoes and bags with tissue paper can also help absorb excess moisture. If the rot has set in If mildew has already formed, Payne recommends washing suffering garments on “a hot wash with some bleach”. If your garment is too delicate for this, use a laundry detergent with antimicrobial ingredients like citrus seed extracts or tea tree oil. Dry cleaning should also work. Alternatively, Payne says you can spot treat mildew stains by rubbing lemon juice into them, or sponging them with hydrogen peroxide and drying the garment in the sun. This can also be applied to shoes or bags made of fabric. For leather, take your shoes or bag outside and use a microfibre cloth to remove the mildew – but be sure to protect your airways while you do so. Then, Payne says to apply rubbing alcohol to the affected area to clean it further. Do your best to remove all the spores as anything left behind can continue to grow. There are also specialty leather products like this one that can help remove mould and mildew. Storage tips When storing things in humid environments be sure to check closets and drawers for mould and treat and remove all spores before placing anything inside. Since air flow between garments can help prevent mildew, don’t over overcrowd your wardrobe, and every so often, on dry sunny days, hang your clothes outside for some air. Never store garments in plastic bags, including dry cleaning bags. For clothes that require garment bags, always opt for cloth bags and place some tissue paper in pockets. Desiccant pouches – the kind you find everything from shoe boxes to tech products to vitamin jars – are also great for slipping into pockets, so don’t throw them away. The same goes for storing shoes, sneakers and handbags, stuff them with tissue paper and a desiccant pouch, place them inside cloth bags and store them in the driest conditions as possible. Clothes, bags and shoes can also be sprayed with moth or water repellents before storage to help prevent mildew too.The contrast in fortunes could hardly have been more distinct. On one side of the stage was Ange Postecoglou, basking in the adoration of 60,000 Celtic fans after an Old Firm triumph, and Alen Stajčić, brow furrowed in concentration, as his underdog Philippines advanced to the semi-finals of the Asian Cup. On the other was Graham Arnold, glumly musing on belief, hard work and goal differences as the Socceroos’ chances of automatic qualification for Qatar 2022 were all but ended, and Tony Gustavsson putting a brave face on the Matildas’ disastrous elimination from the Asian Cup and speaking of effort, learning and his belief that he could bounce back. The dichotomy was obvious enough that it quickly became a key part of the fallout of a calamitous week; the inference being that had the former pair remained in charge of the national teams, or if Gustavsson and Arnold had not been put there, things would have been vastly different. This just might be accurate, but it could also be widely off the mark. The handy thing about hypotheticals is that they never need to be proven right or wrong. But there has certainly been some level of revisionism surrounding both national teams’ history as of late. Yet judging how Australian football continuously confronts times of crisis, it is likely that most of those making the comparison would not actually care much for diving into the details of how their thought experiment would play out. The fun is more about revelling in the contrast, and Australian football is good at finding those. Beyond more obvious binary talking points, seemingly every few years there are reforms, initiatives or principles that are primarily sold as what needs to be done to put an end to an old era and begin a new one, or a review or inquiry that stands apart from all the others with its ability to “get things done”. This means a focus on outcomes. If a side consistently plays flawed football but keeps winning – perhaps a world-record 11 times in a row – things are good. If that team plays the same way but results suddenly dry up, that’s bad. The underlying condition is largely the same, but that was obscured by the contrasting outcomes being delivered. A major review is needed, but only now that World Cup qualification looks unlikely. For the Matildas, if one of their numerous chances against South Korea were not squandered and they progressed to the semi-finals, the conversation surrounding Gustavsson would very likely be significantly different – despite his principles of play remaining unchanged. This discourse largely ignores the long, slow and often unseen processes that actually go into delivering these outcomes. These steps are instead the domain of what Sigmund Freud described as the “ego”, a regulator of the short-term desires of the “id” that doesn’t tend to attract media coverage, likes, shares or backslaps. With this in mind, should Arnold and Gustavsson remain in their positions? There are cases that could be made by Football Australia that they should not. The former has always been one of the most polarising figures in Australian football and given how long he has been around, there is scant reason to believe a rabbit is going to be pulled from a hat. Defendants of the latter, meanwhile, have not exactly put forward many football-based reasons for his retention. While there has been significant discussion on the challenges he is juggling heading into 2023, there has been much less on whether he has demonstrated a skill-set that will be needed to overcome them. But what does the ego say? Would these dismissals be a sound decision born of an in-depth analysis by technical staff that recognise how Australia are playing and what they need to do to play the way they want? Would there be a meticulous, dispassionate search for a replacement that would tangibly improve Australia’s style and approach? Given that FA arrived at Arnold and Gustavsson in the first place and has had an interim technical director for years – one that juggles the role with coaching two different junior national teams – those signs are not promising. And maybe, that’s the real issue at play here: there is not enough ego in Australian football.Voters are less angry about the Morrison government’s handling of the pandemic than they were a fortnight ago, but a majority of respondents think the definition of full vaccination needs to be three jabs, not two, according to the latest Guardian Essential poll. The survey of 1,069 voters has 40% of the sample (up from 35% a fortnight ago) rating Scott Morrison’s pandemic management as good, while 34% of respondents (down from 38%) characterised it as poor. But while the prime minister on Monday confirmed Australia’s international border would be reopened from 21 February for double vaccinated tourists and travellers – 57% of poll respondents think the definition of fully vaccinated in Australia needs to be three jabs, not two (31% say it should be two and 12% are undecided). The Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, has been lobbying to change the current definition of full vaccination during recent national cabinet deliberations, but there has been no shift yet. The next national cabinet meeting is this Friday. Morrison said the definition of fully vaccinated for international tourists would remain at two doses, even if the definition changed domestically, because the chief medical officer had advised two doses was “sufficient”. Compulsion around vaccinations remains a politically fraught issue for the Coalition, with an insurgency building on the party’s right flank. With federal parliament resuming on Tuesday for a two-week sitting, Morrison is facing rolling public protests against vaccine mandates in Canberra. A major rally is planned at parliament house on Tuesday, and the parliamentary leader of the United Australia Party, Craig Kelly, has signalled he could sign protesters into the building. Two government MPs, George Christensen and Gerard Rennick, have also indicated they will address the protests. The prime minister has just endured a horror week. Last Tuesday, Morrison was blindsided when the Network 10’s political editor, Peter van Onselen, used a televised question and answer session at the National Press Club to reveal private criticism of the prime minister shared between the former New South Wales premier Gladys Berejiklian and an unnamed federal ministerial colleague. Then it was revealed late last week that Barnaby Joyce labelled Morrison “a hypocrite and a liar” in a private text message sent before he returned to the leadership of the National party. After the damaging leak, Morrison and Joyce closed ranks and characterised their relationship as amicable and productive. Morrison is attempting to rally his troops for an election within months. The latest Guardian Essential survey has the Coalition on a primary vote of 37% and Labor on 35% with the Greens on 9%, One Nation on 4%, independents on 5%, the United Australia party on 2% – with 8% of respondents undecided. Voting intention figures calculated by Guardian Essential now express the head-to-head metric of the major party contest as two-party preferred “plus”. This change in methodology, adopted after the 2019 election, highlights the proportion of undecided voters in any survey, providing accuracy on the limits of any prediction. Labor is on 47%, the Coalition on 46%, with 8% of respondents undecided in the latest two party preferred “plus” measure. Earlier in the summer, with Morrison under heavy political fire because of pandemic management missteps, Labor’s lead blew out to 50% to 43% on 2PP+ with 8% undecided. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Guardian Essential has only been publishing the head-to-head metrics on a quarterly basis since the last federal election. But given the proximity of the contest, these figures will now be reported fortnightly. As well as a modest rally for Morrison during the past fortnight, the latest poll suggests the NSW Perrottet government has also recovered some of its lost standing with voters after the significant surge in new Covid cases and deaths during the Omicron summer. In mid-December, 54% of respondents approved of the state government’s management of Covid-19, but that crashed to 37% by the end of January. In the latest data, 44% of respondents rate the state government’s response as good. State governments in Queensland and South Australia also saw positive shifts in voter sentiment about pandemic management in the past two weeks, but the Victorian government went backwards, with 47% of respondents characterising management of the pandemic as good at the end of January compared with 42% this fortnight. The latest poll indicates Morrison has political vulnerabilities beyond pandemic management. The data indicates 38% of respondents are less likely to vote for the Coalition because of rising cost of living pressure, and 37% say the same about the government’s lack of a credible climate change policy. But the data indicates another issue Morrison has focused on – greater regulation of social media platforms – is salient with voters. Significant majorities agree with the proposition that digital platforms have a duty of care to protect users and people should not be permitted to hide their identities through the use of anonymous accounts. Parliament will open on Tuesday with a statement of acknowledgment. Last year Australia’s sex discrimination commissioner Kate Jenkins in a landmark review of parliament’s toxic workplace culture recommended political leaders make a public statement acknowledging “the impact of the misconduct on individuals and the lack of action taken in the past” and “outline the institutional leadership commitment to change, with shared accountability for progress”. Sorrow will be expressed at the opening of the day’s proceedings as well as the next steps in implementing recommendations from the review. The Jenkins inquiry was triggered after former Liberal staffer Brittany Higgins alleged she was raped after hours in a ministerial office in March 2019. Higgins’s allegations are the subject of separate criminal proceedings. On Wednesday, Higgins will appear at the National Press Club in Canberra with former Australian of the Year and survivor advocate Grace Tame.Australian electricity providers have been ranked on their climate credentials in a new consumer guide that aims to cut through “greenwash”. Greenpeace’s 2022 Green Electricity Guide, released on Tuesday, assessed 48 Australian energy retailers on six main criteria: providing renewable energy, ending coal use by 2030, halting fossil fuel expansion, supporting new renewable energy, transparency of marketing and pollution and environmental harm. Then, each provider was given a score out of five stars and ranked. This is the first time the guide has been updated since 2018. Glenn Walker, a senior energy campaigner at Greenpeace and author on the 2022 guide says that the researchers placed more emphasis on “cutting through the greenwash and spin” when producing the update. This included reviewing provider websites and marketing materials to “assess how upfront they are with where their energy comes from”. Tim Baxter, senior researcher of climate solutions at Climate Council, says helping consumers see past marketing efforts is important . “Electricity is the most complicated system that most of us never have to think about,” he says. “That makes it difficult for a consumer to know what is happening when they flick their light switch on. A complicated system makes that extremely easy for any provider that is looking to pull the wool over their customers’ eyes.” ‘Dead last’ Australia’s energy giants make up the bottom of the ranks. “They are the worst polluters, and are the companies people should be switching away from,” Walker says. AGL, Australia’s biggest provider, scored one star, placing “dead last” behind Origin and Energy Australia, which also scored one star. The score is a precipitous drop from AGL’s fifth place in 2018, but Walker says the result is “no surprise”. Owning and running “huge, dirty coal burning power stations” is just part of the problem. Walker says a greater worry is these providers are “not moving fast enough to retire those power stations”. “The science is very clear. We know now that Australia cannot burn coal beyond 2030. Any company planning to burn coal beyond that should be heavily marked down.” In a statement, AGL did not directly address its ranking, but said: “As the country’s largest electricity generator and retailer, we recognise our significant role in Australia’s energy transition.” The statement outlined a number of AGL’s renewable projects and investments, and said, “today we operate the largest portfolio of renewable assets of any ASX-listed company”. “We have been focused on our commitment to transition to net zero.” However, Walker calls AGL “the greenwash case in point”. “Most of their ads feature solar and windfarms. They give the impression that they are a leader of clean and green energy. They say they will get to net zero by 2050 as a company. But they want to continue mining and burning coal right up until 2048.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The AGL statement continued: “There is no doubt that coal fired generation will exit the system earlier than previously expected enabling a faster decarbonisation pathway. However this must happen as part of a coordinated plan across governments, industry, regulators and the community. Without this we create market uncertainty and put at risk energy reliability and customer affordability.” ‘Cleaner and greener’ “Encouragingly, since the 2018 report there has been a race to the top,” Walker says. The guide’s top billed retailers are “pure-play renewable electricity companies” who are investing heavily in renewable energy. “They are not involved in mining fossil fuels, and are really transparent about their business. From every angle we assess them, they are helping transform our energy system to make it cleaner and greener.” Enova Energy and Diamond Energy “stood out with five star ratings,” taking the top two positions. Diamond Energy operates solar and wind energy plants, while Enova Energy contract only renewable energy from electricity generators, and harness excess energy from customers’ rooftop solar panels. In 2018, Powershop ranked first place in the guide. It has fallen to 10th place this year, after its acquisition by fossil fuel giant Shell in 2021. Six thousand of Powershop’s customers reportedly switched providers after the acquisition. That demonstrates “a strong consumer concern” in the role their provider plays in the climate crisis, Walker says. ‘Not everybody has the time’ With a “bewildering array of choices out there in terms of energy providers,” head of the University of New South Wales school of photovoltaic and renewable energy engineering, Prof Alistair Sproul, says the Greenpeace Guide is “useful advice for consumers”. However, Dr Hedda Ransan-Cooper, who leads the social science program within the battery storage and grid integration program of Australian National University’s college of engineering and science, is wary of putting responsibility on the consumer. “There is a real lack of leadership from the government on solutions and pathways forward to how the transition should unfold,” she says. “Not everybody has the time, or capacity, to do levels of research and shop around for energy.” While Ransan-Cooper trusts “a proportion of active, engaged people” will make decisions based on the guide, she questions “how many people it is reaching”. Walker says the ultimate goal is to “provide consumers with an easy-to-use tool”. With one of the most polluting electricity grids in the world, “we should hold our government to account … But people can be empowered to take action too.” “The quicker we switch, the better it is for prices, and the quicker we will see Australian climate pollution drop,” he says. “Both benefit consumers, and consumers can be at the forefront of that.” • This article was amended on 9 February 2022. The head of the University of New South Wales school of photovoltaic and renewable energy engineering is Prof Alistair Sproul, not “Alister Sprout”.Taxpayers have been paying more than $10,000 a month for George Christensen’s “e-material” in the same period that he racked up an $85,000 Facebook advertising bill for issues including vaccine discrimination, and a conspiracy theory about the “unelected global elite”. According to reports from the independent parliamentary expenses authority, Christensen claimed more than $50,000 for “e-material” over nine months in 2021, with the spend ramping up to an average of $11,000 a month from the middle of the year. Over the past 18 months, Christensen has spent $85,000 on Facebook ads. Government records show Christensen claimed $12,641 for e-material in the second quarter of last year, jumping to $33,500 in the third quarter as the controversial Queensland MP began ramping up his campaign against vaccine mandates. While the records do not indicate exactly how the money was spent, Facebook’s records show Christensen spending significant sums on advertising on the platform in the same period. The expense reports are not yet available for the October to December period, but Facebook’s ad library shows Christensen spent a similar amount for the last quarter of the year, including an estimated $25,000 on a single ad that calls to “end the vaccine discrimination”. The ad is a “demand [for] an end to all coercive measures by government and private corporations that force people to take a COVID-19 vaccine or else be denied services, rights or employment”. According to Facebook, the ad ran from November to January and had an audience reach of more than 1 million people. He has also spent more than $10,000 on other anti-vaccine mandate advertisements, calling for an end to vaccine passes and passports, which he describes as “medical apartheid” and a “path to tyranny”. Two separate ad campaigns costing up to $7,500 that ran from August through to December campaigned on the issue of “globalist elites”, who Christensen claims are using the pandemic “as an opportunity to fuse socialism and corporatism and embed it permanently into our economy and society”. “In other words, an unelected global elite operating outside the law deciding for ordinary citizens how they will live, work, communicate and do business in the future.” The ads, which had a reach of more than 800,000, link to one of Christensen’s websites which repeats key themes of the “great reset” conspiracy that has taken hold among rightwing groups in the US and Europe and targets “elites from the World Economic Forum”. The website says the great reset “sounds like a conspiracy theory but it’s not”. He also spent up to $5,000 on an advertisement promoting his private member’s bill which would have required doctors to provide assistance to foetuses with signs of life during an abortion. The ads had an estimated audience size of more than a million people. Christensen’s commentary has become more controversial in the months since he announced he would not re-contest the Mackay-based seat of Dawson at the next federal election. Guardian Australia reported last month that he had privately registered a business name and new website calling on people to “fight for our sovereignty”, fuelling speculation the outspoken MP was preparing to launch a new media brand. He told a Prayer and Pushback event last month he would not leave politics after the election and would probably “step back” into the media landscape. Under parliamentary expense rules, MPs can claim taxpayer funds for expenses for the dominant purpose of conducting parliamentary business. This includes electoral duties, which have a broad definition prescribed by the minister, including “facilitating and participating in debate” on matters of interest to constituents. A spokesperson for the Department of Finance said it would not comment on the use of expenses by individual senators and members. “Parliamentarians are allocated an annual budget for office expenses which can be used for the cost of communications, including e-communications,” the spokesperson said. “All office expenses must be for the dominant purpose of conducting parliamentary business. “Parliamentarians must personally certify that their use of office expenses complies with the PBR Act and Regulations.” Christensen did not respond to questions from Guardian Australia, including as to whether the ads were funded by his e-communications budget. Over the weekend, Christensen attended a large anti-vaccination rally in Canberra, posting a live stream of himself at the event saying he was attending along with people from “all walks of life”. The Nationals deputy leader, David Littleproud, said on Monday that Christensen was a “free spirit”, who had the right to demonstrate, but he did not agree with him and did not think he should have attended. “I’m not sure what his role was in that rally, but I don’t think it’s appropriate that he’s out there putting a message against medical advice – that’s not responsible and that’s irresponsible. And people need to understand that they should only take their advice from their doctor. “Obviously we are trying to make sure that George understands the important role and privilege that he has in being a member of parliament. You should take that seriously and we shouldn’t be giving medical advice, only doctors should.” Christensen was forced to step down from a committee role last month after he urged parents not to vaccinate their children. The call attracted a rare rebuke from the prime minister, Scott Morrison, who called Christensen’s views “dangerous” and advised people to ignore him.As she has laid waste to her rivals throughout an extraordinary first season as a senior while skating with deeper maturity and sophistication in each passing competition, it’s been increasingly apparent that only an act of God could prevent the Russian prodigy Kamila Valieva from winning figure skating’s most prestigious title. On Monday, the 15-year-old Valieva offered the world a sneak peek of why next week’s Olympic women’s singles competition is little more than a formality, becoming the first woman to land a quadruple jump at the Olympics – then doing it again moments later – to punctuate the Russian Olympic Committee’s runaway gold in the team event at Capital Indoor Stadium. Valieva, the newly minted Russian and European champion who has already broken the world records for the women’s short programme, free skate and combined total in a stunning debut campaign as an adult skater, opened her title-clinching long program on Monday with a gigantic quad salchow before following with a quad toe loop in combination with a triple toe loop. Her final score of 178.92 was more than enough to prevail in Monday’s free skate, nailing down a gold that was safely in hand even before Valieva’s first-place finish in the short on Sunday single-handedly wiped out the Americans’ day-one lead. “I had [the] burden of responsibility, but I came out a winner,” Valieva said. “It’s been quite overwhelming. I was very nervous, but I am just glad I was able to execute all of my elements well. To perform with a team like this means everything.” Valieva’s dominance on Monday, which followed her Russian team-mates Anastasia Mishina and Aleksandr Galliamov’s win in the pairs’ free skate, left the United States and Japan in a touch-and-go battle for silver. Ultimately, the Americans were able to lock down second place with 65 points through the ice dance pair of Madison Chock and Evan Bates, whose personal-best score of 129.07 in the free dance helped secure the United States’ best ever finish in the team event. The medal proved sorely needed on a Monday when three of Team USA’s warmest medal contenders finished off the podium entirely: Mikaela Shiffrin in the giant slalom, Red Gerard in the snowboard slopestyle and Brittany Bowe in the speed skating 1500m. Japan finished with 63 points to reach the team podium for the first time, safely ahead of fourth-place Canada (53), after Kaori Sakamoto took second to Valieva in the free skate and Riku Miura and Ryuichi Kiara followed suit in the pairs’ free. On a morning that almost entirely followed to form, the biggest wrinkle came off the ice when it was announced American skater Vincent Zhou tested positive for Covid-19 on the eve of the men’s singles competition, which begins on Tuesday with the short program. Zhou’s positive test was later confirmed and he emotionally revealed he was pulling out of the Games later on Tuesday. “I’ve already lost count of the number of times I’ve cried today,” he said. “But I’m happy to say that at least one of those times was happy tears, and that was when I found out that I became an Olympic silver medalist.”. Zhou, the mercurial 2019 world bronze medalist whose free skate on Sunday helped secure the United States’ team silver, was one of the few entrants in the men’s contest with the technical repertoire of quadruple jumps necessary to challenge the likes of Nathan Chen, Yuzuru Hanyu and Shoma Uno for the gold.#UPFORTHECUP How do you do, fellow kids? Now, The Fiver knows all about #hashtags on the social media disgraces but not everyone is quite as savvy as your much-loved tea-timely missive, so here’s a quick guide for the uninitiated: #scenes means someone has scored a goal, #awaydays is fairly self-explanatory and usually accompanied by a photo of a four-pack of Tin on a 10am train, and when people talk about #limbs they’re usually referring to the variety of flailing appendages in the stands [oh, behave – Carry on Ed] as fans cavort in wild celebration. There was admittedly plenty of that at the City Ground as Nottingham Forest stormed to a 4-1 win over Leicester but one fan got his #limbs all wrong in the aftermath of Forest’s third goal, his legs tottering him on to the pitch, his arms flailing haymakers at the Forest players as they celebrated Joe Worrall’s strike. Stewards and police were belatedly on the scene to cart the clown away and Leicester have promised a lifetime ban. There was also violence in Nottingham city centre before the game as assorted numpties lost the run of themselves over an FA Cup fourth-round tie. In more uplifting news, National League minnows Boreham Wood from Borehamwood, a club so cash-strapped they can’t even afford to remove the stray space in their name, earned themselves a fifth-round tie at Everton with a stunning win over Championship Bournemouth. “I don’t want to be on the end of a giant-killing, as magic as it is,” sighed Cherries chief Scott Parker, sending the Cup-cliche-o-meter twitching. “Sometimes you have to take your medicine. Tonight we have to take our medicine and I have to take mine.” And despite the #uglyscenes in the east Midlands, it was by and large a weekend of FA Cup warm-and-fuzzies: Middlesbrough doing for Manchester United on penalties, Kidderminster and Plymouth pushing West Ham and Chelsea to the very limit and, perhaps heartwarming-est of all, Crystal Palace fans’ fundraising efforts for Hartlepool manager Graeme Lee’s wife following her brain cancer diagnosis. Roll on the fifth round. QUOTE OF THE DAY “He’s 37, hasn’t trained in the last four weeks and we had to give him an injection on Monday. We didn’t know whether he’d be fit or not; he trained on Saturday and I rang him on the way home to ask how he was feeling. He said he could feel it and I said: ‘I don’t care, you’re walking your club out at Bournemouth and if you last 15 minutes, we’ll make a sub.’ For him to put in a performance like he did and score the winner is incredible” – Boreham Wood boss Luke Garrard explains how his ancient FA Cup fairytale-maker Mark Ricketts was a one-man barrel of knack, which makes his match-winning heroics all the more ridiculous. FIVER LETTERS “Did The Fiver know that Human Rights World Cup hosts Qatar have a National Sport Day? When they inevitably bid for (and probably win) hosting duties, will they hold Big Sports Day on National Sport Day?” – Kristian Karamfiles. “I am still trying to get my head around the achievements of the highest-paid chief suit in English football, who left his post at the end of January. Aside from enlarging the Manchester United owners’ coffers and overseeing the largest net spend in transfers in Europe over the past 10 years with little to show for it on the field, the litany of disastrous appointments and transfers is mind-boggling. The appalling reality show never fails to deliver and surely it can get worse. During the FA Cup defeat to Middlesbrough it was revealed that, despite hiring a new set-piece coach last summer, they remain the only team yet to score from one in the Premier League this season. Well done indeed” – John Weldon. “Am I right in concluding that everything that happened at Old Trafford during the FA Cup fourth round – Ronaldo’s penalty miss, the insanity surrounding Boro’s goal, the half-time catering breakdown, the rain, the interminable shoot-out … .all of it is Michael Lloyd’s (Friday’s prizeless letter o’ the day) fault?” – Daniel Stauss. “I see that fans now need to bring their own prawn sandwiches to Old Trafford” – John Buckley. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’ the day is … Kristian Karamfiles. RECOMMENDED LISTENING Get your ears around the latest Football Weekly podcast. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS Chelsea have settled a high court case brought by four former youth-team players over alleged historic racist abuse. Wayne Rooney says he misused alcohol in an effort to cope with the pressure that accompanied his rise to elite level football as a teenager. “There were times you would get a couple of days off from football and I would actually lock myself away and just drink to try to take all that away from my mind,” he said. Marc Overmars is out as Ajax’s director of football after sending inappropriate messages to female colleagues. “Unfortunately, I didn’t realise that I was crossing the line with this,” he non-apologised. “Certainly for someone in my position, this behaviour is unacceptable.” Sadio Mané has described scoring the winning shootout penalty to secure a first Afcon title for Senegal as the best day of his life. “I won [Big Cup] and some [other] trophies,” he sighed, in a bruising blow to the Premier League trophy’s ego, “but this is the special one for me. This is more important for me.” Backside flares at the ready: the UK and Ireland have switched focus to hosting Euro 2028 after identifying “many areas of uncertainty” around a bid for the 2030 World Cup, not least the nonsense of it possibly being biennial by then. Jürgen Klopp reckons Harvey Elliott’s return from knack to score in Liverpool’s 3-1 win over Cardiff is a story right up there with Cinderella. “Coming on is a great step back, scoring the goal makes it a proper fairytale,” he cheered. Manchester United have returned to the top of the table … of clubs with the biggest transfer losses in the last decade, splashing an £850m net spend on players. Get the open-top bus ready, Ralf! And Burnley’s Erik Pieters needs to work on his timing, talking up Wout Weghorst’s scoring prowess after a 0-0 draw with Watford that made the Afcon final seem like a white-knuckle ride. “He’s good on his feet and you can see he’s a real goal-getter,” honked Pieters. STILL WANT MORE? FA Cup: 10.1 talking points from the weekend’s steamy fourth-round action. Here’s a lowdown on the latest round of WSL matches. Olivier Giroud ripped up the shirt curse to put Milan on cloud nine in the derby, whoops Nicky Bandini. Nagelsmann v Tedesco lived up to the hype as Leipzig pushed Bayern all the way, reports Andy Brassell. From game on to game over? Sid Lowe watches Sevilla’s title hopes hit the bumpers. Elis James is moving house to a place with no attic. What should he do with his old programmes? And if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! THE RESURRECTED LATICSAn independent study has linked the deaths of thousands of crabs and lobsters and a mystery dog illness to dredging of the River Tees, raising concerns for the government’s flagship freeport on Teesside – a key to the Conservative’s post-Brexit, “levelling-up” agenda. The report has led local fishers to reject a government theory that an “algal bloom” is responsible for the huge piles of dead crustaceans that began washing up on beaches along England’s north-east coast in October. A multi-agency investigation led by the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra) concluded on Friday that the mass crustacean deaths, which the fishing industry says have threatened their livelihoods and led to fears of a collapsing ecosystem, “potentially resulted from a naturally occurring harmful algal bloom”. Algal blooms are a rapid overgrowth of algae that can produce dangerous toxins in the water, sometimes marked by a coloured scum on the water. Scientists have warned that they are becoming more frequent and more toxic worldwide, and could be linked to the climate crisis. Tim Deere-Jones, an independent marine pollution consultant and author of the report, said there was “no empirical evidence to support the theory that it’s got anything to do with an algal bloom”. Deere-Jones, who has 30 years of experience around dredging issues as a consultant, instead said the data obtained via freedom of information requests from Defra and other agencies, linked the mass mortalities to a specific chemical, pyridine, which can be released into the environment as a waste product from industrial processes. “So far, the available evidence points clearly to pyridine as a potential cause of the mortality,” he said. His analyses point to several potential sources of pyridine discharge to the estuary, which could date back decades, but has embedded deep into the seabed. “On the basis of the established fact that pyridine preferentially deposits out into estuarine sediments, rather than remains in the water column, it seems likely that the new deeper dredging being constructed has uncovered and redistributed pyridine-laced sediments to the regional marine environment,” he added. While Defra said that “any levels [of pyridine] detected in crab tissue are likely to be linked to biological processes and not necessarily from the environment”, Deere-Jones pointed out that samples from control crabs collected in Penzance had just under 6mg per kilogram of the toxic chemical, the Saltburn crabs were found to have more than 400mg per kg. “That’s not a natural level, that’s a human impact level,” he said. Defra, which reviewed satellite date showing an algal bloom along the coastal area in late September 2021, rejected this explanation, concluding it is “unlikely that chemical pollution, sewage or infectious aquatic animal diseases were the cause of the deaths”. The agency also said there was no evidence linking recent reports of dead seals, the mystery dog illness causing sickness and diarrhoea following walks along the coast in January, or the dead sea birds washing up in their hundreds in October. However, the North East Fishing collective, a group of commercial fishing associations, angling societies, conservationists and stakeholders along the north-east coast of England, have labelled the explanation as “utter rubbish”. The group say they have all been “dramatically impacted by the recent events on the east coast. Our incomes have been slashed, our livelihoods under threat and our environments eroded.” Fishers from Hartlepool to Scarborough say their catch of crab and lobsters remain 80%-95% down and dead crabs and lobsters were reported last week in Saltburn and Marske-by-the-Sea, which they say is unlikely to have been caused by an algal bloom in October. Following a protest last November, the group set up a crowdfunder and commissioned Deere-Jones to investigate. They have called for further investigations into the high levels of pyridine found in crabs and an immediate stop to dredging activity in the Tees, where they say one vessel “conducted a years’ worth of dredging in 10 days”. Commenting, Tees Valley mayor Ben Houchen said: “No dredging of the River Tees has been carried out by either Teesworks or the Teesside Freeport, the only dredging that has taken place is that carried out by PD Ports as the Statutory Port Authority. “I, like everyone across Teesside, Darlington and Hartlepool, am concerned about the impact the death of so many crabs and lobsters has had on the livelihoods of people from across Teesside and the northeast coast that rely on a healthy sea. The Tees and the North Sea play a massive role in our communities, and I hope that we see our sea life and coast return to normal as soon as possible.” A spokesperson for the fishers said algal blooms “do not occur naturally in our coastal waters in October. The temperatures are far too low” and demanded more evidence for the theory beyond satellite images. A Defra spokesperson said: “Our sampling established that no pyridine was present in the water or sediment samples we collected but was detected in crab tissue from both impacted areas and non-impacted areas elsewhere in the country”. • The headline and text of this article were amended on February 8, 10 and 11. An earlier version said that the independent study had linked the crab deaths and dog illness to dredging for Teesside freeport; although dredging has been carried out in the area, it has not been for the freeport development. A reference to “Maske” was corrected to Marske-by-the-Sea.Name: The mile-high club. Appearance: Sexy, up in the air. Age: Dates to the late 18th century. But that’s well before the advent of powered flight. Yes, but the betting book of Brooks’s gentlemen’s club contains a 1785 record of a wager between two lords, one of whom was to receive 500 guineas from the other if he had sex “in a balloon 1,000 yards from the Earth”. Sorry to be a pedant, but 1,000 yards is some way short of a mile high. Fast-forward, then, to 1916: daredevil Lawrence Sperry, inventor of the autopilot, is giving a hands-free flying lesson to a Mrs Polk when his plane crashes into a Long Island bay. Rescuers find the survivors naked, making Sperry and Polk joint founders of the mile-high club. How does it work in modern times? It varies, but typically two people, not necessarily previously acquainted, become intimate in an aeroplane toilet mid-flight. Why would anyone want to have sex in a plane toilet? To save the blushes of fellow passengers. I mean, why wouldn’t you just wait until you got home? For the thrill of accomplishing something forbidden. Is it forbidden? Generally – but no longer! For $995 (£736), Las Vegas charter service Love Cloud will take you on a 45-minute flight in a Cessna equipped with a bed, for the express purpose of having sex with someone while airborne. Huh. Do I get to meet the person before? You have to bring your own partner. A thousand bucks, other person not provided? Yes, but after that each additional passenger is only $200. What else do I get for that money? A certificate verifying membership of the mile-high club, signed by the pilot. How does the pilot verify things? He wears noise-cancelling headphones throughout, so he’ll take your word for it. What about champagne? Champagne is extra. And people really go for this? They seem to. “My husband and I had joined the mile-high club before, so to be able to do it privately was great,” party planner Frelima Howard told the New York Times. “It was really nice and exclusive and private.” Could the idea take off in the UK? Not without difficulty. In 2011 the Civil Aviation Authority refused to recertify an outfit called Mile High Flights, claiming that inflight sex was too distracting for pilots. Do say: “Please exercise care when opening the overhead locker – the Fletchers are in there.” Don’t say: “How much for eight minutes?”For more than a week, the centre of Canada’s capital city has been paralysed by protestors who have blockaded the downtown area with trucks and cars. City police have described the protest as a “siege” and on Sunday the mayor of Ottawa declared a state of emergency. How did this begin? In early January, a relatively unknown group called Canada Unity announced they would be launching a “freedom convoy” to protest vaccine passports and mandates installed by various levels of government in Canada. This group has unsuccessfully tried to launch such a convoy before, but this time, things took off thanks to frustration with a new requirement that all truckers crossing the US-Canada border must be vaccinated against Covid-19. While the vast majority of Canadian truckers are vaccinated, there were fears that forcing any number of truckers off the job could worsen supply chain pressures. Some trucks travelled more than 5,000km to reach Ottawa, where the convoy started to arrive on January 28. What have the protestors been doing? After pulling into Ottawa, the convoy has morphed into a rolling protest in Ottawa’s downtown core. Trucks and cars roamed through the city, laying on their horns and snarling traffic. Bands of protesters wandered the city, many pushing their way into malls and businesses – maskless, despite a provincial requirement that face coverings be worn indoors. The size of the protest swelled to roughly 10,000 over its initial weekend, but declined significantly and last week, the protest became an occupation. More than 100 trucks sat parked on the main thoroughfare in front of Canada’s parliament buildings. Protesters built a makeshift kitchen and a well-coordinated delivery network brought in hundreds of jerry cans of diesel to those running low on fuel. Who’s protesting? While there are certainly some members of the convoy who are in Ottawa to protest the trucker vaccine mandate, convoy members raise a varied list of complaints. Canada Unity, which operates as an umbrella organization for many of the protesters, is collecting signatures for its “memorandum of understanding”, a document that demands the Canadian government rescind all vaccine requirements or “RESIGN their lawful positions of authority immediately”. The group’s founder, James Bauder – who has written on Facebook that Canada’s prime minister, Justin Trudeau, ought to be tried for treason, and who has endorsed the baseless QAnon conspiracy theory – insists that, should the document get enough signatures, an election will be triggered. Joining Canada Unity is a motley crew of anti-vaccine and rightwing activists. Tamara Lich, who has coordinated a wildly successful GoFundMe, and Pat King, who has coordinated with many of the truckers, were involved in efforts to declare the oil-rich Western provinces’ independence from Canada. Others who have latched on to the movement include QAnon figure Romana Didulo, the self-proclaimed “Queen of Canada”. Speakers and protesters have rejected the science behind vaccines, called for Trudeau’s arrest and trial, and waved Nazi and confederate flags. What do they want? The protesters say they will not leave Ottawa until all vaccine requirements and mandates have been abolished, a demand that is very unlikely to be met. Some have gone further and said they will camp out until Trudeau leaves office. Who’s supporting them? The truckers have become a cause celebre for anti-vaccine groups and rightwing influencers. Their cause has been heralded by Elon Musk, Donald Trump, Tucker Carlson, and a host of others. Bauder’s memorandum of understanding has now collected about 300,000 signatures, while the occupiers’ GoFundMe surpassed CAD$10m ($7.88m USD) – of that, CAD$1m was released to cover expenses, while the remainder was returned to the donors after GoFundMe determined the protest violated their terms of service. That decision led Florida’s governor, Ron Desantis, to pledge an investigation of the company for alleged “fraud”. Other fundraisers have quickly made up the difference: another crowdfunding effort pulled in nearly CAD$500,000, while a Bitcoin fundraiser has already raised nearly 9 BTC ($389,955). The Canadian public has been less supportive. Polling data suggests that roughly a third of the country has a positive impression of the truckers, but that number seems to be falling as the occupation wears on. Canada has one of the world’s highest rates of vaccination against Covid-19, and vaccine mandates remain broadly popular. Ottawa residents are growing particularly hostile and resentful after days of disruption. A class action lawsuit has been filed, seeking damages of nearly CAD$10m over the incessant horn blaring that has disrupted daily life for the thousands of residents who live near the occupation zone. What are the police doing? Ottawa police have called in backup from other police forces around the province, but the chief, Peter Sloly, has confessed that they are woefully outnumbered. While the crowd numbers may not be terribly impressive, they have a physical advantage thanks to their vehicles. Police have increasingly laid fines and charges for mischief, and recently began blocking fuel deliveries to the occupiers – but it hasn’t broken the occupation yet. How does this end? There’s little chance that the Trudeau government will acquiesce to the protesters’ demands – indeed, most of the vaccine requirements are administered at the provincial level, outside federal jurisdiction. Ottawa’s mayor, Jim Watson, is encouraging the federal government to appoint a mediator to find common ground with the protesters, but given their extreme demands, a compromise seems unlikely. Ottawa police are unlikely to clear the occupation by force. They may begin laying more fines against the occupiers – but their impressive fundraising haul means they can withstand significant financial penalties. Morale in the encampment has only been boosted by solidarity convoys to provincial capitals in Toronto and Quebec City, and planned convoys across the United States, Europe and Australia.The Virginia governor, Glenn Youngkin, was accused of creating “a culture of toxicity” in his first months in office, after campaign aides attacked a high-school student, naming and picturing the boy, for sharing a news story about the Republican official. On Saturday, Ethan Lynne, 17 and according to his Twitter biography a Democrat, posted an article which suggested Youngkin could be trying to stop work to highlight the history of enslaved people at the Virginia executive mansion. In response, Youngkin’s campaign account posted a picture of Lynne with the former governor Ralph Northam, next to a picture from Northam’s medical school yearbook of two men in racist costumes: one in Blackface and one in a Ku Klux Klan costume. “Here’s a picture of Ethan with a man that had a Blackface/KKK photo in his yearbook,” Team Youngkin tweeted. In 2019, Northam admitted being one of the men in the photograph, an admission he later recanted. Virginia governors cannot serve consecutive terms. Youngkin beat the Democrat Terry McAuliffe, a former governor, in a bitter 2021 election in which the Republican made teaching about race and racism in US history a key campaign issue. Amid outrage at an attack on a minor, the Team Youngkin tweet was deleted. Speaking to the Washington Post, Lynne said: “A governor’s campaign account has attacked a minor – to me that was a new low … it was up for over 12 hours. I received no apology, no communication, nothing.” On Monday, Youngkin said: “On Saturday night, an unauthorized tweet came from a campaign account. I regret that this happened and it shouldn’t have. I have addressed it with my team. We must continue to work to bring Virginians together. There is so much more that unites us than divides us.” Lynne said: “While he acknowledged the situation, Governor Youngkin did not apologize and did not condemn what happened over the weekend. I still hope he does, and that he will take time to recognize the culture of toxicity he has created within his first month of office.” A Youngkin campaign spokesman, Matt Wolking, said the tweet was deleted when it was realised Lynne was a minor. Lynne’s Twitter biography reads: “Virginian. HS Senior. Democrat.” “It was brought to [our] attention that this Democrat party official repeatedly elevated by [state] senator Louise Lucas as a source of official Democrat party communications is actually a minor, so the tweet was removed,” Wolking said. The article Lynne posted was from VPM, a public radio station in Richmond, the state capital. It alleged Youngkin was converting a classroom in the executive mansion, used to educate on ties between the building and slavery, into a family room. The article also said an archeologist and historian who worked with the two previous governors had her office cleaned out. Lynne tweeted: “NEW: The historian tasked with teaching about slavery at the Virginia Governors Mansion just resigned after finding Youngkin converted her classroom into a family room – and emptied her office.” He added: “Shameful.” Corrections were later posted, saying Youngkin had not converted the classroom and the historian had resigned, but did seem to have had her office cleaned out. Lynne retweeted the correction. Nonetheless, the Youngkin campaign team attacked. Lynne said he did not notice their tweet for hours. “In school, we are taught how to spot bullying, and their tweet last night perfectly fit that description,” Lynne wrote on Sunday, also thanking people who offered support. “It is disgusting, disturbing, and unbecoming of the commonwealth to see the governor and his office stoop this low, especially on a public platform.”Inspired by the success of Wordle, earlier today I set you these three word puzzles that also test lexical ingenuity and pattern-spotting skills. I also said I’d tell you what my Wordle starting word is. See below. 1. Which country am I in? Each of the following words appears either in the middle or at the end of a country. For example, ACED is in Macedonia. What are the countries? If you get more than ten you are doing extremely well! 1. DIVE, 2. DONE, 3. GLAD, 4. HAIL, 5. HELL, 6. LAYS, 7. NAME, 8. OVEN, 9. RAIN, 10. RUNE, 11. SCAR, 12. SWAN, 13. TENS, 14. WAND. Tip: One is in South America, three in Europe, two in continental Africa, six in Asia and three are island nations. Solution: This is tricky – and very pleasing – because the clue words are usually not pronounced as they are in the country word. 1. Maldives, 2. Indonesia, 3. Bangladesh, 4. Thailand, 5. Seychelles, 6. Malaysia, 7. Suriname, 8. Slovenia, 9. Ukraine, 10. Brunei, 11. Madagascar, 12. Botswana, 13. Lichtenstein, 14. Rwanda. 2. Insert here. If you insert the letters ‘NS’ in the same position in the words PAY, SUET, TOIL, DEITY and COOLED, you get five new words: PANSY, SUNSET, TONSIL, DENSITY, and CONSOLED. For each of the following groups of words, can you find two letters to insert in the same position to form five new words? 1. JEER, VERY, JUICE, PEERED, POURING 2. BOW, DUDE, DIVER, RATION, DOUSING 3. JAY, DALE, FEES, MULES, FILING 4. BOO, FIR, CREED, CHAISE, WHILING 5. WAY, FILE, POET, DOING, BAREST 6. ORE, FILE, CLASS, OLIVE, MATING Solution: 1. JESTER, VESTRY, .. 2. BELOW, DELUDE,… 3. JAZZY, DAZZLE,.. 4. BOOST, FIRST, … 5. WACKY, FICKLE,… 6. OUTRE, FUTILE,… 3. Seven cars. Each clue below describes a 9-letter word that includes the consecutive letters CAR. Thus one of the words is CAR_ _ _ _ _ _, one is _CAR_ _ _ _ _ _, and so on until _ _ _ _ _ _ CAR. Find the words. 1. Coconut cookies 2. Cornfield denizen 3. Ink _____ 4. Study aid 5. Tossed out 6. Tram 7. Vacation missives Solution: 3. CARtridge, 2. sCARecrow, 1. maCARoons, 5. disCARded, 7. postCARds, 4. flashCARd, 6. streetCAR. I really enjoyed the comments below the line about Wordle starter words. My preference is a 3-vowel starter – usually ATONE – since it includes 5 of the 6 most common letters in English, and also I like the suggestion of a cleansing, spiritual ritual. Letter frequency-wise, I’m not sure there’s a word that beats it. (Fist bumps to the two readers who also mentioned it.) Kudos to those readers who suggested 4-vowel words: OUIJA, AUDIO, and ADIEU. On which point…A BIENTOT! See you in two weeks. Today’s puzzles were taken from The Puzzle Cabaret by Vincent J. Matsko. Vincent is a maths educator, puzzle designer and mathematical artist, and brings a cross-disciplinary creativity to his puzzles. I set a puzzle here every two weeks on a Monday. I’m always on the look-out for great puzzles. If you would like to suggest one, email me. I’m the author of several books of puzzles, most recently the Language Lover’s Puzzle Book. I also give school talks about maths and puzzles (online and in person). If your school is interested please get in touch. On Thursday 21 April I’ll be giving a puzzles workshop for Guardian Masterclasses. You can sign up here.Kanye’s (sold-out) cropped jacket has put some serious style weight behind the look. Now the high street has upped its game on recycled credentials – see Gap’s well-priced 100% recycled jacket. And if you’re looking for something more fashion than Uniqlo’s roll-up-and-stuff-it-in-your-bag budget option (from £49.90), you can still pick up a navy and khaki, satin-look, oversized parka from their Jil Sander J+ collection (on sale at £99.90) via the Uniqlo website. It follows that Scandi brands know their way around a puffer jacket. Norwegian company Holzweiler’s Dovre jacket is water resistant, made using responsibly sourced down and has a temperature rating effective to −15C. Swedish brands Arket and Cos both offer recycled and upcycled options in several colourways. To maximise use, choose a neutral shade that will fit seamlessly into your wardrobe. Arket’s grey version works just as well worn over office wear as it does with jeans. Reiss’s stone-coloured hooded version is on sale at £180, from £298. And don’t forget go-with-everything black, as seen on a casually dressed Justin Bieber courtside for a trip to the basketball, or when worn with smarter black separates. M&amp;S’s take is water-repellent and comes in regular and long length, in sizes from small to 4XL (£69) Riley Studio spent months developing a food-waste natural dye for their recycled nylon jacket, dyed using onion skins and rice husks to create the taupe hue. It’s a high-ticket spend but on the coldest mornings there is no better coat. It’s like wearing your duvet to work. 1. 100% recycled, £180, cosstores.com 2. Recycled nylon food waste puffer, £495, riley.studio 3. 100% recycled nylon, £43.99, gap.com 4. Boxy upcycled down, £225, arket.com 5. Responsibly sourced down, £494, holzweiler.comThanks for following along today. We are going to hand over to the US politics live blog, where Lauren Gambino will be covering a press conference shortly with the US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, and the EU high representative Josep Borrell, and then, later, Joe Biden’s press conference with the German chancellor, Olaf Scholz. Follow it all here: Nato is considering a longer-term military posture in eastern Europe to strengthen its defences, the alliance’s secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, has said, Reuters reports. Nato defence ministers are expected to discuss reinforcements at their next meeting on 16-17 February. Stoltenberg said: We are considering more longer-term adjustments to our posture, our presence in the eastern part of the alliance. No final decision has been made on that but there is a process now going on within Nato. If Russia really wants less Nato close to the borders, they get the opposite. He was speaking at a press conference with the Polish president, Andrzej Duda, making a reference to the last reinforcement of Nato defences. After Russia’s annexation of Crimea in 2014, Nato countries deployed battlegroups in Poland and the Baltic states. Emmanuel Macron said he did not “believe in spontaneous miracles” as he arrived in Moscow for talks with Vladimir Putin. Moscow has also played down expectations ahead of the talks. Putin’s spokesman, Dmitri Peskov, described Macron’s visit as “very important” but said the situation was “too complex to expect a decisive breakthrough after just one meeting”. He said the US and its allies continued to ignore Russia’s security demands, describing the atmosphere as tense. Macron’s visit has drawn some criticism from EU analysts, but the French president has taken care to brief fellow European leaders. He also spoke to the US president, Joe Biden, on Sunday to “discuss ongoing diplomatic and deterrence efforts”, according to the White House. Germany’s new chancellor, Olaf Scholz, is due to meet Biden in the White House later on Monday, a visit described as a face-saving mission, where he is under pressure to show that Berlin is a reliable partner. Meanwhile, Germany’s foreign minister, Annalena Baerbock, is due to hold talks in Kyiv with her opposite number, Dmytro Kuleba, where she is likely to face calls to lift an export ban on weapons. Earlier on Monday Kuleba met a trio of EU foreign ministers from central Europe in the latest show of support for Ukraine. Debate continues to run on if and when Russia will launch an attack on Ukraine. While the Kremlin denies it has such plans, Latvia’s deputy prime minister and defence minister, Artis Pabriks, said one factor influencing the timing could be that many Russian troops camped at the border are sick with Covid and suffering from poor conditions, which could force a decision by the Kremlin. Emmanuel Macron’s meeting with Vladimir Putin is now under way, reports my colleague Kim Willsher in Paris. The meeting started at 15.30 GMT. The Élysée has described the meeting as a “strict face-to-face”, as there are only four people in the room: the two presidents and two interpreters. The Latvian defence minister, Artis Pabriks, has said Russian troops massed near the Ukrainian border were enduring poor conditions and falling sick, potentially forcing Vladimir Putin’s hand on whether to attack or withdraw. Pabriks, who is also deputy prime minister, told a virtual meeting of the German Marshall Fund of the United States: The news is coming out that conditions for his soldiers at the border are not so pleasant, compared to our barracks here or your barracks in the United States. There is also information that many people are suffering from Covid, so they are sick. So he needs to act. Pabriks said Putin’s options included launching an invasion or choosing another kind of action, such as annexing the rebel-run Luhansk and Donetsk regions, which, “with his media in the pocket, he could sell this as [being] a hero.” The third option would be a climbdown, but Pabriks said it was not clear how Putin would do this, having bet so heavily on the threat of war to gain concessions. “Putin is putting himself and Russia in a corner,” Pabriks said. The UK government will send 350 extra troops to Poland as a sign of support, the Guardian’s defence and security editor Dan Sabbagh reports. The troops will not be part of the Nato battlegroups set up in central and eastern Europe, to reinforce security after Russia’s annexation of Crimea in 2014. The UK currently leads the Nato battlegroup in Estonia with 828* troops and contributes to the Polish battlegroup, with 140* troops. *These numbers were correct in February 2021. If Russia is planning a military invasion of Ukraine, you would not learn much from the Russian press, where the top stories are Sino-Russian relations and the Winter Olympics, reports the BBC’s Moscow correspondent, Steve Rosenberg. The papers reflect how Moscow sees other European leaders, says Rosenberg in his indispensable guide to the Russian press. Nezavisimaya Gazeta has a complimentary article about the French president, Emmanuel Macron, who it sees as a leader similar in stature to Angela Merkel. Who, if not Macron? After the departure of German chancellor Angela Merkel there are no other politicians capable of talking on the same level with the president of Russia. Successful talks with Putin could help Macron achieve “personal leadership in a truly autonomous Europe,” the paper writes, describing him as “someone capable of taking responsibility and initiative in difficult situations”. Izvestiya is not impressed with Merkel’s successor, Olaf Scholz. One of its correspondents writes: He has turned Germany into an outsider on the international stage at a time when the world is suffering one of the most serious crises between east and east. At least Scholz fares better than the British prime minister. “[Boris] Johnson goodbye,” is the headline in the government paper Rossisykaya Gazeta. The French president, Emmanuel Macron, expressed guarded optimism as he arrived in Moscow for talks with Vladimir Putin, Reuters has reported. I’m reasonably optimistic but I don’t believe in spontaneous miracles. Macron is due to meet the Russian president at about 2pm GMT for talks, followed by a working dinner and a joint news conference. It’s also another busy day for diplomacy in Ukraine. Ukraine’s foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, is having a meeting with his counterparts from Austria, Slovakia and the Czech Republic. In Kyiv, he will meet Germany’s foreign minister, Annalena Baerbock, one day before the arrival of France’s Emmanuel Macron, who is due to hold talks with Ukraine’s leader, Volodymyr Zelenskiy In case France, or any other country, needed a reminder, Kuleba has listed Ukraine’s red lines: One of the EU foreign ministers, Slovakia’s Ivan Korčok, has posted this image of their visit to Stanitsya Luhanska, close to the frontline of Ukraine’s war with Russian-backed separatists. Before her trip to Kyiv – her second in three weeks – Baerbock spelled out Germany’s support for Ukraine’s territorial integrity. During my visit to Kyiv, I will once again make it unmistakably clear where we stand: as Ukraine’s partner in the EU, Nato and G7, with no ifs and buts on the country’s territorial integrity and on the side of the people of Ukraine … Together we will respond to any further Russian aggression against Ukraine with tough, very concrete measures. It could be a tense meeting. Germany has been criticised by Kuleba and other senior politicians for refusing to lift a block on the export of German-origin guns from Estonia to Ukraine, as well as perceived reluctance to include Nord Stream 2 in the list of sanctions against Russia. The head of Ukraine’s state gas company has called for the Nord Stream 2 pipeline to be shelved regardless of whether Russia invades Ukraine in the coming weeks. In an interview with the Guardian in Kyiv, Yuriy Vitrenko, the CEO of Naftogaz, said he “unfortunately” did not see much change of attitude from Germany on the Baltic Sea pipeline that bypasses Ukraine. In Germany, unfortunately we cannot see much change of attitude, but there is a change in the US. At least now it seems like the US administration realises that sanctions can stop this project Vitrenko has spent much of his time over recent months pushing western politicians to ditch Nord Stream 2. Last July he accompanied the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, to Berlin and joined a four-hour dinner with Angela Merkel, in which he said 90 minutes were devoted to Nord Stream. More recently he has been in Berlin meeting advisers to Scholz. Vitrenko said he believed the pipeline should be shelved whether or not Russia makes a further incursion into Ukraine in the coming weeks. Speaking last Wednesday, he said he believed that once gas started flowing through the pipeline, Vladimir Putin would be more likely to launch an attack on Ukraine, calculating that it would be hard for the Germans to make a proactive move to cut off gas. If he moves transit to Nord Stream 2 first, and then invades Ukraine, it will be much more difficult [for Germany to sanction the pipeline], because then German consumers will understand they have no heating as a direct result of the German government’s decision. Ultimately, Vitrenko said, the pipeline held the key to the future of Europe: If Germany doesn’t want a new world order as envisioned by Putin to be implemented first in Ukraine and then all over Europe, they should not allow Nord Stream 2 to go ahead. Speaking during a visit to Kyiv last week, the Polish prime minister, Mateusz Morawiecki, had a similar message, calling the pipeline “a powerful threat to peace throughout Europe”. Morawiecki, speaking alongside the Ukrainian prime minister, Denys Shmyhal, said: Through launching this pipeline, Berlin is loading Putin’s pistol, which he can then use to blackmail the whole of Europe. Guardian Newsroom: Will Russia invade Ukraine? Join Mark Rice-Oxley, Andrew Roth, Luke Harding, Nataliya Gumenyuk and Orysia Lutsevych discussing rising tensions between Russia and Ukraine, and diplomatic efforts to avoid conflict on Tuesday 8th February, 8pm GMT | 9pm CET | 12pm PST | 3pm EST. Book tickets here Emmanuel Macron’s visit to the Kremlin today to meet Russian President Vladimir Putin for an open-ended discussion about Ukraine, is a calculated risk by the French president according to France’s press. After the bilateral talks during the afternoon, both presidents will give a press conference. At the moment this is provisionally set for 20.45 Moscow time (17.45 UK time) but will depend on how long talks last. In the Sunday newspaper, Le Journal du Dimanche an article headlined “What Macron is going to say to Putin”, suggested Macron cannot leave the Russian capital to travel to Kiev in Ukraine unless he has obtained a signal of Russia’s willingness to “de-escalate” from Putin. A source told the paper: We have to be very realistic. We will not get any unilateral gesture, but it is vital to avoid a worsening of the situation. Europe 1 radio suggested the meeting was a risk for Macron. “It’s because he thinks he’s going to get that gesture or signal that he has gone”. Officially, such a high level diplomatic visit “without a time limit” could be dangerous for Macron as the presidential election nears. The station added: In reality, Emmanuel Macron wants to show that none of the other candidates except him would be able to have a head-to-head with the Russian president, that he’s the only one with the stature and authority to address the powerful…a sub text aimed at French voters.” Le Figaro turned the question on its head and asked what Macron could do for Putin. It is thought in the Russian capital, with pragmatism, that faced with a “hysterical” America warning of an imminent attack on Ukraine and a Europe “without a face or a voice”, only Macron is left as a useful person with whom to dialogue. But it warned: “The two men have disappointed each other many times over the last five years.” The German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, has set off on a whirlwind diplomatic tour today in an effort to avert a Russian invasion of Ukraine, starting in Washington where he is expected to be received by President Joe Biden this evening. Under pressure to show more commitment towards backing a military effort by Ukraine as it seeks to defend itself from the threat, but facing tough resistance domestically over deploying lethal weapons, Scholz’s first US visit since becoming German leader in December has been described at home and abroad as a “face-saving mission”, in which he will be expected to prove Germany is a reliable partner. Before his departure he struck a more defiant tone over the crisis than in recent weeks, informing the broadcaster ARD that he intended to send more troops to Lithuania in an effort to strengthen Nato’s eastern flank. Scholz is still at pains to prove that the crisis can be solved diplomatically, and this is what the German public also believes, drawing on the experiences of the cold war when there were frequent threats of violence and there was a strong sense of the danger being close at hand. But, crucially, the Biden-Scholz partnership remains untried and untested: Scholz is first and foremost viewed in the US capital as the “successor to Merkel”. He must yet prove he is his own politician and willing to provide European leadership. The success or failure of the leaders’ relationship could yet prove vital to averting a crisis. Not least as the French president Emmanuel Macron’s political future is unclear and the British prime minister Boris Johnson’s attention is being diverted by domestic affairs. Scholz acknowledged in the TV interview that “hard political work” would be required in the coming days and weeks, and that at stake was nothing less than “preventing war in Europe”. But there has been particular irritation in Washington over his refusal to explicitly state that the gas pipeline Nord Stream 2 will be halted if Russia carries out its threat to invade. Scholz has so far refused to be pushed any further than saying “everything is on the table”. He has left it to others, such as the German ambassador to Washington, Emily Haber, to in effect finish his sentence as the Americans would like to hear it. “The chancellor has openly said that in case of a Russian invasion into Ukraine, everything is on the table, all options, including Nord Stream 2,” she said in a recent interview. She also reportedly sent a diplomatic note to Berlin in which she warned that Germany was not being taken seriously as a reliable partner. Scholz has so far established something of a reputation as the chancellor who says little, who prefers keeping his statements vague and reacting to others’ comments rather than stating his own aims clearly. But this has contributed to a drop in his domestic popularity from 60% at the start of the year, to 43% just a month later, and he is under pressure to change his tactics. The Washington encounter, which will be followed by an interview with the broadcaster CNN, will probably force him to come clean on a number of uncomfortable questions, particularly surrounding energy security, namely: why it is that Germany remains so dependent on Russia for its energy, despite its decision a decade ago, to decommission all of its nuclear power plants by next year and phase out the use of coal by 2030? Scholz’s US trip will be followed by a meeting with the president of the European Council and the heads of Baltic states before he visits Ukraine and Russia next week. Emmanuel Macron’s meeting with Vladimir Putin in Moscow has stirred a lot of interest, but some are sceptical about what the French president is trying to do. In an interview with the Journal du Dimanche ahead of the trip, Macron said he believed that “the geopolitical objective of Russia today is clearly not Ukraine, but to clarify the rules of cohabitation with Nato and the EU”. The French president has said several times that Europe needs to devise a new security architecture for the continent that takes into account the expiry of a cold war-era arms control treaties. Carl Bildt, the former Swedish prime minister, said he was at a loss to understand what Macron meant about coming up with “a new order of security and stability”, according to the Voice of America website. In a reference to the European security system built on Nato, Bildt said: These next few months rather seem to call for firm defence of the existing post-1989 order. Macron, who was burned last summer when EU allies binned his proposal with Angela Merkel for an EU summit with Putin, has been consulting widely with other EU member states. Here is Estonia’s prime minister, Kaja Kallas: The French ambassador to Nato, Muriel Domenach, lists the calls he says Macron has had in recent days. Several EU analysts remain concerned by Macron’s proposals. When Germany’s chancellor, Olaf Scholz, meets the US president, Joe Biden, in the White House later on Monday, one issue will not be far away: Nord Stream 2. The Baltic Sea gas pipeline between Russia to Germany has always been hugely controversial. Now complete but pending regulatory approval, it has been caught in the crosshairs of Ukraine’s security crisis. The US has said Nord Stream 2 will not go forward if Russia invades Ukraine; Germany’s foreign minister, Annalena Baerbock, has promised it would be included as part of a “strong package of sanctions”. If you are looking for a guide to why this project is so politically fraught for Germany and Europe, do read this excellent piece by the Guardian’s diplomatic editor, Patrick Wintour. Here is a flavour: But the one thing this pipeline is not, as lamely claimed by the former German chancellor Merkel, is a purely commercial project. It has vast geostrategic consequence, with every inch of pipe a pitched political and legal battle. Indeed few engineering projects have thrown up so many issues: the restoration of the post-Soviet empire, the climate crisis, American bullying of Europe, Germany’s emotional embrace of Russia, the legal powers of the European Commission, corporate lobbying, energy forecasting, and Gazprom’s monopolistic model. Its fiercest critics have described it as a modern day betrayal on the scale of the Molotov-Ribbentrop pact of 1939. While questions mount about the future of Nord Stream 2, the controversial pipeline linking Russia and Germany, the European Union is looking elsewhere for gas supplies. The EU’s foreign policy chief, Josep Borrell, and the bloc’s energy commissioner, Kadri Simson, are in Washington to discuss energy security with the US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, and other top officials. The US and EU recently pledged to work together on energy supplies in an attempt to limit the effects of any Russia retaliation, for example reducing gas flows to Europe in response to western sanctions. The US is already the EU’s biggest supplier of liquified natural gas; the EU is also talking to Norway, Qatar, Azerbaijan and Algeria about boosting supplies. The European Commission president, Ursula von der Leyen, has been speaking on this topic at a conference on Monday. We are building a partnership for energy security with the United States, which is primarily about more LNG gas supplies. We are talking to other gas suppliers, for example Norway, about increasing their supplies to Europe. (Quote via Reuters) Critics would say the EU has been too slow to reduce its dependence on Russian gas: the bloc gets 41% of its natural gas imports from Russia, a figure that has hardly changed in more than a decade of turbulent relations between Moscow and European capitals. Even EU insiders admit the EU has not done enough. Here is Borrell in a blogpost ahead of his trip to Washington: In recent years, Russia has enhanced its resilience against economic sanctions, by increasing its foreign currency reserves, more than we have done to enhance our capacity to face potential gas supply cuts. We should urgently consider developing EU strategic gas reserves and the possibility of joint gas purchasing, as the commission has suggested. He is referring to European Commission proposals for voluntary joint purchase of gas reserves, part of a series of measures being discussed in response to soaring gas prices. This is Jennifer Rankin, taking over from Paul Owen, who launched today’s liveblog. Hello, and welcome to our live blog of the ongoing tensions between Russia and Ukraine. Today looks set to be dominated by diplomacy, as the French president, Emmanuel Macron, heads to Moscow for talks with Vladimir Putin, and the German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, holds talks in Washington with Joe Biden. Russia still denies planning to invade Ukraine but has tens of thousands of troops near the border. Moscow says it could take unspecified military measures if its demands – including a promise by Nato never to admit Kyiv – are not met. These terms are unacceptable to Nato. The White House national security adviser Jake Sullivan said on Sunday that Russia could invade Ukraine “any day”, triggering a conflict that would come at an “enormous human cost”. Macron believes he can deliver “a historic solution” to the crisis. Moscow has given the visit a guarded welcome, saying it would listen to the French president’s ideas, but played down expectations of a breakthrough. The Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov said: The situation is too complex to expect decisive breakthroughs in the course of one meeting. In recent days there has been nothing new on the topic of security guarantees for Russia, our western interlocutors prefer not to mention this topic. Two sources close to Macron told Reuters that one aim of his visit was to buy time and freeze the situation for several months. Unlike in the previous Ukraine crisis in 2015 when Angela Merkel and François Hollande travelled to the Kremlin together, Macron has not taken his German counterpart with him. Scholz will be travelling to Kyiv and then Moscow next week. Instead Scholz is in Washington meeting Biden. A continuing bone of contention between their two countries is the Russian Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline to Germany. US spokespeople have stated that the pipeline “will not move forward” if Russia attacks Ukraine, but the German chancellor has not gone that far. We’ll cover all this and more here throughout the day. Read more:My friend Mike Nally, who has died aged 83, made his name in journalism in the 1960s as a reporter for Granada Television’s Scene at 6.30 news programme and then for the BBC’s Look North. Later he was news editor at Radio Newcastle before returning to his print roots with the Observer, initially in London and then in Manchester as the paper’s northern correspondent until the late 90s. Mike was born in Crumpsall, Manchester, to Hilda (nee Clarkson), a civil servant, and her husband, Will Nally, a journalist and Labour MP for Bilston in the West Midlands from 1945 to 1955. Mike attended North Manchester grammar school for boys before going on to study politics at Manchester University. His first job as a reporter was with the Stretford Journal, and he further honed his reporting skills on the Manchester Evening Chronicle, before moving to Granada. A man of the left with a distrust of the establishment and its institutions, Mike had an inquisitorial style of questioning that was rare in the media world of the 60s. On one occasion, in an encounter on the BBC Northwards slot, he reduced the corrupt politician T Dan Smith – at the time supremely confident in his command of the media and recently named the Architect Journal’s Man of the Year – to utter silence. However, Mike’s direct style of interviewing caused problems at the BBC and, after clashes with executives, he left Look North in 1970 to become news editor at Radio Newcastle, at the time one of the BBC’s more adventurous local radio stations. In 1973 he moved back into print journalism with the Observer in Manchester, from where he provided insights into regional industry and politics, as well as delightful cameo articles of north country life. In 1996 Mike moved into teaching journalism at the University of Central Lancashire in Preston, inspiring dozens of aspiring young journalists and bringing to that task – until retirement in 2009 – the same restless irreverence that had characterised his earlier work. In a typical moment teaching about public relations officers, he said: “My first reaction to a press release is: ‘what are the bastards trying to hide from me?’” He is survived by his wife, Brenda (nee Taylor), whom he married in 1963, their sons, Sean and Joel, and grandchildren Maya, Orla and Otis.I moved into a newly built house in June 2020. HMRC has still not updated my postcode on its records, so passport and driving licence renewals have had to be completed by post. I have tried to complain about this using the online complaints system. After spending 45 minutes completing six pages of the signing-in process, and receiving a one-time password and my 12-digit ID, I was asked for … my postcode. Jim Rotheram Preston, Lancashire • It’s hard to impress on non-south Asians what Lata Mangeshkar meant to one-sixth of humanity (Lata Mangeshkar, legendary Bollywood singer, dies at 92, 6 February). She was the background music of the lives of millions over many decades. In a time and place where division was – and remains – the modus operandi, she was a bridge between generations, castes, religions, and even countries. She was a national treasure. Sheilendr Khipple Wilmette, Illinois, US • Growing weary of Wordle, I have devised an alternative mental challenge – Sunaku – in which the sum of the numerals in each square, with an appropriate number of zeros inserted in the correct positions, will equal the total government write-off for fraud during the pandemic. Hilary Veale Weymouth, Dorset • Dr David Mathieson (Letters, 2 February) got off lightly on the duty that he paid for his books post-Brexit. My son sent me a painting for Christmas, marked as a gift. I had to pay £65.12 before Parcelforce would deliver it. Philomena O’Hare Farsley, West Yorkshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Once again, it’s remarkable to see how little is understood about the workings of capitalism by those who operate at the very top of it (Bank of England boss criticised for asking workers not to demand pay rise, 4 February). “The rich cannot buy great quantities of bread,” the economist JK Galbraith observed after the Wall Street crash of 1929 and America’s struggle to revive its economy. He meant that the goods and services that keep the high street (and its suppliers and manufacturers) going come from the everyday spending of the masses, not from the activities of the very few mega-rich speculators and rentiers who always end up causing volatility and boom and bust. While no one would want a return to the union militancy of the 1970s, it was pointed out at the time by some economists that at least the big pay rises to workers put money in their pockets to spend, which stopped the economy tilting into recession. The real problems today come from high rents, a dysfunctional housing market and private sector greed. The average household is mired in personal or mortgage debt – a problem that wouldn’t have been so evident in the 1970s, but is certainly a problem today, as the Bank of England worries about the effects of raised interest rates. David Redshaw Gravesend, Kent • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Nesrine Malik colourfully describes the protracted demise of Boris Johnson as a “slow bleed, rather than an immediate fall” (This government has been built on a fantasy. Restoring reality will cost the Tories dear, 7 February). She rightly suggests that because the Conservative party narrative is built on lies, it will reframe the prime minister’s lies and allow him to live another day, and then another, and yet another. Those of us who have written to our local Conservative MPs about our distress at partygate and the flouting of rules seem to all have received replies with common phrases indicating that action is being taken to improve the operation at No 10. Not one word of contrition or recognition of the prime minister’s individual failings and personal responsibility. In almost every conversation I have these days, both young and old share shock at the nonsense going on in parliament, and anxieties about the economic crisis, the rising cost of living and how they are going to manage. While this prime minister and his government bluster on, it is the rest of us who will experience the slow bleed of increasing prices, increased taxes, real incomes falling, further diminished public services and the removal of a safety net to catch us when we fall. All this government offers are sticking plasters when what we really need is major surgery. Peter Riddle Wirksworth, Derbyshire • Nesrine Malik emphasises the need for the survival of some sort of credible Conservative party. Those of us who have never voted Conservative, and never will, should be hoping that the downfall of Boris Johnson does not leave behind a vacuum that a new Nigel Farage (or indeed the old one) will be only too happy to fill. It would be tragic if the mainland Conservatives went the way of Ulster unionism, steadily replaced as contenders for office by hardliners. Geoff Reid Bradford, West Yorkshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Andy Haldane, co-author of the government’s big levelling-up report, wants to pair a swathe of the UK’s major material needs with the thrust of achievements in Renaissance Florence (Report, 5 February). It would be difficult to entertain a more idiotic vision. Florence had no coordination between public expenditure and urban improvement. Taxation staggered from one need to the next. Churches and rich patrons were the prime movers behind all major architectural commissions. Michelangelo and Leonardo da Vinci deserted Florence for more promising venues. The Medici began to put their hands into the public till even under the 15th-century republic. Any conception of the public good was rudimentary. The political upper class swiftly made its peace with the overmighty Medici in the 16th century. Enough said. Lauro Martines London • Levelling up isn’t just about a new bus route or train line, it’s about rebuilding the foundations of this country’s prosperity. At the heart of levelling up should be the reform of our education system. We need to teach creativity, which helps people solve problems. We need to value engineers and tradespeople such as electricians, plumbers and gas fitters, so we need more focus on those skills at ages of 16-plus. It’s ironic that the person in charge of levelling up is the one who took England’s education system back to learning by rote and destroyed what would really make a difference. Michael Sanders London • One of the projects that will apparently receive funding in the white paper on levelling up (Report, 2 February) is money for the electrification of the Midland mainline north from Bedford to Sheffield. Some 15 years ago, I was a member of South Yorkshire Passenger Transport and I can remember councillors welcoming the news that the rail line up to Sheffield was to be electrified. Since then, this announcement has been trotted out a number of times, with a lengthy hiatus when we were promised an extension to the city from the proposed HS2 route to Leeds instead. Work is finally beginning on electrifying the line from Bedford to Market Harborough. Yet again, we are faced with a recycled project with recycled funds, the eventual completion of which stretches further and further into the future. Sylvia Dunkley Sheffield • Lisa Nandy is right to point to the vacuum at the heart of the levelling-up plans. Tagged on to the prosperous south-east, the Isle of Wight has been underfunded for decades in terms of money per pupil. We have had a gutful of education change and boast such a mosaic of secondary provision that it lacks coherence. Local housing is well beyond the means of residents thanks to second homes and holiday lets cornering the market. Our ferry links remain among the most expensive in the world. We are deprived of subsidies enjoyed by other coastal crossings. This has led to higher prices and less frequent crossings, which have affected social mobility and trade. We don’t need more of the same tired policies. We need levelling up of the money that we have been deprived of in the past and involvement of island people in their future. Yvonne Williams Ryde, Isle of Wight • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Kirstie Allsopp has been examining why young people can’t afford to buy houses, making the following suggestions: they should move to cheaper areas; they should spend less time at the gym; they shouldn’t waste their money on a Netflix subscription. You don’t need me to point out the flaws in her arithmetic; that vital work has already been done, not least by young people. We all know that clashes between generations are the stupidest internecine conflicts humanity has ever been able to dream up. The only thing keeping them alive are these regular bulletins from the “things young people should stop buying if they want to afford homes” gazette. It started in 2016, when an Australian demographer, Bernard Salt, criticised millennials for going to “hipster cafes”; by the following year, this had been distilled down to the quintessential hipster item, the avocado. If only they would forgo their fruit/vegetable on toast, they would be able to save for a deposit. Though it started in Australia, this line, like a lie, had got halfway round the world before the truth – that it would take hundreds of years before your daily avocado savings would amount to a house – had got its pants on. Just as any coffee, so long as it was milky and Italian in genesis, came to stand in for “privileged metropolitan”, so the avocado effortlessly swelled to represent “any young person, without any defined range – so, for practical purposes, any person younger than me”. If you had coffee and avocado, that made you a privileged young person, and, therefore, in the world of food symbolism, beneath contempt, politically irrelevant. It didn’t make a whole load of sense, but it made more sense than going after their Netflix subscriptions. It’s a platform you would be as, if not more, likely to associate with the middle-aged, so it just reinforces, surely inadvertently, the underlying message that what the middle-aged have as their birthright, the young will never deserve. Allsopp should have gone after this generation for chilling. Even people who don’t know what “Netflix and chill” means still know that it’s a young person thing. Zoe Williams is a Guardian columnistMohamed Salah is expected to return to training with Liverpool on Tuesday as he looks to move on quickly from defeat in the Africa Cup of Nations final with Egypt. Liverpool’s leading goalscorer arrived back in England shortly after his country’s penalty shootout loss to Senegal in Cameroon on Sunday. He intends to join Jürgen Klopp’s players in a light recovery session on Tuesday and put himself in contention to face Leicester in the Premier League at Anfield on Thursday. Salah’s involvement against Brendan Rodgers’ side is not guaranteed, with Liverpool waiting to assess the forward after his recent workload and heavy travel itinerary. But his availability is another fillip for Klopp with the team still involved in four competitions. Sadio Mané, who converted the winning penalty to seal Senegal’s first Africa Cup of Nations title, may not be back in England until Wednesday having taken part in a homecoming parade in Dakar. Liverpool coped comfortably in the absence of Salah and Mané, winning two Premier League games, reaching the Carabao Cup final at the expense of Arsenal and advancing to the FA Cup fifth round with victories over Shrewsbury and Cardiff. They have also added the Colombia international Luis Díaz to their attacking ranks while the pair have been in Cameroon and welcomed back Harvey Elliott from a serious ankle injury.The former owner of Norton Motorcycles faces up to two years in prison after pleading guilty to illegally investing millions of pounds of people’s retirement savings into his own businesses. Stuart Garner, who acquired the classic marque in 2008 and was feted by a series of UK government ministers including the MP Stephen Barclay, the prime minister’s new chief of staff since Saturday, admitted three offences at Derby magistrates court on Monday. Garner will be sentenced at the end of the month, when he faces a maximum of two years in prison or an unlimited fine. The admission comes after pension holders had been complaining for years that the businessman had repeatedly ignored their requests to return their retirement savings. It also follows a 2020 Guardian and ITV News investigation that showed how more than 200 “ordinary working people” had had their entire pension pots invested into Norton shares. The motorcycle company slumped into administration in January 2020, leaving the pension fund holders owed about £14m. In June 2020, Garner was ordered to pay the money back after the Pensions Ombudsman ruled he acted “dishonestly”. It is understood the pension holders are still waiting for any of their funds to be returned. On Monday, the court heard that the offences related to three Norton pension schemes, Dominator 2012, Commando 2012 and Donington MC, which had a combined total of 227 members. The investments into Norton breached technical pensions laws preventing more than 5% of an occupational scheme’s value from being invested into assets connected to the employer’s company. Nicola Parish, executive director of frontline regulation at the Pensions Regulator, said: “As a trustee, Stuart Garner failed to comply with restrictions on investments which are designed to protect the funds of pension schemes. Trustees have a vital role in protecting the benefits of members and we will take action where that responsibility is abused.” While the Norton schemes were occupational pension funds, which are usually set up for the benefit of a company’s employees, most of the pension savings were originally invested into Norton during 2012 and 2013 by people with no connection to the motorcycle firm. They were later shown to be victims of a so-called “pensions liberation” fraud, a type of scam when savers are tricked into switching their retirement funds out of established schemes. The case resulted in its promoter, Simon Colfer, being convicted of fraud in 2018 for the way in which he had sold the schemes. Garner has always said he had no knowledge of Colfer’s fraud. Two further Garner associates involved in setting up the Norton pensions schemes – Andrew Meeson and Peter Bradley – were also convicted of a separate tax fraud in 2013, when they reclaimed £5m of tax rebates from fictitious pension contributions. Court documents from that trial state that £990,000 of the proceeds of the tax fraud were loaned to Garner, which he used to originally acquire the Norton brand in 2008. Garner was not implicated in any wrongdoing in the tax fraud case. He did not respond to invitations to comment on Monday.My mother, Frances Seeley, who has died aged 85 after a stroke, was a primary school teacher who was involved in training staff across Coventry in the Standard Attainment Tests (SATs). The daughter of Florence (nee Weaver) and Oliver Smith, Frances was born in Uckfield, East Sussex, where her parents were in service. During the second world war, her father was away from home with the army for five years and was awarded the Military Medal. The family moved to Coventry, where Frances spent the night of the blitz under a staircase at home, as her baby brother, Robert, had chicken pox and and the family could not get to their shelter. Her father was demobbed in 1946, but her mother died within a year of his return. Frances passed the 11-plus exam and attended Stoke Park grammar school for girls. The family finances were strained, and, though intellectually able, Frances had to start work. She got a job in the dye house at the textile manufacturer Courtaulds in the city, where her facility to pipette liquids to an amazing degree of accuracy was much admired. In 1958 she married Peter Seeley, who worked at the Morris car factory. As well as bringing up their two children, Frances was endlessly patient and thoughtful in the care of her mother-in-law, who lived with us from 1967 until her death in 1985. In 1968 Frances fulfilled her ambition of training as a teacher, at the Canley College of Education (later merged with the University of Warwick). She chose art and craft as a specialism and was especially keen on pottery and weaving. Her first permanent teaching post was in 1971 at Hollyfast primary school in Coventry, followed in 1977 by Hearsall primary – a school with a much more diverse catchment, where she enjoyed working with children of many cultures, faiths and ethnicities. For many years Frances led the school’s annual camp for children – many of whom had never been away from home. With the introduction of the new Standard Attainment Tests (SATs) from 1989, Frances took the opportunity to put herself forward for this work. She thought that if teachers were going to have to implement the new system, it was better that they heard about it and were trained in it by someone who had real experience in those roles. On retirement in 1994 Frances took up the role of churchwarden for All Saints, Allesley, where she had worshipped for more than 40 years. She was instrumental in bringing about the creation of a woodland burial site alongside the church. She was involved in charitable activities, as a member of St John Ambulance, raising funds for Leukaemia Research and running charity events for the church. Peter died in 2018. After her stroke in 2019, Frances moved to live first with her son – my brother, Chris - and then with me in Nottingham. Frances is survived by Chris and me, and four grandchildren.The supermarket chain Asda has committed to making its cheapest food ranges more widely available, after the anti-poverty campaigner Jack Monroe raised concerns that low-income shoppers were facing price increases because they could no longer get hold of them. The retailer said it had taken onboard Monroe’s comments and would stock its full Smart Price and Farm Stores ranges in all 581 food stores and online, increasing the number of customers who have access to the products. Some of the deals, which include 1kg bags of rice for 45p and tins of chopped tomatoes for 28p, had been taken off the website and removed from some stores as the supermarket streamlined its offer. But last month Monroe pointed out that some shoppers were in effect facing triple-digit inflation because they were no longer able to buy products from these ranges and had to buy more expensive basics. In one example she gave of an unnamed retailer, the cheapest 1kg bags of rice had been removed from the shelves, and the next alternative was a 500g pack costing £1, which worked out at a 344% increase. She added that in her local Asda, the cheapest bag of pasta was no longer a 29p bag from the Smart Price range but an own-brand version costing 70p – a 141% price rise. Asda said 150 value-range products were stocked in 300 stores currently, and by 1 March it would introduce all 200 of them across its outlets. This week it increased the number available online by 100 to 187, and it will add more by the end of the month. Meg Farren, Asda’s chief customer officer, said: “We want to help our customers’ budgets stretch further and have taken onboard the comments about the availability of our Smart Price range made by Jack Monroe. We are taking steps to put our full Smart Price and Farm Stores ranges in store and online to make these products as accessible as possible.” The rising cost of energy bills and food is putting household budgets under pressure, and Monroe raised concerns that headline inflation figures do not capture the impact on those with the least money to spend. She has set up her own index to track the cost of essentials, which she said would “document the disappearance of the budget lines and the insidiously creeping prices of the most basic versions of essential items at the supermarket”. After she launched the campaign last month, the Office for National Statistics said it accepted that every person had their own inflation rate and it would do more to capture the impact of price increases on different income groups. Monroe welcomed the move, tweeting: “Delighted to be able to tell you that the @ONS have just announced that they are going to be changing the way they collect and report on the cost of food prices and inflation to take into consideration a wider range of income levels and household circumstances.”Pupils who were sent home to learn remotely during lockdown may no longer feel the same need to turn up for school, according to an Ofsted report, which also cites parents requesting online lessons for their children during term-time holidays. The report comes after an investigation into low attendance in schools, which found the switch to online lessons had “negatively affected” some secondary school pupils’ perceptions of the need to be in school and could be contributing to high absence rates. Some parents who felt their children had learned well using remote lessons wanted to continue, while others whose children have a history of poor attendance used “possible Covid” as an excuse for absence, sometimes resulting in 10 days off school without a confirmatory PCR test. Others had apparently misunderstood the role of online lessons. “Some parents think that remote education can be provided for non-Covid-related circumstances, such as being on holiday, which leaders have to explain is not the case,” the report says. According to the latest government statistics, attendance in state-funded schools fell to 87.4% on 20 January, with 415,000 pupils off for Covid-related reasons. Pre-pandemic, the overall absence rate in 2018-19 was 4.7%. The report, published by the schools watchdog on Monday, confirmed that the most common reason for higher than normal absences was pupils having Covid, but parents’ and pupils’ anxieties were also having an impact, as well as the shift in attitudes to school among some young people. It also found that some parents were keeping children home unnecessarily after a contact with someone who tests positive for Covid, “finding it hard to move on from the ‘bubble-isolation mentality’”. The report, Securing Good Attendance and Tackling Persistent Absence, follows a call last year by the education secretary, Nadhim Zahawi, for a close examination into low attendance rates in schools in England. “It appears that the provision of remote education during national lockdowns has negatively affected some pupils’ perceptions of the need to be in school, particularly in secondary schools,” the report states. “There is a sense from some pupils, as one leader explained, that ‘you weren’t fussed when we weren’t in school all that time in lockdown and we did our work at home, so why does it matter so much now?’” it went on. Many schools have continued to make lessons available online because of continuing high Covid rates with many pupils still off sick and isolating. Some pupils have told teachers, however, they would prefer to work at home and can’t understand why they can’t work remotely rather than coming into school. The report says: “Where one pupil has Covid-19 and is receiving remote education, this can affect other pupils’ perceptions: ‘My mate’s home, learning online, so the provision must be there, so why can’t I have it too?’, as one leader put it.” Ofsted said some absences were linked to families who feel they have not had a holiday in a long time, with some taking a previously cancelled holiday during term time, though some schools reported fewer term time holidays. Among other influences, one school leader said some families were affected by reports of rising Covid rates in their local area and kept their children off school as a result. Ofsted’s chief inspector, Amanda Spielman, said: “There’s no doubt that schools continue to face some very tricky challenges around pupil attendance. But it is clear that leaders who have previously improved pupil attendance have managed to maintain good levels this term by applying the same principle of ‘listen, understand, empathise and support – but do not tolerate [absences]’.”The discovery of a soundproofed torture chamber believed to have been used by a narcotics gang should remind recreational cocaine users of the consequences of their habits, a Dutch public prosecutor has said. Koos Plooij told a court in Amsterdam that the violence of the drug trade was a “repulsive, but apparently unavoidable” result of the widespread use of illegal drugs in the Netherlands and its neighbouring countries. “The question is how many people are willing to admit that there is indeed a connection between their cocaine use – whether it is to party, deal with work stress or suppress psychological problems – and the underworld that is happy to answer demand but according to its own rules: corrupting, undermining, tough, sparing nothing and nobody,” Plooij said. The comments were made at the latest hearing in the case of 11 suspects, including an alleged ringleader known as Roger “Piet Costa” P, who are accused of planning to murder rivals at an apparent torture site in Wouwse Plantage in Brabant. Two years ago, police officers, acting on intercepted messages, discovered seven shipping containers in Wouwse Plantage in Brabant, six of which were allegedly used as cells containing handcuffs and legcuffs. In the seventh container was a refashioned dentist’s chair, with straps for tying arms and legs, finger clamps, scalpels, claw hammers, pliers, loppers, pruning shears, gas burners, tie wraps and duct tape. The container was sound proofed. Officers also found a freezer large enough to hold more than one person and a mortar mixing tub which was allegedly going to be used for waterboarding victims. The court heard that a second site in Rotterdam was the operating base for an “arrest team” whose task was to pick up their intended targets and take them to the site in Wouwse Plantage. Prosecutors provided the court with an intercepted message from the suspect known as Piet Costa in which he wrote, “There are a few now and I hope I get the chance to torture them”. A second man, who is terminally ill and not currently on trial, allegedly wrote: “If they don’t cooperate, right in the knee”. The court heard that the wives and children of the alleged gang’s rivals were also in danger of being targeted and “detained under the most barbaric conditions”. In both sites, officer found stolen police uniforms, bulletproof vests and blue flashing lights. Prosecutors called for a 12-year jail sentence for Roger P, known as Piet Costa, who is already facing a jail sentence of 17 years and nine months sentence over a separate conviction. He has been described as a major figure in the drug world. The prosecution said there was nothing to substantiate the claims made by one of the suspects that they believed the containers were being set up for the purposes of growing hemp. The suspects deny the charges.There is a long and inglorious history in racing of individual bodies or businesses opting for short-term gain ahead of the broader interests of the sport. But even so the Jockey Club’s decision to sign a five-year deal with the gaming giant Playtech, which was announced last week, feels like a new low. The result, according to Playtech’s casino director, James Frendo, will be “a full range of exceptional and exciting cross-product content”. Or the Jockey Club flogging Playtech some racing-themed wrapping paper for software that mechanically grinds a fixed percentage of turnover from its users, depending on your point of view. And of all the moments to jump into bed with a gaming company, they have done it now, just before a government White Paper with proposals for reform of the gambling laws which could have a profound impact on the sport’s revenue stream from betting. The ideas that have been floated to reduce gambling-related harm include a blanket ban on advertising, “affordability” checks before customers are allowed to deposit or gamble, which would require punters to hand over extensive banking and financial details to a new regulator, and a monthly cap on gambling “spend” of as little as £100. Where the policy-makers eventually decide to draw the lines remains to be seen, but it has often been compared to a choice between regulating gambling like alcohol or, much more strictly, like tobacco. Racing can cope with the former but it would on a long, slow slide towards oblivion if the government opts for the latter. The fundamental differences between betting, where the odds are fluid and punters can win, and gaming, where the fixed margin is unbeatable, were appreciated and understood by legislation until the 2005 Gambling Act blurred the distinction. The big off-course firms – which had built their brands on betting – were delighted, and they spent the next 15 years raking in billions from gaming machines in “betting” shops until the maximum stake was finally cut from £100 to £2 in April 2019. But the distinction was blurred in the exploding online sector too, allowing the big-name brands to not only offer slots and casino products to their account holders, but actively cross-promote gaming products to racing and sports punters. This led to what is now a fairly standard business model across the industry. First, use big racing and sporting events, such as the Jockey Club’s crown jewel at Cheltenham next month, to sign up new accounts. Next, use profiling to weed out anyone who promises to be “uneconomic” – they can tell within three bets, apparently. And then push as many of the remainder as possible towards the gaming side of the business, via “free” spins and so on. It is grubby and cynical, and also highly effective. It deters punters from betting on racing – what’s the point if they restrict you the instant you have a decent win? – and, perhaps of most concern, pushes potential problem gamblers towards casinos and slots, where the rapid-fire spin rate could be seen as addictive by design. No one is suggesting that betting, on racing or anything else, is entirely safe for all gamblers, and that needs regulating too. But the problem-gambling rate associated with slots and gaming products is significantly higher. As the Gambling Commission pointed out in 2020, “activities that permit high-frequency participation are more likely to be associated with harm and more readily facilitate problematic behaviour, such as loss-chasing”. The best outcome for racing from the latest review of the gambling laws would be alcohol-style regulation for betting and a tobacco-style regime for gaming. That would require, for instance, complete separation between the betting and gaming sides of a firm’s operation, including separate licences and sites as well as a blanket ban on cross-promotion. The penalty for any breach would be suspension or loss of the firm’s gaming licence, which would help to focus the compliance department’s attention on the importance of sticking to the rules. Nor is there any obvious reason why the real-world £2 maximum spin on the slots should not apply online, too. To reach that point, or somewhere close to it, racing needs to argue for as much regulatory blue water as possible between betting and gaming, and ideally to do so with one voice. Few events demonstrate the difference between betting and its drab, soulless distant cousin quite like Cheltenham, where everything from the backdrop to the wild uncertainty and intensity of the competition adds to the experience. And yet the Jockey Club is willing to hawk the Festival’s name and reputation to a gaming company in return for … well, probably rather more than 30 pieces of silver, but a miserable, unworthy sum all the same. That is the same Jockey Club, let’s not forget, which operates under a Royal Charter that requires it to act for “the long-term good of British racing”. Charlie Boss, the Jockey Club’s chief commercial officer, said last week that “we did some very serious due diligence into the player safety capabilities [at Playtech] and what they offer there”. That they were willing to consider a deal in the first place, however, suggests they either get the difference between betting and gaming but do not think it really matters, or they do not understand it all. It is 10-11 each of two on which would be the deeper cause for concern.It seems a lifetime ago now that Camilla Parker Bowles was a scarlet woman, a mistress so reviled some felt she would never be accepted by the public. This week it was announced that she will become Queen consort when her husband becomes king, in what felt like the final reward for years of being a Good Wife; the kind who supportively, unselfishly and discreetly enables her husband to become the best version of himself. As an anonymous royal source told the Daily Mail approvingly, Camilla saw her job as doing whatever she was asked to do: “You don’t try to shape the role to your advantage. It’s about duty and service.” And if it’s taken three solid decades of self-effacement to transform her from hate figure to national treasure – well, nobody said being a Good Wife was easy, or indeed fun. Carrie Johnson has certainly found it hard going, judging by a new biography from the Tory peer Lord Ashcroft in which her critics portray her as the wrong kind of wife entirely; too meddlesome, too “woke”, too insistent on her husband changing the odd nappy, and altogether too unlike her predecessor, Marina Wheeler, who made his life run so smoothly that he didn’t have to worry about anything (and was duly rewarded for her efforts by being repeatedly cheated on). Poor Boris needs “mothering”, we’re told, not someone nagging him about net zero. Setting aside the fact that portraying the prime minister as a needy manchild does him no favours, the trouble with this reductive nonsense is that as an explanation for his current misfortunes, it simply doesn’t wash. Wheeler was not some surrendered wife content with reverently rearranging her husband’s sock drawer, but a leading QC and committed Brexiter who argued trenchantly in the run-up to the referendum for curtailing the influence of the European court of justice, and was widely credited with persuading her wobbling husband to back Brexit. (Wifely influence can be surprisingly acceptable in Tory circles, so long as it’s in the “right” direction.) Carrie Johnson, meanwhile, may well have been guilty of using the network she once developed as a special adviser to steer her husband’s government in her preferred direction, but she has become a lightning rod for unfair criticism and downright misogyny. Downing Street can be a lonely place for spouses, but perhaps particularly one dealing in quick succession with the near-death of her husband, two births, a miscarriage and rumours that he might be pining for the last wife, all while trying to find her footing on a very public tightrope. It’s too easy to blame every controversial decision, intragovernment tension or inexplicable U-turn on her whispering in the prime ministerial ear, when all too often the problem is his own ideological slipperiness and strategic preference for chaos. Just as it did in the days of Camilla being pitted against Diana, setting two wives against each other conveniently obscures the role of the man stood between them. All successful marriages are partnerships, and in politics that’s perhaps unusually true. David Cameron would have been a different man without Samantha shaking up some of his assumptions; Theresa May drew confidence from rock-steady Philip. But it is prime ministers who set the direction of their governments and the culture inside Downing Street. Johnson’s hatred of personal confrontation, learned in childhood, leaves him wanting to be all things to all people. While this fuzziness is electoral catnip – who else could have persuaded so many starkly different groups of voters in 2019 that he was simultaneously on all their sides? – it is no recipe for clear leadership internally. Those who have worked for him describe a secretive man, who in an argument leaves both sides with the impression he agrees with them before reneging on one the minute he leaves the room. As prime minister, he is forced daily into making hard choices that reveal either his true convictions or strange lack of them, while the glib half-truths to which he resorts when cornered are quickly exposed. None of that is his wife’s fault. The strengths and weaknesses Johnson exhibits as prime minister are the same strengths and weaknesses evident throughout his career. And to the extent that Carrie has power over his decisions, it can only be the power he allows her to have. Like blaming a mistress for the breakup of a marriage, blaming a wife for a politician’s failures obscures the fact that he’s the one who made a vow to the country – and the one ultimately responsible for sticking to it. Gaby Hinsliff is a Guardian columnistThe Today programme presenter Justin Webb has been partially rebuked by the BBC after he suggested students were lying when they accused a university professor of transphobia. Introducing Radio 4’s newspaper review last October, Webb said: “And quite a lot of coverage still of Kathleen Stock, the academic from Sussex University who’s been abused by students who accuse her, falsely, of transphobia. She says her union has now effectively ended her career. It’s published a statement of support, not for her but for those who are abusing her.” Four listeners complained to the BBC that Webb’s use of “falsely” was inaccurate and betrayed a personal opinion. Three also complained of inaccuracy and apparent bias in describing the students who had been protesting against Stock as “abusing her”. Stock left her position as a philosophy professor at the University of Sussex at the end of last year after protests over her views on gender identification and transgender rights. She said she had no choice but to resign after protests from students and opposition from fellow academics. The BBC’s editorial complaints unit ruled that Webb was not sufficiently accurate when he suggested the accusation of transphobia against Stock had been disproved. This was because the “validity or otherwise of the accusation of transphobia are the heart of the controversy”. However, the BBC rejected listener complaints that Webb or the Today programme staff breached impartiality rules by expressing their personal opinions on a controversial subject. Instead, they said the word “falsely” was used by the presenter because he was introducing a summary of a Spectator article by Julie Bindel that was supportive of Stock and criticised “extreme transgender ideology”. The BBC complaints unit also ruled Webb’s description of the student protesters as abusive was accurate because some of the language they had used was “incontestably abusive, irrespective of the merits of the arguments”. Among those who filed complaints to the BBC was Freddy McConnell, a transgender journalist who recently lost his legal battle to register as his child’s father. The public broadcaster has increasingly struggled with how to cover transgender issues, with editorial clashes between staff in the newsroom as well as rolling criticism on social media of specific articles. Last year the BBC withdrew from a diversity scheme run by the LGBT charity Stonewall that provided guidelines on running an inclusive workplace. Executives said that although it did not believe membership of the scheme compromised its impartiality, the perception that it could do so was causing problems for the BBC. At the time the BBC director general, Tim Davie, said his organisation was committed to providing a safe space but insisted “our journalism must be impartial and reflect a range of views” on policy debates such as changes to the law around transgender issues.For Luke Garrard, it was all about creating a moment, a rush of joy, something to remember for ever and, given the odds against his Boreham Wood team in the FA Cup fourth round at Bournemouth on Sunday, the manager would have taken anything – and especially a goal. Garrard got that and what a story it was for the captain, Mark Ricketts, at 37 years young, when he threaded home a low sidefoot on 38 minutes to give the National League side the lead. Ricketts had not trained from Tuesday to Friday and he did the bare minimum on Saturday as he nursed an injury that needed an injection last Monday. “Mark was still feeling it after the session on Saturday,” Garrard says. “I said: ‘I don’t care. You’re walking us out at Bournemouth. I don’t care if it’s 15 minutes or 20 minutes. You deserve that.’” Garrard wanted the moment for his players, particularly the stalwarts such as Ricketts; for the fans; for the chairman, Danny Hunter, who has done everything since his takeover in 1999 and, yes, for himself. Why not? “When we scored the first goal, I would probably have taken a 5-1 loss … just to have a moment,” Garrard says. Garrard and everybody connected to the club ended up with so much more and the scenes after the final whistle, when little Boreham Wood had hung on to win 1-0 and set up a fifth-round tie at Everton, featured plenty of people taking leave of their senses. At 11pm the previous night, Garrard had received a FaceTime call from a member of the club’s staff who was already in Bournemouth at a hotel. “There were 30 or 40 fans [outside the hotel] and they were singing my name … incredible,” he says. After 17 years at Boreham Wood, initially as a player and as the manager since October 2015, his bond with the support is unbreakable. Garrard was in tears at full time, partly because he had his wife and two young sons at the stadium, along with other family members and friends. He stayed back at first to allow the players to celebrate in front of the away end but, a little later, he had his moment alone with them. There was a touch of the Jürgen Klopps about his fist pump and their cheers. Boreham Wood, whose players are full-time professionals, have earned roughly £240,000 in prize money from the Cup run. They collected £110,000 in TV money from the Bournemouth tie and, when their shares of gate receipts are factored in, it is believed they have made about £500,000 – with more to come at Everton, particularly if it is televised. “This will fill a small void in a big black hole,” Garrard says, as he reflects on the impact of the pandemic on the club. “But I’ll tell you now that the chairman would pay half a million to have a moment like this. Because he’s saying that he’s coming towards the later stages of his life. “Money is money. He says it to me every time. Don’t worry about the money. He never puts pressure on me to go on a Cup run. But to create those moments …” Garrard is asked whether he shared a moment with Hunter after the match. “I’ve made a fat man happy,” he says, smiling. “And that’s not me … I sound so rude. He says it in his interviews. ‘You make a fat man happy.’” He can be familiar with Hunter, he can poke fun, because they are so tight. “It’s not a chairman-manager relationship. He calls me his sixth son. I just love the man. “There is a pandemic but he paid everyone at the club 100%. He gave everyone £100 a week to pay for their [online] food shopping so they wouldn’t have to go to the supermarkets and risk bringing Covid back to their homes. I was getting unbelievable steak every week. He remortgaged his house [in March 2020 to put the money into the club].” Garrard was impressed by the Bournemouth manager, Scott Parker, who came into the dressing room to congratulate them. “I have to say: ‘Who does that?’” Garrard says. “For him to have that about him after a defeat is incredible.” He has asked Parker whether he can shadow him in training for four or five days at some point. So now for Everton. Now for Frank Lampard and his assistant manager, Ashley Cole. “I’m an Arsenal man so to see Ashley Cole … I probably won’t know how to put two words together,” Garrard says. “Frank Lampard is an England legend, a Chelsea legend. But I’ll be asking him the same thing I did with Scott Parker. ‘Can I come in and shadow you?’ He’s unbelievable. Hopefully he keeps the score under 10. “My players deserve this. They deserve to walk out at Goodison and hear the [Z Cars] music. The hair on the back of my neck has just gone up thinking about the music.” The Boreham Wood story has got all the ingredients for a film so perhaps the nearby Elstree Studios should give it some thought. “That’s nice,” Garrard says. “I’ll have Brad Pitt. He can play me.”Britain has agreed to send a further 350 troops to Poland, in a move intended to demonstrate that the two countries stand together amid concerns that the Ukraine crisis could spill over into eastern Europe. The deployment was agreed bilaterally – meaning it takes place outside Nato’s structures – and comes a few days after the US announced it would send in 1,700 paratroop reinforcements into Poland. Ben Wallace, the defence secretary, standing next to his Polish counterpart in London, said the aim was to send a “strong signal” to Russia that the UK and Poland “stand side by side” as Moscow moves up to 30,000 troops to neighbouring Belarus. Mariusz Błaszczak, the Polish defence minister, said he wanted the deployment to take place “as soon as possible” and that he intended the troops would be based “east of the Vistula river”, which runs through the heart of the country. Poland borders both Ukraine and Belarus to the east. Russia has begun sending thousands of troops into Belarus for military exercises this month, which the US and the UK fears could be used as the basis for an invasion of Ukraine – or they may end up being permanently stationed in the country. It is part of wider buildup of an estimated 130,000 Russian troops near Ukraine’s borders. Over the weekend US officials warned that Russia had assembled around 70% of the force needed to attempt an invasion of its smaller neighbour. Labour said it welcomed the deployment, but said “UK leadership has been missing from the top-level diplomacy required” because Boris Johnson has been fighting to survive as prime minister. The party called on ministers to reverse a planned reduction of about 9,500 in the target size of the UK armed forces. “With threats increasing and growing Russian aggression, ministers must halt their plans to cut the army,” the shadow defence secretary, John Healey, said. Britain already has 250 soldiers in Poland, 150 of whom are part of an existing Nato multinational protection force, and 100 of whom are engineers helping Warsaw to strengthen its borders with Belarus. Details about which forces would be sent out were not initially available, a sign that the agreement had been hastily put together and signed off at a meeting between Wallace and Błaszczak at the Ministry of Defence in London. But a few hours after the agreement was announced, the MoD said 350 Royal Marines would fly out to Poland “in the coming days”. British sources indicated the extra forces would not amount to a permanent deployment in Poland. But the UK has already signalled it is willing to base extra forces in eastern Europe, offering to double its commitment to Estonia, where 900 British forces lead a Nato battlegroup. The fact that the agreement was brokered directly between the two countries suggests that Warsaw is anxious about the growing Russian presence in Belarus, which Nato says includes Iskander missiles with a range of up to 500km (300 miles), and S-400 air defence systems. The first US troops, paratroopers from the 82nd Airborne, from the recently announced deployment arrived in Poland over the weekend. Another 4,500 US forces are already in the country as part of Nato and bilateral missions. Further decisions on long-term deployments in eastern Europe are expected to be discussed at a meeting of Nato defence ministers on 16-17 February. Jens Stoltenberg, Nato’s general secretary, said at a press conference in Brussels with Poland’s president, Andrzej Duda: “We are considering more longer-term adjustments to our posture, our presence in the eastern part of the alliance. No final decision has been made on that, but there is a process now going on within Nato.”My friend Stephen Trudgill, who has died aged 74, was an emeritus fellow of Robinson College, Cambridge, whose work often focused on the interaction of nature with people. Unfortunately Steve died just before the release of his book, Why Conserve Nature?, which examines the varied meanings of nature, climate change, ecological science and nature in literature and art. It should be published shortly. Described by one friend as a “hippy contrarian”, he pursued certain key themes throughout his career. These he characterised as the “personal meanings of nature, especially the therapeutic aspects in wilderness, nature reserves and gardens, as well as the psychological importance of nature to our wellbeing”. He had a generous and kind nature that was appreciated by generations of students and dons, as well as his neighbours (of which I was one) in the Cambridgeshire village of Hinxton. His slightly stooped frame was a familiar sight in the gardens of Robinson College – he was chair of its gardens committee – and he was often seen checking the footpaths around Hinxton, where he served on the parish council for 23 years. Steve was born in Norwich, where his father, John, was a publisher and artist, and his mother, Hettie (nee Gooch), worked in the Jarrold &amp; Sons department store. After Thorpe grammar school he went to Bristol University, where he had wanted to study botany as well as geography and geology but – because the timetable precluded it – reluctantly took sociology as his third subject. After graduation in 1968, he gained his PhD on the geomorphology of Aldabra Atoll in the Indian Ocean, where he spent several months in 1972. His lecturing began at the University of Strathclyde, before he moved to the University of Sheffield, where he taught soils, biogeography and geomorphology for 20 years. Steve then joined Robinson College in 1996, becoming its first resident geography director of studies and making geography one of the college’s best established subjects. It was at Robinson that his reluctantly undertaken sociology studies proved their worth as he expanded his interest from physical geography to the psychological and social aspects of environmental perception and environmental management. These elements all came together in his course on the social engagement of nature. Outside his university work, Steve was especially proud of the time he spent as a member of the executive committee of the Field Studies Council, helping young people access the countryside. He had a restless curiosity that was reflected not only in his professional life but in many other interests, including as a gardener, birdwatcher, opera lover and amateur artist. He is survived by his brother, Peter.The United States’ Internal Revenue Service will no longer use third-party facial recognition technology on millions of Americans who use the agency’s website to pay taxes or access documents. The IRS said on Monday it would transition away from using the identity verification company ID.me in the coming weeks and develop a new authentication system that does not use facial recognition. The announcement comes hours after US lawmakers asked the IRS to “halt its plans” to use the technology. “The IRS takes taxpayer privacy and security seriously, and we understand the concerns that have been raised,” said the IRS commissioner, Chuck Rettig. “Everyone should feel comfortable with how their personal information is secured and we are quickly pursuing short-term options that do not involve facial recognition.” Citing privacy and security concerns, Democratic lawmakers on Monday had said they were “deeply concerned” about the IRS’s deal with ID.me, the face-recognition company that promises to verify taxpayers’ identities with a selfie. “Millions of Americans use the IRS website annually for a variety of vital functions, and, as a result, each of them will be forced to trust a private contractor with some of their most sensitive data,” the lawmakers, Ted Lieu, Anna Eshoo, Pramila Jayapal and Yvette Clarke, said in a letter. “We urge the IRS to halt this plan and consult with a wide variety of stakeholders before deciding on an alternative.” The lawmakers demanded that the agency pause its plans until it addresses concerns raised by Congress and consults with stakeholders in the civil rights and civil liberties communities. Digital rights groups warned using facial recognition systems for identity verification when filing taxes raises myriad privacy and discrimination issues. Studies have shown both technologies ID.me uses in its identity fraud and verification processes – face-matching and facial recognition systems – often misidentify Black and brown faces. The use of such technologies also creates a massive database of information that can be vulnerable to cybersecurity attacks or shared with other government entities. Among the personal data the company is collecting are users’ images, “inferred citizenship” based on passport information, voiceprints, location data, addresses, social security numbers, driver’s license numbers, passport-card numbers and more. ID.me said it only shares this user information with government entities in response to a subpoena or other legal request or in the case of an identity theft investigation. “If they switch to another company, a lot of the issues will be the same,” said Caitlin George, Fight for the Future campaign director. “The number of problems just outweigh the benefits. And that’s why we don’t think it should be used at all.” Lieu said that the IRS had failed to justify why it needs to give a third-party contractor access to the biometric data of millions of Americans. “I could do banking transactions right now, without having to have facial recognition. Why does the IRS need to have facial recognition to allow Americans to simply use their portal?”My friend Michael Wilson, who has died aged 79, was a linguist who used his skills to enable British ornithologists to access works unavailable in English. Mike and I grew up in Somerset villages separated by the Mendip Hills. Our mutual passion for birds absorbed our time and energy in our teenage years. He excelled at identifying bird calls as he walked the Somerset levels. If he heard an unfamiliar call or song he would doggedly wait, listen, search and commit it to memory. At 15 our bikes took us to search for a little bittern in some reedbeds beside the A38. We stayed in a truck drivers’ lodge in a dormitory room full of snoring men, to be on site at first light for the best chance to see the elusive bird. Mike was wonderful company, considerate, thoughtful and a prolific note-taker. After O-levels at the Blue school, Wells, in the long hot summer of 1959 we hitched to Scotland with an old Army bivouac to see the first successful nesting of an osprey at Loch Garten. We joined the watch rota set up by the RSPB to look out for egg thieves and record the birds’ feeding behaviour. Mike was the first to eat part of a trout dropped by an incoming bird that we recovered from below the nest. Supervising, Peter Conder, later the RSPB chief executive, fried it up in a pan. Such bonding sealed a lifelong friendship. In the 1970s Mike joined my family’s holidays in the birding hotspots of Cley, Dungeness and the Isles of Scilly. Born in the hamlet of Keward, near Wells, Mike was the son of Violet Hutchinson and Walter Wilson, a dealer in vintage cars who did electrical work for EMI in Wookey. At the Blue school, he was drawn to languages and studied German and Russian at Edinburgh University in 1963. That led to posts teaching English in Minsk and Voronezh, where he got to know many Russian ornithologists. While teaching at Sherborne school and at Hedley Walter school, Brentwood, Mike joined an editorial team under Stanley Cramp, the chief editor of The Birds of the Western Palearctic (BWP), volunteering to translate bird literature from German and Russian. In 1980 he became a full-time team member in the Alexander Library of the Edward Grey Institute, Oxford, to research, write and edit BWP volumes 3-9. It was a joy in 2019 to see Mike receive the Janet Kear Union Medal from the British Ornithologists’ Union in recognition of his distinguished service to ornithology. He is survived by his sister, Penny.This live blog is now closed but coverage of UK politics continues on Wednesday’s blog: Boris Johnson is “not a complete clown”, his new communications director has said, as he revealed that the prime minister initiated a defiant rendition of Gloria Gaynor’s I Will Survive when the pair met last week. Sajid Javid has denied that a plan to clear the huge NHS backlog in England has been delayed because of wrangling with the Treasury over funding, as health bodies warned any further wait could exacerbate the scale of waiting lists for treatment. Labour has describe the 6 million NHS waiting list as a “Tory backlog”, not a Covid one. Speaking in the Commons, Wes Streeting, the shadow health secretary, said: This isn’t a Covid backlog, this is a Tory backlog. We went into the pandemic with NHS waiting lists already at a record four and a half million and now 6 million people are waiting on NHS waiting lists, more than ever before. More than a million are waiting for scans and tests used to diagnose cancer and the NHS itself is waiting, waiting for the government’s plan to deal with the backlog. Labour has also dismissed cancer waiting list targets announced by No 10 today as either old or unrealistic. (See 3.53pm and 4pm.) Keir Starmer has been rescued by the police from a mob of angry anti-vaxx and anti-lockdown protesters. (See 5.36pm.) This is from the Mirror’s Rachel Wearmouth on the incident. The Labour MP Chris Bryant has linked what happened to Boris Johnson’s anti-Starmer Jimmy Savile smear in the Commons last week. Johnson has said he is “absolutely not” worried about Sunak’s loyalty as chancellor. Ipsos Mori says Keir Starmer and Rishi Sunak outscore Boris Johnson on all but one of the leadership qualities featured in its polling (personality). According to a report by Dan Falvey for the Express, some of the anti-vaxx protesters confronting Keir Starmer in the incident outside the Commons were shouting “traitor” at him, and one seemed to mentioned the Jimmy Savile smear raised by Boris Johnson in the Commons last week. According to a Labour source, with the police there to protect him, Keir Starmer was not in any danger from the anti-vaxx protesters who surrounded him. But it was an unpleasant incident, the source says. Here is more on the Starmer incident. From the Sun’s Jack Elsom From Mail Online’s David Wilcock Keir Starmer has been put into a police car after being surrounded by protesters near the Houses of Parliament, the Sun’s Jack Elsom reports. A Labour source says the people having a go at Starmer were anti-vaxx demonstrators. Ben Clover from the Health Service Journal says cancer targets announced by Downing Street today (see 12.29pm and 1.03pm) are old. An MP who suffered a brain haemorrhage has returned to the House of Commons for the first time in almost two years, saying support for stroke survivors is “woeful” and must increase, PA Media reports. PA says: SNP MP Amy Callaghan spent four months in hospital and underwent two life-saving surgeries after collapsing at home in June 2020, aged 28. The East Dunbartonshire MP returned to politics as she made a virtual contribution to the House of Commons in March last year, but appeared on the green benches in person this afternoon. She called on work and pensions secretary Therese Coffey to increase universal credit levels. Callaghan said: “In July 2020, I met my constituent Stacey, not at a constituency surgery but at the PDRU at the Queen Elizabeth University Hospital in Glasgow. “We recovered from our strokes alongside each other and I got to hear her story. “Too many people like Stacey have survived catastrophic life events only to be let down by this government’s woeful welfare system, unable to work and unable to pay for basic necessities many of us take for granted.” Dominic Cummings, Boris Johnson’s former chief adviser who is now waging a campaign for force him out of office, had been expected to publish fresh allegations about the refurbishment of the PM’s flat today. But he says is he holding off for a day. Referring to the row about Guto Harri’s past lobbying for Huawei, Cummings also claims Boris Johnson originally failed to take the security threat posed by Huawei seriously. Ben Bradshaw (Lab) said being chief of staff to the PM was “more than a full time job”. He asked how Steve Barclay would be able to do the job while also doing his other ministerial duties, and serving his constituents. In response, Michael Ellis said that Angela Rayner’s jobs included being shadow minister for the Cabinet Office, shadow secretary of state for the future of work, shadow first secretary of state, deputy Labour leader, and a member of parliament. In her response to Ellis, Angela Rayner, the deputy Labour leader, says if Steve Barclay took parliament seriously, he would be responding to this UQ himself. She asks for more detail about how the new post will work. Ellis says it was Tony Blair, a Labour PM, who first appointed a chief of staff in Downing Street. He says Steve Barclay will answer questions in the Commons in his new role. In the Commons Michael Ellis, the paymaster general and a Cabinet Office minister, is responding to the Labour urgent question about Steve Barclay’s appointment as the PM’s new chief of staff. Ellis says Boris Johnson promised last week to make changes, and that is what he is doing. The government needs to deliver on its agenda, he says. He says the changes announced over the weekend will bring “renewed discipline and focus” to what the government is doing. He says Barclay will provide “political leadership” in No 10 as the PM’s chief of staff. He will be in charge of integrating the new Office of the Prime Minister with the Cabinet Office. He will also work with cabinet colleagues on making levelling up a priority for all departments. He says Barclay will remain a minister of the cabinet and, as a minister, he will be able to direct civil servants, thus strengthening cabinet government. Rachel Reeves, the shadow chancellor, and Wes Streeting, the shadow health secretary, have released the text of an open letter they have sent to the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, and the health secretary, Sajid Javid, about the delay in the publication of the plan for tacking the NHS waiting list backlog. Here’s an extract. Treasury sources are quoted in the media attributing the delay to the need to secure value for money. This is a welcome change from the past two years, when £8.7bn was wasted on unusable and overpriced PPE, billions lost to fraud has been written off, and contracts were offered to friends of ministers and donors to the Conservative party. However, if this is the reason for the delay, why was value for money only a last-minute consideration? The publication of the NHS recovery plan must not become another cancelled operation. If you allow your party’s chaos and incompetence to paralyse the government, it will be NHS patients who pay the price. We urge you to agree and publish this plan immediately. Steve Brine (Con), a former health minister, says the 28-day cancer standard “does sound familiar”. He asks for an assurance that it is a maximum, not a target. Argar says the government is always trying to exceed its targets. In the Commons Labour’s Chris Bryant asked about the third cancer target briefed by No 10 today, but not formally announced by the PM. (See 1.03pm.) Bryant, a cancer survivor, said he did not see how it would be possible to ensure that 75% of cancer diagnoses happen at stage one or stage two (early stages of cancer). No 10 says it wants to meet this by 2028. In response, Edward Argar, the health minister, said Boris Johnson was “unapologetically ambitious”. He said more details would be set out in the plan being published imminently. Wes Streeting, the shadow health secretary, said in response to Edward Argar: “This isn’t a Covid backlog. This is a Tory backlog.” NHS waiting lists were already at a record 4.5m before the pandemic, he said. He said Boris Johnson held a photocall today to announce his waiting list plan, without a waiting list plan ready. It was obvious the Treasury was unwilling to help him out, Streeting said. Regarding the two targets announced by Johnson (see 12.29pm), Streeting said there was already a plan for cancer patients to start treatment within two months of a referral. It hasn’t been hit since 2015, he said. And he said ensuring three out of four patients get a diagnosis within 28 days is an existing target that has not been met. In the Commons Edward Argar, the health minister, is responding to the Labour urgent question about the NHS waiting list backlog. He says there are 6 million people waiting for treatment, and this figure will “get worse before it gets better”. He says there were 8.5 million people who did not come forward for treatment during the pandemic who in normal circumstances would have done so. He repeats the two targets announced by the PM in his interview this morning. (See 12.29pm.) And he says the government must get its overall plan right. He says ministers will update MPs at the earliest opportunity. Ben Wallace, the defence secretary, has announced that Britain is sending an extra 350 troops to Poland, my colleague Dan Sabbagh reports. Stormont politicians have been urged to work to “salvage” what they can from the “chaos” caused by the DUP, PA Media reports. PA says: Sinn Féin’s Stormont leader, Michelle O’Neill, was speaking in the assembly after party whips met to discuss how to expedite outstanding legislative bills through to completion before the end of the mandate. O’Neill was appearing in the chamber for the first time since she was removed from her post as deputy first minister following the resignation of the DUP first minister, Paul Givan, in protest at Brexit’s Northern Ireland protocol. She made particular reference to uncertainty that now surrounds a scheduled state apology next month for victims and survivors of historical institutional abuse in Northern Ireland. “The DUP’s actions in unilaterally resigning from the executive are reckless and have caused concern and uncertainty for businesses, for workers, for families and campaigners on a range of many important issues,” she said. “In terms of the survivors of historical institutional abuse they have caused real hurt and real trauma. “While the DUP must bear responsibility for that, I am also very conscious that those of us who are serious about showing responsible leadership and delivering for people can and should seek to salvage what we can from the chaos the DUP have caused.” At the Downing Street lobby briefing the PM’s spokesperson confirmed that the government was setting two new cancer waiting time targets. (See 1.03pm.) Here are some of the other lines from the briefing. The spokesperson said that further No 10 personnel changes would be announced “in the coming days”. He said: We still need to announce the new permanent secretary for No 10, for example. So there will be additional recruitment into No 10 and there’s an ongoing process for the PPS (principal private secretary) role too, so that needs to be announced. The spokesperson said that Boris Johnson had confidence in the chief whip, Mark Spencer, but he sidestepped a question about whether Spencer would still be in his job this time next week. It is expected that he will be replaced. The spokesperson said Henry Newman, a No 10 adviser who is a close friend of the PM’s wife, would leave Downing Street to take up a job with his former boss, the levelling up secretary, Michael Gove. That was a “mutually agreed decision with the prime minister”, the spokesperson said. The spokesperson defended the decision to appoint a minister, Steve Barclay, as the PM’s new chief of staff. He cited Germany as an example of where this happens. The spokesperson claimed that Johnson was aware that Guto Harri, his new head of communications, had lobbied the government on behalf of the Chinese telecoms firm Huawei in a previous job. Asked about this, the spokesperson said: “He’s aware of who [Harri] had been working for, and the background of his strong experience in the private sector.” Huawei is being removed from the 5G network in the UK because it is seen as a security risk. The spokesperson said the government was “monitoring very carefully” the situation in Northern Ireland following the resignation of the first minister. The spokesperson said Jimmy Carr’s comment about Gypsy, Roma and Traveller communities was “deeply disturbing”. My colleagues Peter Walker and Jim Waterson have the full story here. Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland’s first minister, says it is “offensive” for anyone worried about Covid or the cost of living crisis to hear that Boris Johnson is treating his leadership predicament as something to laugh about. (See 12.05pm.) Keir Starmer has used a TV interview to claim that “chaos” in government is to blame for its failure to publish today the full plan to tackle the NHS waiting list backlog. He said: This is a massive problem. We’ve got 6 million people on the waiting list; we desperately need a plan. The government said it was going to come with a plan and now it hasn’t, and I think it’s yet more evidence of the chaos, incompetence, particularly of the last three or four months where everybody’s been broiled in allegations about partygate - there is a price for that, and the price is the government not getting on with the job. Starmer said he did not think the new No 10 appointments announced by Boris Johnson at the weekend would make any difference. He said: I personally think that nothing will really change until the person at the top changes, because all routes lead to the prime minister, and that’s the change we really need to see now. And asked about the new book about Carrie Johnson, the PM’s wife, and whether the criticism it contained was appropriate, Starmer said: I approach politics on the basis that we should treat people with respect ... Obviously respect differences of opinion, but I do not go along with the idea that we should drag everybody into the gutter. There will be two urgent questions in the Commons this afternoon. At 3.30pm Wes Streeting, the shadow health secetary, will ask about the NHS plan to tackle the waiting list backlog that was due to be published today, and after 4.15pm Angela Rayner, Labour’s deputy leader, will ask about Steve Barclay’s appointment as the PM’s new chief of staff. And here are the main points from Boris Johnson’s pooled TV interview with ITV’s Carl Dinnen. Johnson said he was announcing two new targets for the time within which people should be able to get a diagnosis for possible cancer. Confusingly, the targets that Johnson mentioned in his interview (see 12.29pm) are not the same as the ones that the prime minister’s spokesperson told journalists at the lobby briefing that Johnson would be announcing on the visit. The spokesman said that the government was committing to clearing the backlog of patients waiting more than two months for cancer treatment by March 2023 (a target Johnson mentioned). But the spokesman also said that by 2028 the government wanted to ensure that by 2028 75% of people with cancer get diagnosed when it is at stage one or stage two (ie, relatively early on). Johnson did not mention this one in his interview. Johnson said the ‘My Planned Care’ initiative announced overnight would allow patient choice to help drive down waiting lists. He said that he had no doubts about Rishi Sunak’s loyalty. Sunak, the chancellor, has been noticeably less enthusiastic in his defence of Johnson over partygate in recent weeks, and this has fuelled suspicions that he is after Johnson’s job. Asked if he was worried about this, Johnson said: I think that what we’re doing is working together across the whole of government to fix the Covid backlogs which, believe me, is a massive priority for us, for everybody in the country. Pressed on whether he has doubts about the chancellor’s loyalty, Johnson replied: Absolutely not. What I would say is that it’s thanks to the investment that we’re able to put in, thanks to the sound management of the economy, everything that we did, if you think about it, all the looking after business throughout the pandemic, that’s enabled our economy to bounce back so well, that in turn enables us to put the investment that we need now in the NHS. Johnson did not deny singing “I will survive” to Guto Harri, his new communications director, in response to a question about whether he would be able to see off attempts to force him out of No 10. Johnson sidestepped a question about whether he takes political advice from his wife, and whether criticism of her over this was fair. In response to this question, he replied: I think it’s entirely fair for people to focus on the issues that I’m focused on and that is number one, our priority, which is to tackle the Covid backlogs and rebuild our economy. He refused to say if any of the officials who left Downing Street last week were to blame for organising or attending No 10 parties that broke Covid rules. In response to this question, he just said he was focused on addressing the needs of the public, like tackling the NHS waiting list backlog. Boris Johnson has used a pooled interview on his visit to Maidstone hospital to announce two targets to reducing cancer treatment waiting lists. He said the targets were: Three-quarters of people who suspect they have cancer should be able to get a diagnosis within 28 days, Johnson said. From March 2023 nobody should have to wait more than two months for a cancer diagnosis, he said. Johnson described these as “very tough targets”. He said they were part of an overall elective recovery plan, to tackle NHS waiting lists, that will be published soon. I will post more from the interview shortly. In his Golwg interview Guto Harri, the PM’s new communications chief, also said that Boris Johnson is “not all clownish”. According to a Google Translate version of the article, Harri said: Everyone’s attention is on recent events that have caused a lot of hurt, but in the end, that’s nothing to do with the way people voted two years ago. [Johnson] is not a complete clown, but he is a very likeable character. 90% of our discussion was very serious but it shows that he is a character and that he has fun. He is not a vicious man as some misrepresent him. Harri also said that Johnson “is aware of the appalling hurt that all the talk about these parties has created” and that he now had to get the government “focused on delivery”. UPDATE: I have replaced “not all clownish” with “not a complete clown”, a better translation. My colleague Aubrey Allegretti has the full story here. Guto Harri, Boris Johnson’s Welsh-speaking new head of communications, has given an interview to the Welsh magazine Golwg. As the BBC’s Ione Wells reports, Harri revealed that when he discussed taking his new job with the prime minister, Johnson’s channelled Gloria Gaynor to say that he would not be leaving No 10. Here is an extract from the interview, filtered through Google Translate. I walked in and did a salute and said ‘Prime Minister, Guto Harri reporting for duty’ and he stood up from behind his desk and started taking the salute but then he said, ‘What am I doing, I should take the knee for you.’ “And we both laughed. Then I asked ‘Are you going to survive Boris?’ And he said in his deep, slow and purposeful voice, and started to sing a little while finishing the sentence, saying ‘I Will Survive’. In an inevitable way that invited me to say ‘You got all your life to live’ and he replied, ‘I got all my love to give’, so we got a little blast from Gloria Gaynor! Harri knows Johnson from the time when they were both at Oxford together and he worked as Johnson’s head of communications during Johnson’s first term as London mayor. The taking the knee joke was a reference to the incident that led to Harri being suspended as a contributor to GB News. Andrew Griffith, the Tory MP appointed to head Boris Johnson’s policy unit at No 10 following the resignation of Munira Mirza last week, has used an article for ConservativeHome to set out his agenda. Here are his key points. Griffith says government departments that are performing well can expect less interference from No 10. He says: Ministers, too, will notice a difference. In today’s complex, competitive and dynamic environment it’s a fallacy to control everything too tightly from the centre. Decisions are usually taken best close to where their impact is felt, and high-performing departments should expect a light touch approach, freeing up bandwidth for deeper interventions elsewhere. This makes No 10 sound like Ofsted, which also focuses its interventions on poor performers. He describes the government as an “insurgent force” because of the opposition it faces from parts of the establishment, and from the BBC. He says: In the battle of ideas, we remain an insurgent force: outgunned by the hegemony of leftwing orthodoxy that often lurks without challenge within swathes of the cultural and education establishment and in the state supported media. He suggests Boris Johnson’s leadership has some similarities with Margaret Thatcher’s. He says: I bring to the role my personal experience of growing up in the early 1980s, when an unconventional Conservative prime minister built an unusually broad coalition of support, secured successive large election majorities, confounded pessimists and radically improved the way that the world and its own citizens perceived Britain. He says the re-establishment of Conservative backbench policy committees will improve policy making in government. He says: One way we will do this [win the battle of ideas] is through Sir Graham Brady and the 1922 executive’s ambition to re-establish backbench policy committees. The prime minister and I warmly support this, and we are committed to make them work. Covid has suppressed proper policy discussion for too long – indeed, for the majority of the time that I and my 2019 colleagues have sat in parliament. A large majority is a poor substitute for proper engagement between ministers, No 10 and backbench colleagues who in many cases possess decades of relevant experience. The 1922 backbench policy committees – one covering each major government department – will form just one part of changes in how a sleeker No 10 operation engages with members of parliament. Jonathan Ashworth, the shadow work and pensions secretary, also told Sky News this morning that he thought criticism of Carrie Johnson because of her influence over her husband was sexist and misogynistic. For a defence of the Ashcroft book, do read this article by Paul Goodman at ConservativeHome. Goodman, who edits the website, considers whether singling out Carrie Johnson for criticism is fair. It’s a tricky journalistic task, because Ashcroft owns ConservativeHome, but Goodman does consider both sides of the argument. Happily, though, he sides with his boss. He says: So it is true that “Carrie Johnson’s behaviour is preventing the prime minister leading Britain as effectively as the voters deserve,” as our proprietor claims? The full book may help us to reach a decision: all I can say is that such is my impression of the consensus view in Westminster, at least among ministers, MPs and spads [special advisers]. But Goodman agrees with Ashworth on the key point. But whether the charge is true or not, it deflects from the main point. Which is that the prime minister himself, not his spouse, bears responsibility for his decisions. It would be unfair to blame others for them, even his politically-engaged wife. After all, he chooses who he divorces, marries and has children with. And here are some of the other lines from Sajid Javid’s morning interviews. Javid, the health secretary, said the criticism of Carrie Johnson, the PM’s wife, highlighted by a new biography yesterday was misogynistic. Asked about the claims in the book by Lord Ashcroft, which were published yesterday by the Mail on Sunday, Javid said: I don’t think it’s fair or right at all, and I’ll tell you why. I just think as a general rule, a politician’s partner – any politician, any party – should be off limits. It’s the politician that has chosen to have a public life ... I think the, this whole focus on Carrie Johnson in some of these reports, I think it’s very undignified and very unfair. Before her marriage and her relationship with Johnson, Carrie Symonds (as she then was) worked briefly for Javid as a special adviser. Asked on Sky if this criticism amounted to misogyny, Javid replied: “Yes, it is. It’s sexist.” The book accuses Carrie of frequently persuading Johnson to reverse decisions already taken with his official adviser and quotes unnamed sources claiming that her meddling is damaging or ruining his premiership. You can get a flavour of it here. Javid said it was time to “draw a line” under the row about Boris Johnson’s suggestion that Keir Starmer was to blame for the failure to prosecute Jimmy Savile. On Friday Javid disassociated himself from what Johnson said. But today, in an interview with Sky News, he said: “I think we should draw a line under this issue and just try to move on.” He said Johnson has clarified what he meant. But he sidestepped questions about whether Johnson should apologise, or whether he would have made the same comment himself. Javid said he did not think there would be a Tory leadership election. He told Sky News: I don’t think there is going to be a leadership election. We have got a leader in place who is doing an excellent job, is getting on with the job, is delivering on the commitments that we made, and I am there to support him, along with the rest of us. Saying there will not be a leadership election is not the same as saying there will not be a vote of no confidence vote. Only 54 letters from Tory MPs are needed for a no confidence vote. But a leadership contest would only happen if Johnson lost or resigned, and 181 Tories would probably have to vote against him for him for the no confidence motion to pass. (There are currently 360 Tory MPs.) Javid said he supported Johnson 100%. Asked if he backed the PM, he told BBC Breakfast: Absolutely, 100%, and I’ll tell you why. Because despite the challenges, and of course there are many, we are delivering, this prime minister is delivering. When he was elected with a record majority, so many commitments rightly were made to the British people. He’s saved this country from Corbynism, he’s delivered on Brexit, we’re getting on with the job of levelling up, he’s delivered the most successful vaccination programme in Europe, the biggest booster programme in Europe, making us the freest country in Europe and we have the fastest growing economy in the G7. Guto Harri, Boris Johnson’s new director of communications, arrived for first proper day at work carrying a Tesco bag. It is not clear whether he had been shopping at the local Tesco Metro, where under the old regime staff used to buy enough drink to fill a suitcase to fuel their “wine-time Fridays”, but Harri told reporters that he was bringing healthy snacks and mineral water for his team. It was a none-too-subtle way of signalling that the boozing culture in the press office is over. This is from Good Morning Britain’s Lorna Shaddick. Matthew Taylor, chief executive of the NHS Confederation, which represents health leaders, told the Today programme this morning that it was important for the government to set realistic targets for its elective recovery plan. He said: It is really important that we are accountable for public money that is spent, but the danger is that, if you take on targets that are unrealistic, you end up skewing clinical priorities in pursuit of those targets. The particular challenge we have got now is, whilst we know we have got millions on the waiting list, we don’t know how many people out there in the community ought to be on the waiting list but didn’t come forward during Covid. I think that big imponderable is why have have got to be a bit careful about targets. Taylor used to work in Downing Street as head of policy for Tony Blair and yesterday, in a post on Twitter, he suggested that one reason for the delay in the publication of the elective recovery plan was Treasury reluctance to prop up a PM on his way out. In his interview with Sky News this morning, Sajid Javid, the health secretary, was asked if he agreed with this analysis. “I don’t recognise that at all,” he said. He said that he had a strong relationship with the Treasury and “couldn’t wish for a better partner”. Good morning. Today the government was expected to announce its NHS “elective recovery plan”, giving details of the timetable for tackling the backlog of 6m operations and procedures that has build up during the pandemic. In a crowded field, this is almost at the top of the list of momentous challenges facing Boris Johnson. But publication of the plan has been held up. This is how my colleague Denis Campbell explains it in our overnight story. The Department of Health and Social Care (DHSC) was expected to publish the “elective recovery plan” detailing measures to tackle the 6 million backlog, on Monday. That, however, has been delayed for a second time by a fresh bout of wrangling between NHS England and the government over how demanding the targets imposed on hospitals should be. The disagreement centres on the deadline by which NHS trusts will have to have treated all those who have been waiting either one year or two years for care, usually an operation. “Conversations about the targets have become protracted and difficult. The Treasury wants a certain scale of ambition, they want tougher targets than NHS England thinks is feasible,” said an NHS source. Another NHS source said: “There will be an aim to end 104-week waiters by the end of March. And nobody will wait more than a year for treatment by March 2025, but the government are trying to bring that forward to March 2024, and that is still being negotiated.” Sajid Javid, the health secretary, has been giving interviews this morning and he effectively admitted that ongoing negotiations were to blame for the last-minute hold-up. But he said he would not describe it as a row. He told the Today programme: There’s been no argument. There’s been a very active discussion, within both the NHS and my department, to collectively agree on an elective recovery plan. Javid also said that the rise of the Omicron variant was the main reason for the delay. And he rejected claims that the Treasury was being difficult. He told BBC Breakfast: The Treasury is an excellent partner. No department in government works as a silo and it will always be much more effective when we work together and I’m very fortunate, we have a great relationship with the Treasury. I can just tell you from my own personal experience having been chancellor, having the Treasury working with you in partnership makes a huge amount of difference and and that’s plain to see when you look at the billions of pounds of investment we’re putting into the NHS and social care. I will post more from Javid’s interviews shortly. The hold-up comes as Boris Johnson continues his shake-up of the Downing Street operation and anxiously waits to see whether he can get to Thursday, when the Commons starts a mini, half-term recess, with a no confidence vote being triggered. It is possible that more MPs may go public today to say they have submitted a letter calling for a ballot. And there are claims that Dominic Cummings, Johnson’s former chief adviser, may publish fresh claims today intended to undermine the PM. Here is my colleague Rowena Mason’s latest story on Johnson’s situation. Here is the agenda for the day. 11.30am: Downing Street holds a lobby briefing. 2.30pm: Thérèse Coffey, the work and pensions secretary, takes questions in the Commons. I try to monitor the comments below the line (BTL) but it is impossible to read them all. If you have a direct question, do include “Andrew” in it somewhere and I’m more likely to find it. I do try to answer questions, and if they are of general interest, I will post the question and reply above the line (ATL), although I can’t promise to do this for everyone. If you want to attract my attention quickly, it is probably better to use Twitter. I’m on @AndrewSparrow. Alternatively, you can email me at andrew.sparrow@theguardian.comAfter confirming the appointment of Paul Collingwood as interim head coach on Monday England’s extensive post-Ashes overhaul turns next to the playing staff, with an injection of fresh blood expected when the squad for the three-match tour of the West Indies is named on Tuesday. Collingwood, who took charge of England’s squad for their T20 series in the Caribbean last month, takes over on a temporary basis from Chris Silverwood, who was sacked last week following England’s dismal 4-0 defeat in the Ashes. That chastening experience has brought a slew of changes. Besides Silverwood the batting coach, Graham Thorpe, and England team director, Ashley Giles, also departed – though Joe Root has remained as captain and Collingwood, an assistant coach under the previous regime, will also provide some continuity. The new broom may now be set to sweep through those on the pitch, with Collingwood pronouncing the series that begins in Antigua on 8 March an opportunity to “reset and rebuild”. England’s selection panel – understood to feature Collingwood, Giles’s temporary replacement, Andrew Strauss, and the head scout, James Taylor, with input expected from Root and his vice-captain, Ben Stokes – will meet on Tuesday with much to discuss. Ben Foakes, jettisoned after England’s tour of India last year, is likely to get another chance to stake a claim for the wicketkeeper’s gloves given Jos Buttler’s struggles in the red-ball game, while Durham’s left-handed opener Alex Lees could win promotion to the full squad after captaining the Lions in Australia. Joe Clarke and Josh Bohannon are vying to come into a batting unit that failed to reach 300 in 10 Ashes innings, while the Lancashire seamer Saqib Mahmood could make the transition to the Test squad after impressing for England’s white-ball sides and spinner Matt Parkinson is in contention to bolster the bowling ranks. “I am genuinely excited to be leading the Test team for the tour of the Caribbean. I can’t wait to get started,” Collingwood said. “Having a challenging Test series against the West Indies straight off the back of the Ashes disappointment gives us a chance to reset and rebuild. “Playing Test matches for England is the highest accolade in the game. My objective is to give players clarity, direction and encouragement for them to start building something special. “I have spoken to Joe Root and Ben Stokes, and both are excited and passionate to take the team forward in this new cycle. Although they know it won’t be easy, they have the desire and bravery to do things differently to ensure the team can prosper. We have an opportunity to get back on track.”The military train lurched into the rail depot at Kursk on a recent afternoon, carrying more snow-dusted main battle tanks, self-propelled artillery, and other heavy weapons to within a few hours’ drive by car of the Ukrainian border. At the depot, the flatbed railcars parked between heavy containers carrying chemical products, leaving them visible only from a small pedestrian footbridge overhead. There, military police with red armbands kept watch as locals looked on curiously at the latest arrivals in Russia’s vast military buildup. A recent trip by the Guardian to the Voronezh and Kursk regions in Russia found a hive of barely hidden military activity as Russian troops continued to position themselves for a potential assault on Ukraine, with the latest reports stating that personnel are being transferred and troops are leaving larger depots for forward staging areas just miles from the border. As fears grew in the west of a possible Russian military incursion, world leaders on Monday met in a flurry of diplomatic activity: Emmanuel Macron headed to Moscow for talks with Vladimir Putin, Joe Biden hosted the German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, in Washington DC and a European delegation was in Kyiv. In the UK, the defence secretary, Ben Wallace, announced a further 350 troops to Poland as 1,700 US paratroopers from the 82nd Airborne also arrived in the Nato member amid concerns the Ukraine crisis could spill over. On the ground in Kursk and Voronezh, which each sit about 100 miles from the border with Ukraine, the heightened Russian military activity has become increasingly impossible to ignore. As jets roared overhead last week during a military training exercise, locals in Shilovo, a district of Voronezh, were stunned to see a Pantsir air defence missile system emerge into a snowy field right next to the local primary school. (The western military district announced that it was just a training exercise.) In the nearby suburb of Maslovka, months of offloading of tanks, artillery and other equipment at a railway station has put local residents on edge. “My wife came back from her errands yelling about tanks, tanks, tanks,” said Oleg Romanenko, a mechanic and metal shop worker who lives near a main street in Maslovka, named for the 206th Rifle Division that fought in the second world war. “It is hard to walk outside your home and see this and not think a war could happen. Everyone has thought about it, at least.” Videos have begun surfacing of trains carrying Russian troops toward the front, and flight data suggests that troops from Siberia are also being airlifted towards Ukraine. Near the Kursk rail depot, air force officers cycled through a nearby spa hotel, while national guard military convoys seen as potential follow-on forces have been spotted driving through nearby towns as they make their way toward the border. Nonetheless, most of the activity points to the grand scope of Russia’s buildup, where an estimated half of the country’s battalion tactical groups has been moved to staging grounds within striking distance of Ukraine, sometimes just dozens of kilometres away from the border. US officials think that Russia has 70% of the necessary military equipment already positioned in order to launch an attack. “All of our red flags or checkboxes have been ticked in the past couple of weeks,” said a researcher from the open-source Conflict Intelligence Team (CIT), which has tracked Russian military deployments towards Ukraine. Those include the 200th Separate Motor Rifle Brigade, which departed its base above the Arctic Circle last month and which may have been the unit whose arrival was observed by the Guardian. The CIT researcher said their red flags include the movement of airborne troops and national guard troops, and the recent movement of equipment from a large military encampment in the town of Yelnya – he called it an “Oh crap” moment. “The evidence we have strongly suggests that literally every large ground formation of the Russian armed forces is involved in this,” the researcher said. “That’s literally unprecedented,” at least since the Soviet Union, they added. Despite the warning signs, some locals in Maslovka still view the buildup with an air of disregard. Videos of tanks and other weaponry arriving at the railway began to emerge in March and since then many have been convinced that the movement of heavy weaponry is just a defensive posture or a ploy in a high-stakes negotiation with the west. “We’ve got used to it here,” said Marina, a pensioner who was waiting at a bus stop off of the main street. She declined to give a surname. “[Troops] arrive and then in a few days they are gone again. Sometimes you see a few men in uniform. But we generally don’t [interfere], don’t ask questions. These are these kinds of times.” Security has certainly tightened since spring, when a Sky News crew managed to walk on to a new base in the Voronezh region being established for the arriving troops. Now, roads to large encampments in the area have been blocked off, locals said. And CIT researchers said that Russian railways had made it more difficult to track train data, increasing the importance of social media video uploaded to platforms like TikTok. Several people in Maslovka said there had been informal warnings not to speak with media or outsiders about the buildup or movements of military vehicles. At a local grocery store, a shopkeeper shrugged when asked about the tanks that would have been parked 50 metres from her door a few days earlier. “I don’t know anything about that,” she said pointedly and moved into the back of the store. The neighbouring region of Kursk, which until recently had seen relatively little military activity, now had “a massive influx of vehicles and personnel,” wrote Konrad Muzyka in an examination of satellite photography of the region taken earlier this month. Videos taken from social media on Monday showed more tanks being transported south of Kursk by rail toward the border. Analysts said that an attack from this area could threaten the city of Kharkiv just across the border or could continue on to either cut off Ukrainian troops in the east or toward the capital of Kyiv. Kursk is historically associated with one of the largest and bloodiest tank battles of the second world war and some locals said it was unthinkable to imagine being on the frontline of a new conflict. “Everyone is interconnected, especially because of our family ties across the border,” said Larisa Kholtobina, the director of a local museum that focuses on preserving the memory of children who fought in the second world war. “There has been this [difficult] period … But we hope that things calm down.” “It’s just a few hundred kilometres from here” to the border, an assistant added. “We try not to think about it but we know that a war would touch us here too.”Time to wrap up. Here’s the main stories US house price growth is set to slow substantially, experts say, as the cost of living squeeze hits household budgets. Mortgage lender Halifax reported that average prices hit a new record of £276,759 in January, but monthly growth slowed to 0.3%. Higher inflation, and rising borrowing costs, are likely to cool the market this year. European Central Bank president Christine Lagarde has tried to calm concerns that inflation could force the ECB to tighten monetary policy sharply. She told MEPs that the chances have increased that inflation will stabilize at its 2% target, despite hitting its higher level since the euro came in. Lagarde’s comments came after eurozone bond yields rose, with the gap between Italy and Germany’s borrowing costs hitting its highest since summer 2020. Supermarket chain Asda has committed to making its cheapest food ranges more widely available, after the anti-poverty campaigner Jack Monroe raised concerns that low-income shoppers were facing price increases because they could no longer get hold of them. Unions have urged the government to do more to help low-paid workers weather the cost of living crisis, after research found the number claiming universal credit has more than doubled since the start of the pandemic to at least 2.3 million. The founder of Cobra Beer has warned that drinkers are going to have to pay more for their pints because the industry faces a “vicious cycle” of surging costs. Two FTSE 350 firms have appointed new CEOs today, and they’re both women. Pets At Home has appointed Sky UK executive Lyssa McGowan as its first female chief executive, while housebuilder Taylor Wimpey has promoted group operations director Jennie Daly to be its CEO, despite pressure from activist investor Elliott for an external hire. The mutual insurer LV= has launched a boardroom clear-out following the high-profile failure of its management to sell the company to a US private equity firm last year. European stock markets have closed higher, with travel stocks boosted by signs that Covid-19 case rates are falling in some countries. Investor morale in the eurozone has risen....but German industrial production dipped in December as construction output dropped. And fans of plant milk can now buy potato milk at Waitrose this week: Goodnight. GW Some highlights from the Treasury Committee’s hearing on inflation, and the Bank of England today, from my colleague Richard Partington...: ..and Arthi Nachiappan of The Times: Global supply chain problems have forced investment group abrdn to delay an investor vote on its £1.5 billion takeover of Interactive Investor.... because it couldn’t get hold of enough paper. Abrdn faced problems securing enough paper to post a circular to its more than a million shareholders before their vote on its planned purchase of ii, the do-it-yourself investment platform. The paperwork should be dispatched this week, which is about two weeks later than planned. The former owner of Norton Motorcycles faces up to two years in prison after pleading guilty to illegally investing millions of pounds of people’s retirement savings into his own businesses. Stuart Garner, who acquired the classic marque in 2008 and was feted by a series of UK government ministers including the MP Stephen Barclay, the prime minister’s new chief of staff since Saturday, admitted three offences at Derby magistrates court on Monday. Garner will be sentenced at the end of the month, when he faces a maximum of two years in prison or an unlimited fine. The admission comes after pension holders had been complaining for years that the businessman had repeatedly ignored their requests to return their retirement savings. It also follows a 2020 Guardian and ITV News investigation that showed how more than 200 “ordinary working people” had had their entire pension pots invested into Norton shares. Here’s the full story: Travel stocks are rallying in the US today, as in Europe, on signs that Covid-19 infections could be slowing in some countries. Norwegian Cruise Line Holdings, Royal Caribbean Cruises and Carnival Corp are all up around 8% in New York, where American Airlines is up 4% and aircraft manufacturer Boeing is 2.8% higher. The rally comes as Covid-19 case rates slow in the US and parts of Europe, after a grim winter of record infections. New cases per day in the US have plunged by almost half since mid-January. But the death toll from Covid-19 is stark - hitting 900,000 last Friday, less than two months after eclipsing 800,000. Crypto currencies are pushing higher tonight, with bitcoin now up 9% at a four-week high of $44,362, and Ether touching three-week high. Bitcoin had sunk to a six-month low in late January, in the wider selloff in speculative assets, but has now seeing a pick-up. Craig Erlam of OANDA says: Bitcoin hasn’t only weathered the recent storm, it’s managed to rally through a key resistance level and generate some decent upside momentum as well. It’s been a mixed week for risk assets but bitcoin is finding some form and the break of $40,000 could be key to it continuing to build on that. We’ve seen what bitcoin can do once it gets moving and while it’s still early days, there’s certainly reason to think the worst may be behind it. The next big test is $45,000. Eurozone bond yields have slipped back somewhat from their earlier highs, after Christine Lagarde pushed back against worries that the ECB could tighten policy aggressively to tame inflation. ING’s Carsten Brzeski writes that Lagarde has tried to cork the ‘hawkish genie’ that triggered today’s selloff in bonds. At today’s hearing at the European Parliament, Lagarde mainly repeated the main messages of Thursday’s ECB meeting but subtly pushed back on overly aggressive rate hike expectations. She stressed that any policy adjustment “will be very gradual” and that there were no signals that “inflation will be persistently and significantly above our target over the medium term, which would require measurable tightening.” Also, she said that the ECB was determined to use all tools necessary to ensure an equal transmission of its policy to all member states. While these comments leave some open questions, like how to combine the end of asset purchases with still narrow bond yield spreads, it is clear that Lagarde’s mission today was to put the hawkish genie back into the bottle. Normalisation does not mean tightening. Europe’s stock markets have closed mostly higher tonight, although shares in Italy and Spain were dragged back by concerns over rising government bond yields. In the City, the FTSE 100 index gained 57 points to close at 7573, up 0.75% today. Financial stocks, miners, betting firms and travel companies gained ground, with Flutter up 5%, and airline group IAG gaining 3.8%, and Barclays, Lloyds and HSBC gaining over 2% each. Property companies, supermarket chains and utilities dipped, though. Germany’s DAX gained 0.7%, with France’s CAC 0.8% higher. David Madden, analyst at Equiti Capital, says: Traders are cautiously optimistic this afternoon and in turn we are seeing a rally in stocks. European benchmarks are outperforming their US counterparts even though tensions between Russia and Ukraine haven’t been resolved. The international community is taking the issue very seriously, the UK announced it is sending troops to Poland. Despite the political standoff, stock markets in continental Europe are showing impressive gains as the DAX and the CAC are both up almost 1%. It is remarkable the German index is holding up so well when you consider it is heavily dependent on energy supplies from Russia, so a war in that part of the world could spark an energy crisis. The FTSE 100 is firmly in positive territory as banking, oil and mining stocks are assisting the market. However, Italy’s FTSE MIB lost 1%, and Spain’s IBEX slipped by 0.36%, as those rising peripheral eurozone bond yields caught traders’ attention. European Central Bank president Christine Lagarde has told the European Parliament that price pressures in the eurozone could subside before they become entrenched in people’s expectations. Testifying to the EP’s committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, Lagarde said that eurozone inflation risks are on the rise. But, she also argued that inflation can stabilise around the ECB’s target of 2%, meaning no need for major tightening. Downplaying concerns about rising inflation, Lagarde told MEPs that: “We have to bear in mind that demand conditions in the euro area do not show the same signs of overheating that can be observed in other major economies,” “This increases the likelihood that the current price pressures will subside before becoming entrenched, enabling us to deliver on our 2% target over the medium term.” “The chances have increased that inflation will stabilize at our target. There are no signals that inflation will be persistently and significantly above our target over the medium term, which would require measurable tightening,” Higher energy costs pushed eurozone inflation to its record rate of 5.1% in January. Those higher bills will leave households with less to spend on other products and services, which could drag on prices in future. Investors are now keen to hear the ECB’s next economic projections, in March, with the possibility of early interest rate rises pushing up bond yields this afternoon. Supermarket chain Asda has committed to making its cheapest food ranges more widely available, following warnings that the poorest families were being priced out of buying food. Asda announced it will stock its full Smart Price and Farm Stores ranges in all its 581 food stores, and online, to provide customers on a budget with more value choices. The supermarket currently stocks 150 Smart Price and Farm Stores products in 300 stores and will introduce all 200 products in these value ranges to all food stores by 1st March. The move was prompted by anti-poverty campaigner Jack Monroe, who has highlighted that value ranges were “stealthily being extinguished” from the shelves of supermarkets, forcing shoppers to “level up” to the supermarkets’ own branded goods, or go hungry. Meg Farren, Asda’s chief customer officer, says: “We want to help our customers’ budgets stretch further and have taken on board the comments about the availability of our Smart Price range made by Jack Monroe. “We are taking steps to put our full Smart Price and Farm Stores ranges in store and online to make these products as accessible as possible.” Monroe is also developing a new poverty index that will track the cost of living for basic products. Many government bond yields are rising today as investors sell sovereign debt, as they deduce that interest rates are going to rise quicker than previously thought. The move has pushed borrowing costs for southern eurozone governments back towards their pre-pandemic highs, as investors adjust to signs that the European Central Bank could raise interest rates as soon as this year. Inflation is sharply over target in the US (where it hit a 40-year high of 7% in December), the UK (5.4%, a 3o-year high) and the eurozone (5.1% in January, the highest since the single currency began). Central banks in all three areas are now expected to tighten policy faster than thought a few weeks ago, (through unwinding their government bond purchase schemes and raising interest rates). America’s Federal Reserve is expected to raise interest rates at least five times this year, following Friday’s strong jobs report. Four of the Bank of England’s nine rate-setters wanted a bigger interest rate rise last week (to 0.75%, not the 0.5% rise we saw), as they tried to squeeze inflationary expectations. Klaas Knot, the Dutch central bank head, fuelled speculation that eurozone borrowing costs would rise this year, when he predicted the European Central Bank would raise interest rates in the fourth quarter of this year. This selloff has pushed Greek 10-year bond yields up, hitting their highest levels since April 2020 (although they’re still much lower than in the eurozone crisis a decade ago, when 7% was the ‘danger zone’). And the yield on Italian bonds, vs safe-haven German debt, has risen to its highest level since summer 2020. Fawad Razaqzada, analyst at Think Markets, explains what’s behind the moves: The Bank of England and European Central Bank were more hawkish than expected, with a bigger split in the former in deciding how much to raise rates by. In the US, the much stronger non-farm payrolls report, plus more signs of rising inflationary pressures, cemented expectations of a faster rate hiking cycle over there. While yields have extended their gains, the equity markets have started the new week on a stronger footing – except in some peripheral European countries. The bond selling has been more profound for European peripheries, with Greek and Italian yields sharply widening their gaps against German bunds. This is because peripheral Europe has been the major beneficiary from ECB’s emergency stimulus measures. With investors now pricing in a faster removal of QE by the ECB, they are taking no chances. The Italian benchmark stock index was down around 1.5% today, sharply under-performing the likes of the UK’s FTSE and the German DAX indices. Shares in exercise equipment maker Peloton have surged 22%, following reports late last week that Amazon and Nike are both evaluating possible bids for the company, whose pandemic-fuelled growth has slowed. Wall Street has opened slightly higher, with the S&amp;P 500 index gaining 0.3%, or 12 points, to 4,513 in early trading. The Dow Jones industrial average of 30 large US stocks is flat, with communications group Verizon (-1.3%) insurance group Travelers Companies (-1.1%) and chemicals firm Dow Inc (-1%) in the fallers. Tech stocks are picking up, though, lifting the Nasdaq Composite by 0.9%. Back in the City, the FTSE 100 index has pushed higher - now up 51 points or 0.7% at 7567. Gambling groups Flutter (+4.3%) and Entain (+2.4%) are in the top risers, along with insurance group Prudential (+2.75%), miner Anglo American (+2.4%), Lloyds Banking Group (+2.4%) and airline IAG (+2.3%). But Italy’s FTSE MIB share index is having a choppy day, down 1.3% as the sell-off in European government bonds worries traders. As flagged earlier, 10-year Italian yields have risen sharply for a third straight session, sending the spread against safer German bonds to the widest since August 2020. Deal news. Low-cost US airlines Frontier and Spirit have agreed to merge, creating what would become the fifth-largest airline in the country. The $6.6bn deal will bring the two largest low-cost carriers in the U.S. together, with Denver-based Frontier Airlines holding a 51.5% controlling stake in the combined airline. Frontier and Spirit said the combination will create America’s “most competitive ultra-low fare airline”, and better challenge with the “Big Four” airlines — American, Delta, Southwest and United. Today’s eurozone government bond selloff has also widened the gap between German and Italian sovereign debt.... Over in Switzerland, Credit Suisse is facing charges in a Swiss court of allowing an alleged Bulgarian cocaine trafficking gang to launder millions of euros, which the bank denies. Associated Press have the details: A Swiss criminal court was opening a trial Monday on charges that Credit Suisse failed to do enough to stop money laundering linked to drug trafficking by a Bulgarian criminal organization, which employed a wrestler who once hauled millions in currency by car to Switzerland. The case against the bank in federal criminal court, in the southern city of Bellinzona, centers on charges that it “did not take all necessary measures to halt the infraction of money laundering” by one of its employees, according to a summary from the court announcing the start to the proceedings. As per Swiss criminal court cases, the defendants — both individual and corporate — were not named to protect their privacy. But Swiss prosecutors identified Credit Suisse by name in an indictment announced in December 2020. The indictment, which centered on a former manager at the Swiss bank and two members of the criminal ring, wrapped up a yearslong investigation into allegations of wrongdoing that appears mostly to have taken place between 2004 and 2008. “Credit Suisse unreservedly rejects as meritless all allegations in this legacy matter raised against it and is convinced that its former employee is innocent,” the Swiss bank said in a statement Monday, adding that it “will defend itself vigorously in court.” More here: Credit Suisse faces trial in drug-tied money laundering case Beer lovers are going to have to pay more for their pints because the drink industry faces a “vicious cycle” of surging costs, the founder of Cobra Beer warned this morning. Lord Bilimoria, who has turned Cobra into a household name since founding the brand in 1989, said soaring costs across the supply chain, from manufacturing and energy to freight and staffing, meant prices would have to rise. “Our input costs in every way – bottling, energy – are up,” he told BBC Radio5 Live’s Wake Up To Money programme. “Freight costs have soared, sometimes 10 times. Wages are increasing and on top of that there are labour shortages. It does mean that businesses have to put up prices. But the consumer is already feeling the squeeze. It is a really challenging situation for everyone.” You can listen in here: European bond yields have jumped today after the European Central Bank last week sparked speculation that it could tighten monetary policy as soon as March. Yesterday, Klaas Knot, the Dutch Central Bank President and a member of the ECB’s governing council, said he expects the European Central Bank to raise interest rates in the fourth quarter of this year. Bond yields rise when prices fall, and today’s sharp moves suggest investors are anticipating the ECB could slow its bond-buying stimulus programmes faster than previously expected. Reuters has the details: Markets are on alert for rate rises in both the euro zone and the United States after the ECB last week was considered to have adopted a more hawkish tone. The United States reported stronger than expected jobs and earnings data. “The most dominant thing is still central banks and the tightening we see there, that has led to the volatility,” said Matthias Scheiber, global head of portfolio management at Allspring Global Investments. German 10-year government bond yields hit three-year highs and Italian 10-year yields hit their highest since May 2020, with Italy seen particularly vulnerable to rate increases due to its high levels of debt. ECB President Christine Lagarde could try to appease rate hike jitters at her testimony before the European Parliament later today (15:45 GMT). Last Thursday, Lagarde said eurozone inflation was likely to remain elevated for longer than previously expected, and didn’t repeat her previous guidance that an interest rate increase this year was “very unlikely”. In the consumer world, the potato is taking on soya, nut and oat in the plant milk market. My colleague Zoe Wood explains all: Described as “deliciously creamy” and capable of producing the “perfect foam” for a homemade latte or cappuccino, the Swedish potato milk brand Dug goes on sale in 220 Waitrose stores this week. Sales of plant-based alternatives to milk are booming in the UK with the market now worth about £400m a year as Britons reduce their consumption of animal products. In recent years the buzz has been around oat milk, thanks to the success of rival Swedish brand Oatly, but in its recent food and drink report Waitrose predicted that in 2022 it would be “the turn of the potato”. Waitrose said that in 2021 its sales of plant-based milk were almost a fifth higher than in 2019 as alt-dairy entered the mainstream. Oat milk is the current bestseller, ahead of almond, soya and coconut, it said. Waitrose’s alternative milk buyer, Alice Shrubsall, said sales of the products had “gone from strength-to-strength over the past few years” adding: “Demand hasn’t slowed in this market and we’re seeing customers become more experimental with their alternative milk choices.” Emma Källqvist, the acting chief executive of Veg of Lund which owns the Dug brand, said its arrival on the high street was a “critical milestone” for the company. It is already available online on sites such as Amazon and Ocado. Here’s the full story: Pets At Home has appointed Sky UK executive Lyssa McGowan as its first female chief executive, as the pets supplies retailer looks to continue its recent strong growth. McGowan will succeed Peter Pritchard, who is stepping down this summer after more than a decade at the helm, on 1st June. McGowan joins from Sky, where she has been chief consumer officer at Sky UK. Pets at Home chairman Ian Burke says McGowan brings strong corporate, strategic and operational expertise across a range of consumer-facing businesses, and a proven track record of growth at Sky. “Following an extensive search process across internal and external candidates, the Board believes that Lyssa has the requisite skills and capabilities to lead Pets at Home as it executes its future growth strategy. Pets at Home has benefited from the boom in pet ownership during the pandemic. It lifted its profit guidance last month, after a strong Christmas, with the ‘humanisation’ of the market boosted sales, such as dog spa days and advent calendars. Shares in Pets At Home have risen 1% this morning. With Jennie Daly taking control at Taylor Wimpey (see earlier post), it’s encouraging to see some progress addressing the City’s gender imbalance. Russ Mould, investment director at AJ Bell, says more needs to be done: “Lyssa McGowan looks like a great hire for Pets at Home, bringing expertise in data and digital channels for a consumer audience. The pet products retailer has been enjoying recent success with its VIP club which is helping to strengthen customer loyalty and give more insight into spending habits. “McGowan’s experience in a top consumer role at Sky could help take Pets at Home’s analytical capabilities to the next level. Understanding the customer and how they might spend more money is an important goal for retailers. “Jennie Daly is an internal promotion at Taylor Wimpey and one that brings nearly 30 years’ experience in the housebuilding and land planning industries. She should know the sector inside out and should be a safe pair of hands in making sure the company is run smoothly. “Daly becomes the fourth CEO change for a FTSE 100 company in 2022, following appointments at Johnson Matthey, Burberry and Anglo American. “There are currently eight FTSE 100 companies with a female CEO, not including the forthcoming changes at Taylor Wimpey. The relevant companies are Admiral, Aviva, GlaxoSmithKline, Entain, ITV, NatWest, Severn Trent and Whitbread. “Liv Garfield at Severn Trent is the longest running FTSE 100 female CEO, having been in charge since April 2014. She’s a member of the 30% Club which is a campaign to increase gender diversity at board and executive-committee levels. “The 30% Club says: ‘Time and again research shows diverse companies outperform their less diverse peers’. It’s therefore encouraging to see the percentage of FTSE companies with female leadership start to move up, but there is clearly a lot more to be done.” UK house prices reached a record high in January according to Halifax, but the lender warned growth is likely to slow “considerably” this year as household finances come under increasing pressure. The price of the average UK home reached a record high of £276,759 in January, up £24,500 over the year, and £37,500 higher than two years ago. However, house price growth slowed to just 0.3% in January, the smallest monthly increase since June last year, in a sign that the pandemic-fuelled boom could be fading. Russell Galley, a managing director at Halifax. “While the limited supply of new housing stock to the market will continue to provide some support to house prices, it remains likely that the rate of house price growth will slow considerably over the next year.” Halifax, which has previously said that the housing market “defied expectations” last year, said affordability remains at historically low levels as price rises continue to outstrip growth in earnings. Last week, the Bank of England raised interest rates for the second time in three months, as it sought to temper inflation, which is running at a 30-year high of 5.4%, with analysts expecting further rises later this year. Homeowners are also facing a dramatic increase in living costs, including higher energy and food bills, rising phone and broadband charges, and increased national insurance payments from April. Here’s the full story: Investor morale in the euro zone has risen this month, as the economic situation around the world has stabilised. Research institute Sentix’s gauge of investor optimism, released this morning, has increased to 16.6 from 14.9 last month. Sentix’s expectations index hit the highest since last July, while the measure of current conditions also picked up. Sentix managing director Manfred Huebner warned that slowing growth abroad, such as in the US, could weigh on Europe’s recovery: “The development in the USA is problematic. Here the overall index is falling for the third time in a row, which is due to the decline in expectations. Building more houses could help ease the affordability crisis, by giving potential buyers more properties to aim for. But a report this morning has shown that new greenfield housing developments are locking residents into car dependency, by making everyday journeys impossible without a vehicle. Meanwhile, pledges for walking, cycling and public transport are often left unfulfilled, as Laura Laker reports: The group Transport for New Homes (TfNH) visited 20 new housing developments in England, finding that while those on urban brownfield sites generally lived up to sustainable transport pledges, greenfield sites were often far from shops and amenities, without public transport, cycling links or even pavements, and the homes themselves were seemingly designed around car parking. Surface transport is responsible for 22% of the UK’s greenhouse gas emissions, and the Climate Change Committee says reducing demand for car travel is key to meeting emission reduction targets. Campaigners say housing pledges in the “levelling up” white paper, launched last week, will do little to achieve this and that planning reform is urgently needed. The government aims to build 300,000 new homes a year to meet growing demand. The report, Building Car Dependency, which follows research from 2018, says greenfield housing “has become even more car-based” in recent years, adding hundreds of thousands of additional car journeys to our roads. Housebuilding also faces obstacles; Last month, a House of Lords committee warned that confusion about planning rules and shortages of staff were undermining government targets to build 300,000 homes a year. Jan Crosby, head of infrastructure, building and construction at KPMG UK, says the UK needs to invest in housing where it’s really needed, including helping key workers to live near their employer: “We’ve seen another month of house price growth, albeit at a slower rate for a number of months. It will be interesting to see if the cost of living and inflationary pressures have any further impact in the coming months. “The recent change in interest rates may also impact demand, as many will choose not to borrow and first-time buyers could well be impacted again. It’s likely that as people stay put and continue to develop and extend where they live now, then prices could start to flatten and growth will slow. What is also important is making sure we invest in housing where it’s needed most, be it affordable housing or for essential workers who can’t afford to buy near the hospital where they work for example.” Here’s another sign that the markets are anticipating higher interest rates, after the US, UK and eurozone central banks all turned more hawkish recently as inflation has soared. [A negative bond yield means an investor receives less money when the bond matures than the original purchase price for the bond] If you’re just reading in, here are the key points from Halifax’s monthly report on the UK housing market: More details start here. Most European stock markets have begun the week with small gains, as investors ponder how quickly central bankers will raise interest rates to tackle inflation. In London, the FTSE 100 index is 15 points higher at 7531, up 0.2%. Retail group Next (+1.8%) broadcaster ITV (+1.6%) and engineering firm Melrose (+1.4%) are leading the risers, with mining firms also up. UK housebuilders are lower, though, with Barratt Development 1.2% lower. Germany’s DAX is 0.3% higher, with France’s CAC creeping up by 0.15%. On Friday, a surprisingly strong US labor market report showed that America added 467,000 jobs last month, and 700,000 more than first estimated in November and December. This bolstered optimism about the US recovery, but could also clear the way for the Federal Reserve to withdraw its pandemic stimulus more quickly and lift borrowing costs through 2022. Markets are pricing in more than five quarter-point Fed rate hikes in 2022. So stocks could remain choppy, if investors keep to the sidelines until the picture is clearer. More property news: Taylor Wimpey has appointed an internal candidate as its first female chief executive. The move could anger Elliott Advisors, the activist investor which was pressuring the housebuilder to appoint someone from outside the company. Jennie Daly, who is currently group operations director, will take over from Pete Redfern who has led the business for 15 years since it became the UK’s third biggest housebuilder through the merger of Taylor Woodrow and George Wimpey in 2007. The move makes Taylor Wimpey becomes the first UK housebuilder to appoint a female chief executive. The chair, Irene Dormer, said that Daly’s skills “set her apart from the other candidates we were considering”. She’ll become one of only a handful of female CEOs at FTSE 100 companies. However, the move will inevitably spark a backlash from Elliott, which in December revealed it was one of the company’s top five investors and went public with demands including finding a new chief executive. In a nine-page public letter to Dorner it said that shareholders were “unlikely to support a chief executive candidate that represents an extension of the status quo at Taylor Wimpey”. More here: Ross Counsell, chartered surveyor and director at GoodMove, predicts UK house prices will drop this year, following the slowdown in January: “Although these statistics show that the property market is continuing to boom, I think it’s fair to say that we can expect house prices to fall this year. With the cost of living going up, many people will find themselves struggling to afford the increasing house prices and will not be looking to buy because of this. This means there will be less buyer demand which in turn, leads to house prices falling. “For anyone looking to buy a home, I would recommend waiting towards the middle of the year, when we may see the start of a reduction in house prices.” Supply chain bottlenecks continue to hit German factories and building firms, new data shows. German industrial production dipped by 0.3% in December, down from 0.3% growth in November, and weaker than the 0.4% rise forecast by analysts. The construction sector was particularly weak, with production falling 7.3% in December. Production of consumer goods fell by 0.5%, while the production of heavy duty machinery and equipment (capital goods) rose by 2.5%. It means German industrial production ended 2021 around 6.9% lower than before the pandemic. Problems sourcing components (such as computer chips), transport delays, high energy costs, staff shortages and Covid-19 disruption have all hit the sector. Carsten Brzeski of ING says there are some positive signs, but supply chain problems remain a serious problem: The sharp drop in construction activity weighed on industrial production, while the manufacturing sector saw production increasing for the second month in a row. Despite these first positive signs, German industry remains in the stranglehold of global supply chain frictions. It is not only semiconductors but all kinds of input goods, ranging from bottom brackets for bikes to magnesium needed in automotive and aircraft construction. This bottleneck problem has reached unprecedented levels. For example, the estimated number of months’ production assured by orders on hand in manufacturing has reached 4.5 months. German industry is waiting for the “ketchup bottle effect”, Brzeski adds: Remember the glass ketchup bottle that you shake and tap all you want with no result until suddenly it all comes flooding out and your food is smothered in ketchup? Under the surface of today’s headline data, the bottle has started to drip. Unions have urged the government to do more to help low-paid workers weather the cost of living crisis, after research found the number claiming universal credit has more than doubled since the start of the pandemic to at least 2.3 million. The TUC said the 1.3 million increase in working universal credit claimants had been caused by households being pushed into financial hardship during Covid and called for a substantial rise in the payments and a higher minimum wage to head off a “perfect storm” of costs coming in spring. From 1 April, energy bills will rise on average by £700 to £2,000 a year and a few days later the chancellor’s 1.25% national insurance surcharge will start hitting wage packets. Unfixed mortgages will start rising in March, while food, rent and other prices have all been increasing at their fastest rate for 30 years. While the Treasury announced some support on Thursday to mitigate the squeeze, the TUC said that without further intervention, millions more working people would find themselves pushed below the breadline. Frances O’Grady, the TUC’s general secretary, said ministers need to urgently raise universal credit payments to 80% of the living wage – which is set to rise to £9.50 in April. “Universal credit urgently needs boosting and we need further action to reduce fuel costs for those battling to make ends meet. The best way to give working families long-term financial security is to get pay rising across the economy.” Higher borrowing costs could cool the UK housing market, with the Bank of England expected to lift Bank Rate to at least 1% by the end of the year. But that could make it even harder to buy your first homes, says Myron Jobson, senior personal finance analyst at interactive investor: Rate rises would compromise affordability for those who can least bear it: first time buyers. This is compounded by increasing cost of living pressures which, for many, could push their goal of buying their first home further out of reach. “While mortgage rates remain low by historical standards, buyers have to save bigger deposits than they did pre-pandemic as UK house price growth has significantly outpaced the rise in average earnings in recent history. A slowdown in house price growth this year seems inevitable, says Karen Noye, mortgage expert at Quilter: With energy prices soaring, inflation running riot and interest rates likely to rise in the very near future people are going to start to feel less financially stable than they were before, and this will translate into fewer property purchases. House price growth continues to far outstrip wage growth and now with a cost-of-living crisis looming the run of ever-increasing property prices is simply unstainable. Another unpredictable factor is how businesses will react to the end of office restrictions and guidance to work from home, Noye adds: While many businesses feel the pandemic has caused a permanent change in how we work, others will mandate a stricter office return. This may reverse the trend that has seen city centre flats become less desirable compared to more rural detached houses. Supply, affordability and the patience of house buyers are all being stretched, says Lucy Pendleton, property expert at independent estate agents James Pendleton: She says the pressure on household budgets means “things are going to get choppy”. The double whammy of last week’s huge hike to energy bills and the quarter-point interest rate rise will continue to create a sense of urgency around completions. With the cost of living so high, first-time buyers in particular, will find it hard to keep their skin in the game “Slowly the pool of buyers will be whittled away by dwindling affordability and only the most motivated, with the financial means to cope, will be left standing. Monthly growth is anaemic and the shortage of stock and ongoing decline in year-on-year new instructions will soon start to have a negative impact on valuations. “Mortgage costs have already gone up several hundred pounds and the likelihood of more Bank of England interventions on the way will tempt many into the security of longer fixes. Property advisor Emma Fildes of Brick Weaver says the house price ‘juggernaut’ could be running out steam, although London seems to be making a comeback. A lack of properties on the market will support prices this year, predicts James Humphries-Stone, director of Midlands-based estate agency, The Avenue: “Though the rate of price growth fell slightly in January, demand is massively outstripping supply and that will support values throughout 2022. As long as supply remains as low as it is, it’s hard to see prices falling despite soaring inflation and rising interest rates. The race for space will continue to drive activity levels throughout 2022, just as it did in 2021.” It’s astonishing to think that people are paying nearly £40,000 more for the average home than they were before the pandemic, points out Iain McKenzie, CEO of The Guild of Property Professionals: With rising interest rates, and soaring inflation and the cost of living, we could see this cooling effect settle in for the long-term. If you are considering selling your home, your local estate agent will be eager to market it, as the demand for property is still outweighing supply. Halifax’s report also shows that annual house price inflation in London rose for the third month running in January, to 4.5%. That’s double the rate recorded in December and the highest reading in over a year. The easing of pandemic restrictions and increased demand from overseas buyers is lifting demand for property in the capital. Marc von Grundherr, director of estate agents Benham and Reeves, says the London market is stirring. “It may seem strange to think of London as the tortoise of the UK property market but while the rate of house price growth has been accelerating at alarming rates in the majority of UK regions, the capital’s housing market has remained far more muted. However, we’re now seeing something start to stir and London house prices have climbed at double the rate seen in December alone. The returning combination of both domestic and foreign demand is helping to rejuvenate the London market and we predict that come the end of the year, the capital will be leading the house price pack once again.” The average house prices in Wales fell slightly this month, Halifax reports, to £205,253. That still left Wales’s annual house price inflation at 13.9%, “by far the strongest performing nation or region in the UK”. Average property prices edged down in Scotland too, to £192,69, with the annual rate of inflation slowing somewhat to 8.9%. In Northern Ireland, prices were up 10.2% on last year, giving an average property value in January of £170,982. Across England, the North West remained the strongest performing region, with prices 12% higher year-on-year, with an average house price of £213,200. UK house prices have hit record highs last month, but the cost of living squeeze means growth is likely to “slow considerably” this year, mortgage lender Halifax says. Halifax has just reported that house prices rose by 0.3% last month, their slowest monthly rise since last June. On an annual basis, the rate of growth remained steady at 9.7% last month. But with household budgets squeezed by rising inflation, and higher interest rates pushing up mortgage costs, the market is expected to cool. In January, the average UK house price on Halifax’s index rose to a new record high of £276,759. That’s around £24,500 up on this time last year, and £37,500 higher than two years ago, before the pandemic. Russell Galley, managing director at Halifax, says house price growth slowed somewhat at the start of the year. Affordability is already historically stretched, making it even harder to get onto the property ladder, Galley points out: “Following the peak activity of 2021, transaction volumes are returning to more normal levels. Affordability remains at historically low levels as house price rises continue to outstrip earnings growth. Despite record levels of first-time buyers stepping onto the ladder last year, younger generations still face significant barriers to home ownership as deposit requirements remain challenging. “This situation is expected to become more acute in the short-term as household budgets face even greater pressure from an increase in the cost of living, and rises in interest rates begin to feed through to mortgage rates. While the limited supply of new housing stock to the market will continue to provide some support to house prices, it remains likely that the rate of house price growth will slow considerably over the next year.” Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. Inflation will hit UK economic growth this year as consumers are hit by rising prices, economists warn today. The EY Item Club has cut its forecast for UK economic growth this year to 4.9%, down from 5.6%, as the squeeze on households’ spending power and the omicron variant slow the recovery. In its latest quarterly assessment of the economy, EY predicts inflation to hit 7% in the spring, its highest level since 1992. That will mean people will see their real wages fall this year (in the biggest squeeze on households on record). EY predicts the Bank of England will respond by hiking Bank Rate to 1% by the end of this year -- having lifted them to 0.5% last Thursday. On the upside, EY says the UK GDP grew 7.3% in 2021, up from the 6.8% predicted in its previous forecast. Hywel Ball, EY’s UK chair, says: “The forecast shows that the economy’s bounce back in 2021 was stronger-than-expected and Omicron’s economic impact is likely to be temporary and limited. While the economy and UK businesses may have a softer launch pad for growth this year, they will still benefit from a number of tailwinds in 2022 and 2023. “But blowing in the opposite direction will be a squeeze on household spending power which is expected to be a bigger headwind for the economy than the Omicron variant. Inflation is set to reach its highest level in thirty years by the spring and will be well ahead of pay growth. “Although the latest forecast says that the economic scarring from the pandemic is likely to be minimal, policymakers still face the challenge of how they help support households through the forthcoming squeeze on their finances and give companies the confidence needed to unlock business investment. The push towards Net Zero certainly creates an opportunity for investment growth.” Financial services firm Deloitte has warned that the economic picture is also looking darker. It reports that consumer confidence during the last quarter of 2021 as people were hit by higher household bills and inflation. The UK cost of living squeeze is set to worsen, with the chairman of Britain’s biggest supermarket chain warning that food price inflation will soon hit 5%. John Allan, who has chaired Tesco since 2015, told the BBC’s Sunday Morning programme that he was well aware people on very tight budgets were having to choose between food and heating. “In some ways the worst is still to come – because although food price inflation in Tesco last quarter was only 1%, we are impacted by rising energy prices. Our suppliers are impacted by rising energy prices. We’re doing all we can to offset it … but that’s the sort of number we’re talking about. Of course, 5%,” European stock markets are set to start the new week with small gains, with the FTSE 100 index up 0.3% in pre-market trading. The agenda 7am GMT: German industrial production for December 7am GMT: Halifax house price index for January 3.15pm GMT: Treasury committee hearing: is inflation back to stay? 3.45pm GMT: ECB president Christine Lagarde testifies to the European Parliament committee of Economic and Monetary AffairsMPs from all sides angrily rounded on Boris Johnson and accused him of whipping up political poison after the Labour leader, Keir Starmer, was set upon by protesters who accused him of protecting the paedophile Jimmy Savile. Johnson provoked widespread fury last week when he suggested Starmer had protected Savile during his time as director of public prosecutions. The comments drew criticism from two former Tory chief whips and prompted the resignation of a long-serving aide. On Monday, Starmer and the shadow foreign secretary, David Lammy, had to be bundled into a police car after anti-vax protesters surrounded him near parliament with shouts of “traitor” and “Jimmy Savile”. One witness said a protester carried a hangman’s noose prop, which another protester had joked was for Starmer. Lammy said it was “no surprise the conspiracy theorist thugs who harassed Keir Starmer and I repeated slurs we heard from Boris Johnson last week at the dispatch box. Intimidation, harassment and lies have no place in our democracy. And they won’t ever stop me doing my job.” The former chief whip Julian Smith was among at least seven Tory MPs to criticise Johnson as he described the events as appalling. “It is really important for our democracy and for his security that the false Savile slurs made against him are withdrawn in full,” he tweeted. Calls for an apology also came from Sir Roger Gale, Anthony Mangnall and Tobias Ellwood – Tory MPs who have sent letters of no confidence in Johnson – as well as Stephen Hammond, who has expressed significant concerns about the prime minister. Tory MP Rob Largan also said it was time to defuse the situation. “Words matter. What we say and how we say it echoes out far beyond parliament. It can have serious real world consequences. Elected representatives have a responsibility to lower the temperature of debate, not add fuel to the fire.” Johnson said the behaviour “directed at the leader of the opposition tonight is absolutely disgraceful” but stopped short of apologising for his remarks. “All forms of harassment of our elected representatives are completely unacceptable. I thank the police for responding swiftly,” he said. Labour sources were furious at the incident, though Starmer was unharmed and escorted back to his office within minutes. “Boris Johnson and his cabinet chose to lie down with the dogs – and now the whole lot of them are covered in fleas,” one Labour source said. The row over Johnson’s Savile comments has been cited by a number of Tory MPs who have submitted letters of no confidence in the prime minister, 54 of which must be sent to trigger a vote of no confidence in him. During an exchange in the House of Commons last Monday, Johnson said Starmer was “a former director of public prosecutions, who spent more time prosecuting journalists and failing to prosecute Jimmy Savile”. Starmer did not take the decision personally but had apologised for institutional failings after Savile’s abuse was revealed. Munira Mirza, one of Johnson’s closest aides who headed the No 10 policy unit, quit on Thursday after urging Johnson to retract the comments. Cabinet ministers have also expressed unease at the remarks, including the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, during a national press conference, saying “I wouldn’t have said it”. Other cabinet ministers have defended the remarks – including the business secretary, Kwasi Kwarteng, and the justice secretary, Dominic Raab, who called it part of the “cut and thrust” of politics. The incident on Monday night prompted renewed anger from MPs. Labour’s Chris Bryant tweeted that Johnson’s comments were directly responsible for circulating links between Starmer and Savile, which had originally appeared on far-right websites. “This is appalling. People were shouting all sorts at Keir, including ‘Jimmy Savile’. This is what happens when a prime minister descends into the gutter and recycles lies from hard-right conspiracy theorists. Political poison has an effect. Johnson has no moral compass,” he wrote. The shadow minister, Yasmin Qureshi, said: “The PM enabled and actively encouraged this.” Liam Byrne, the MP and former mayoral candidate, said: “The best of this country will always defeat the worst. But now we see clearly the kind of behaviour Boris Johnson is prepared to incite.” The Labour mayor of London, Sadiq Khan, also blamed Johnson for amplifying false claims. “This is what happens when fake news is amplified and given credibility by people who should know better. Solidarity with Keir Starmer and David Lammy. Thank you to the Met officers for their swift intervention.” The health secretary, Sajid Javid, had earlier said it was time to “move on” from the row over Johnson’s Savile comments. “I think we should draw a line under this issue and try to move on because the prime minister has come forward and clarified his remarks.” Johnson is expected to reshuffle his team on Tuesday, including a shake-up of the whips’ office that could see the chief, Mark Spencer, sacked. Chris Pincher, a housing minister and ally of the prime minister, is tipped to replace him. The prime minister will also continue the overhaul of his back office team, after recruiting Steve Barclay, the Cabinet Office minister, as his chief of staff, and Guto Harri, his former spokesperson, as his new director of comms. Henry Newman, the deputy chief of staff, and an ally of Carrie Johnson, is also leaving No 10 to return to a job in Michael Gove’s team. Barclay addressed No 10 staff on Monday saying he wanted to create a “mutually supportive” environment after difficult recent weeks and assuring them his doors is “always open”. He will now divide his time between No 10 and the Cabinet Office, with some of his portfolio distributed to other ministers. Harri was also present at the staff meeting, after drawing criticism from Labour over his previous job for a lobbying firm and a media interview in which he recounted Johnson appearing to make light of his troubles by singing: “I will survive”. Labour called for more scrutiny of Harri’s past work for the lobbying firm, saying: “We can’t have the revolving door from lobbying to government see potential national security issues arise. We need full transparency from Guto Harri about all contact he had with government in his former role as a lobbyist and who his clients were.” Scotland Yard said two arrests were made following clashes between police and protesters on the Victoria Embankment after Starmer was taken to safety. A Met police statement said: “Shortly after 5.10pm on Monday, 7 February, a man who had been surrounded by a group of protesters near to New Scotland Yard, was taken away from the scene by a police car. “A man and a woman were arrested at the scene for assault of an emergency worker after a traffic cone was thrown at a police officer. They have been taken into custody.”A tourist from Arizona won $229,000 on a Las Vegas slot machine but walked away unaware of his windfall, due to an error in the machine. It took nearly three weeks for gaming board agents to track him down and enrich him. On 8 January, Robert Taylor hit a jackpot on a slot machine at the Treasure Island Hotel &amp; Casino on the Vegas strip. But the “slot machine experienced a malfunction that prevented Mr Taylor and casino personnel from realizing that a progressive jackpot had been won”, the Nevada Gaming Control Board said. “By the time an extensive review of the slot machine and the communications technology was completed, confirming the jackpot had been won, Mr Taylor had returned home to Arizona.” The casino struggled to identify its lucky patron. The gaming board launched an extensive investigation that included a review of hours of surveillance footage across numerous properties; witness interviews; a study of electronic purchase records; and analysis of ride-share data obtained by the Nevada Transportation Authority. Eventually, the investigation was able to identify Taylor as the lucky casino patron. He was notified on 28 January, nearly three weeks after his win. “The Nevada Gaming Control Board is charged with the strict regulation of the gaming industry, the protection of the gaming public, and ensuring that the industry benefits the state of Nevada,” said James Taylor, chief of enforcement for the board. “I commend the agents of the enforcement division … for ensuring that the public trust in the gaming industry remains strong by spending countless hours over two weeks to ensure that a patron is awarded winnings owed to him. “I’d also like to thank the Nevada Transportation Authority for their assistance in confirming the identity of the patron. This has been a great example of government working together for the benefit of the public.” Robert Taylor will return to Las Vegas to collect his $229,368.52 jackpot, according to gaming officials. The Nevada gambling industry has recovered since the start of the pandemic. In a report released last month, the state gaming board revealed that casinos “won” – or earned – a record $13.4bn in 2021, compared to $12bn in 2019. “This represents an all-time record for gaming win, beating the previous record set during calendar 2007 which totaled $12.8bn,” board analyst Michael Lawton said. He attributed the success to vaccine rollouts which have increased capacity in casinos, as well as strong gambling demand due to “healthy consumer savings as a result of stimulus payments and the sustained rebound of leisure travel”.One detail within the hike in energy bills hasn’t received enough attention. While the surge in wholesale gas prices is, by a wide margin, the biggest driver, let’s not overlook the contribution from the cost of clearing up the mess of 29 corporate failures in the sector. Those costs also fall on customers. The infuriating element is charges for lost credit balances – in other words, money taken from customers via direct debit that should have been in place when a supplier failed. In practice, sums have been missing in many instances. Some companies, it seems, have played fast and loose with their working capital arrangements. Customers of the failed companies do not lose a penny when they are transferred to a new supplier via Ofgem’s “supplier of last resort” mechanism, it should be said. Instead, the missing balances are replaced, as it were, via charges on everybody’s bills. In effect, we all pay for the missing millions. How much are we talking about? So far, not much: only £2.45 per customer (or about £54m in aggregate) was included within the £68 “supplier of last resort levy” that formed part of last week’s near-£700 hike in the price cap. The bulk of the levy covered new suppliers’ weightier costs of buying energy for customers who arrived unexpectedly. But the full extent of the missing balances is still to emerge as numbers are reconciled with administrators’ reports and so on. By the end of the process, we could be talking about serious sums. Chris O’Shea, chief executive of Centrica, owner of British Gas, estimated last October that almost £400m of customer credit had gone. But that was at a point when only 15 rivals had failed. The figure, almost certainly, will be higher now. If these were banks collapsing without customers’ deposits, argued O’Shea, it would be “a national scandal”. Spot on. It’s not as if Ofgem was unaware of the danger. In March last year – so a few months before gas prices surged – the regulator announced it was “concerned that some suppliers may use customers’ surplus credit balances to fund otherwise unsustainable business practices”. That concern was well founded: the predictable car crash happened. MPs on the business and energy select committee could usefully try to force more transparency when Ofgem chief executive, Jonathan Brearley, is one of their witnesses on Tuesday. A few questions: what’s a fair estimate of the missing balances? Is there any hope of recovering any? Why did Ofgem not insist on hard ring-fencing rules years ago? And why will it take until spring to design proper protections? Elliott wise not to blow the Taylor Wimpey house down Whatever you do, don’t appoint an insider as your next chief executive, advised Elliott Advisors. Taylor Wimpey has ignored the instruction from the supposedly fearsome New York activist hedge fund. Jennie Daly, currently operations director, will succeed long-serving Pete Redfern, becoming the first woman to lead a major UK housebuilder. In the circumstances, Elliott’s reaction was almost gentle. It said it expects to see Taylor Wimpey “take the necessary steps to deliver improved value for shareholders”, which could be said of almost any company at any time. It now sees the appointment of new non-executive directors as “critical to this process”. Elliott’s restraint is sensible. Boards propose chief executives and there’s no mileage in disputing the principle, especially when you’re merely a “top five” shareholder and decline to say how much you actually control. Besides, Daly, despite her low profile, may turn out to have ideas that Elliott likes. The demand that it had absolutely had to be outsider was always odd if Elliott had nobody particular in mind. Certainly one name touted by others, Dave Jenkinson, was a non-starter. As deputy to £75m boss Jeff Fairburn at Persimmon, he collected £40m a few years ago from the same wildly over-the-top incentive scheme. Taylor Wimpey, underperformer or not, didn’t need that cure. Clear-out at LV= Alan Cook’s position as chairman of LV= has been untenable for a while. The moment came last December when he failed to get sufficient backing from members of the mutual insurer for a takeover by private equity firm Bain Capital. A boardroom clear-out, which swept away half its members on Monday, was inevitable. The survivor is chief executive Mark Hartigan, presumably because somebody has to run the shop while talks take place with fellow mutual Royal London on an alternative deal. If the new negotiations don’t work out, however, incoming chair Seamus Creedon would be well advised to rethink his loyalty to Hartigan – the Bain fiasco was as much his as it was Cook’s.In the 1992 sci-fi dystopia Snow Crash, the author Neal Stephenson imagined a bleak 21st century where the collapse of the global economy had seen governments fall and their power replaced by a few giant businesses. The book is notable for prescience, anticipating the adoption of what was then seen as outlandish technologies like the wireless internet, cryptocurrencies and smartphones, as well as the rise of the gig economy. But it is the book’s prophetic vision of “the metaverse” that has revived interest in the work. That is because Stephenson described the online virtual reality experience that almost every tech giant today wishes to commercially exploit. Last October, Microsoft announced that users of its Teams online meetings app would be able to turn themselves into avatars – the term Stephenson popularised in Snow Crash – to encourage users into virtual interaction. Days later Mark Zuckerberg, Facebook’s founder, rebranded his company as Meta, with a focus on the potential for virtual worlds. Mr Zuckerberg wants to convince the world that he has found new ways to make money – a quest that has become more urgent since last week it was revealed that the company’s user base may not just have plateaued but is starting to decline. This is in part because many Apple iPhone owners choose to opt out of being tracked by applications like Facebook and younger people prefer to spend time on the Chinese-owned social media network TikTok. Facebook users’ engagement provides the personal data used to target advertising. Mr Zuckerberg’s Meta rebrand is meant to signal that he will improve his firm’s targeting and measurement techniques – and extract more revenue from its users. However, the metaverse may not be the future. The corporate version of social media has been blamed, with some justification, for rotting democracy from within. Because Facebook, Twitter and YouTube loom so large in the public imagination, there exists a “blind spot”, suggests computer scientist Ethan Zuckerman, for alternative models. Yet they are here. Tim Berners-Lee, the web’s inventor, wants to wrest power back from big tech and put people in control of their personal data. Other decentralised platforms – such as Mastodon – make it possible to create online communities with different rules. Progressive Twitter users in India switched in 2019 to mstdn.social after a supporter was suspended. However, the biggest decentralised social network is Gab, which serves de-platformed rightwing extremists. There are also social media platforms built around cryptocurrency/blockchain capitalism, which currently has a prohibitively large carbon footprint. Contributors to such sites are typically rewarded with tokens, theoretically enabling high-quality content to be rewarded. However, this model has its downsides: notably that voting power is proportional to currency holdings. When Steemit, one of the original crypto-sites, was bought out, its new owner used his market power to move it his own blockchain system – precipitating a walkout by users. Mr Zuckerman’s wish is for “lots more social networks” that are explicitly governed by the communities who are working with them and offer tools that give more control over what is seen and how it is seen. He thinks that a period of fertile creativity may produce a new, more cooperative form of social media. One hopes he is right.The NHS has some catching up to do. With 6 million people in England currently on waiting lists, and another 1.5 million in Northern Ireland, Scotland and Wales, the mismatch between demand and supply in the health system is one of the most serious problems facing the country. This means it is also one of the biggest challenges for ministers, who know that NHS delays, and the problems including deaths that these cause, will be a huge issue – perhaps the single biggest issue – in the next general election. So it is no wonder that the government is trying to force NHS England’s bosses to fix the problem quickly. Publication of a recovery plan for elective (non-emergency) hospital treatment has already been delayed once. Over the weekend it emerged that a sticking point in negotiations is the deadline that will be imposed for reducing waiting times. Waits of more than two years will have been dealt with by the end of March. But ministers’ demand that waits of more than one year should also be eliminated by March 2024 has met with resistance. That is because the length of time that a person has been waiting is not an indication of their level of need. And if people who have been waiting for a long time for non-urgent treatment are prioritised, then those who are more ill but have been slower to come forward will suffer. The extent of the delays is nothing short of a scandal. Being told that you may have cancer is highly distressing; the two-week maximum waiting time for patients in these circumstances to see an oncologist exists for a reason. For half-a-million people in England to have waited longer than this, as new research suggests that they have done over the past year, is a sign of a brewing crisis. So are lengthy queues for operations such as hip replacements, which have left thousands of people who ought to have been fitted with new joints trapped in pain and disability. But the NHS is right to push back against unrealistic commitments. Political expediency must not be allowed to trump clinical judgments. And ministers must be prevented from passing the buck, and blame for departmental mistakes, to the NHS. The pandemic has dramatically worsened conditions on the ground, putting unprecedented pressure on primary care and hospitals. But the problems of under-resourcing and lack of long-term planning predate Covid. A health and social care workforce strategy was promised in 2019, as an adjunct to a long-term plan that placed staffing front and centre. But the work done in this area by Dido Harding at NHS Improvement was feeble, and the plan is yet to arrive. An amendment to the health and care bill proposed by Jeremy Hunt, who chairs the health select committee, would have increased transparency by requiring regular updates on vacancies and training places – but the government voted it down in November. Labour should maximise pressure on this point and others, both in the House of Lords and when the bill returns to the Commons. The truth is that Tory resistance to forward planning, as well as insufficient spending, lies at the heart of the NHS’s difficulties. With 100,000 job vacancies, and worrying reports about burnout among staff, Sajid Javid and his colleagues should be listening carefully to health bosses. Instead, they combine a high-handed approach to NHS management with over-enthusiasm for big business – as was illustrated by Mr Javid’s recent decision to force through a deal with the private sector despite warnings about costs. Overall, the conduct of the government suggests that the problems of most interest to it are not those facing the NHS. They are the problems facing ministers and their party.Warner Bros is being sued by co-financiers Village Roadshow over the hybrid release of the sci-fi sequel The Matrix Resurrections. As with all of Warner’s 2021 titles, the fourth Matrix film was released on the big screen and the company’s streaming service, HBO Max, as a response to the pandemic. A complaint put forward by Village Roadshow claims that the decision destroyed any box office chances in December. The Matrix Resurrections, which reunited stars Keanu Reeves and Carrie-Anne Moss, made just $37m in the US and has just crossed $153m worldwide. The budget is believed to be around $190m. The Matrix Reloaded, the highest-performing of the franchise, made more than $740m in 2003. “WB’s strategy not only ensured that The Matrix Resurrections would be a bust at the box office, but it also inflicted serious harm to the entire Matrix franchise,” the suit claims. “There can be no doubt that the abysmal theatrical box office sales figures from The Matrix Resurrections dilute the value of this tent pole franchise as a film’s lack of profitability generally prevents studios from investing in additional sequels and derivative films in the near term.” Reviews for The Matrix Resurrections were mixed on release, with the Guardian’s Peter Bradshaw calling it “a heavy-footed reboot which doesn’t offer a compelling reason for its existence”. The film was originally scheduled to be released in April 2022 but was moved to the end of 2021, a decision that the complaint alleges was intended to “create a desperately needed wave of year-end HBO Max premium subscriptions”. Two weeks ago, Warners revealed that HBO Max had gained more than 5 million US subscribers in 2021, up 35% over the past 24 months. Village Roadshow is claiming breach of contract and alleging that Warners is also “devising various schemes” to deprive them of rights to follow-ups to other co-owned films such as sequels to Charlie and the Chocolate Factory and Edge of Tomorrow. The company has invested more than $4.5bn in a partnership that has lasted for more than 20 years. “This is a frivolous attempt by Village Roadshow to avoid their contractual commitment to participate in the arbitration that we commenced against them last week,” the studio said in response. “We have no doubt that this case will be resolved in our favor.” The suit follows a fractious year in Hollywood as studios released tentpole films on streaming services at the same time as in cinemas as Covid continued to affect audience turnout. Last July, Scarlett Johansson hit Disney with a lawsuit after her standalone Marvel adventure Black Widow went to Disney+ on the same day as its theatrical release, a move she claimed affected box office sales. The studio settled with her in October. Warner’s decision to put its 2021 slate on HBO Max at the same time caused ire among film-makers that have worked with them, including Christopher Nolan and Denis Villeneuve. The studio’s 2022 films will mostly be launched theatrical-only with some possible exceptions.A researcher in Venice has found evidence revealing that Marco Polo had a daughter out of wedlock. Agnese is believed to have been born between 1295, the year the merchant and explorer returned to Venice after more than two decades travelling through Asia, and 1298, the year he was imprisoned in Genoa for his involvement in a naval conflict between the two cities. Polo, who wrote a book about his travels that went on to become one of the world’s first bestsellers, was in jail for a year before returning to Venice and marrying Donata Badoer, with whom he had three other daughters. Marcello Bolognari, a PhD student at Ca’ Foscari University in Venice, said there were “hints of Agnese’s existence” in other Polo family documents, but her last will, recently discovered in Venice’s state archive, provides strong evidence that the explorer was her father. The document, written on 7 July 1319, shows that Agnese, who died in her early 20s, had entrusted her father, Polo, to deliver her will and testament to the priest, Pietro Pagano, at the church of San Felice in Venice’s San Giovanni Grisostomo neighbourhood. “We know for sure he had three daughters and this document reflects that most probably he had another daughter from a previous relationship,” said Bolognari. “We don’t know if he had been married before his second marriage or if the child was born from an affair.” The fact that Agnese had entrusted Polo with her will was proof that he knew of her existence and that the pair had a “strong and trusting relationship”, added Bolognari. Agnese did not name her mother in her will, which Bolognari said could have been a sign that her mother had died. He said Agnese’s will depicted “an intimate and affectionate family life”. She was married with two young children. Polo had three daughters with Badoer – Fantina, Bellela and Moreta. He died in 1324, aged 69.Guto Harri: Good to see you again, sir. Boris Johnson: And you Guto Boyo! Harri: I thought you were going easy on the racism these days … Johnson: I was only being friendly. And I have cut out the picaninnie, watermelon and letterbox gags. Harri: I guess I’d better take the knee then. So I suppose I ought to ask. Are you going to be in the job long? Johnson: (singing) I will survive! … I’ve got all my love to give. Harri: Well I’d be careful about what you do with all that love, if I were you. It’s got you into a lot of scrapes in the past. I’ve warned you before about being sexually incontinent. Not that being sexually incontinent is a bad thing, of course! Johnson: Chance would be a fine thing! I can’t move these days without a couple of plods following me. Do you remember the good old days at the GLA when I could slip off on my bike for some pole-dancing with Jennifer? Harri: Try and concentrate. Back to my original question. How long do you think you’re going to be in Downing Street? Johnson: Why? Harri: It’s complicated … It’s like this. I’m still on the board of the PR company, Hawthorn Advisors, and I only agreed to come over to No 10 as I was told it was basically a holiday job. At worst, something that could take up a six-month sabbatical. Johnson: I see… Harri: The thing is, I’m only here for the laughs. Everyone knows you’re a goner. So I had assumed you did too… Johnson: Er … no. Harri: Right then. I’d better spell it out. Most of the country hates you. The only reason you’re still prime minister is because the Tory MPs are too stupid to work out who to replace you with. So I just thought it would be a bit of a laugh to take on the most impossible communications job going. Then when it all went tits up, I could go back to Hawthorn at double the salary. Johnson: Could we at least pretend that you’re in it for the long term? Harri: You mean, announce that I’m leaving Hawthorn for good even if I miraculously end up back there before the end of the summer? Johnson: Yes! That’s exactly the sort of thing I had in mind. Harri: It’ll cost you. I’ve got my reputation to think of. Can’t be seen to be taking a hopeless cause too seriously. Johnson: I’m sure Lord Brownlow can oblige. But why am I paying you all this money? Harri: Because I’m the only one stupid enough to take the job. Right? That’s sorted. OK so let’s try and do something about your image. Do you think you could get rid of the Toddler haircut? You’re beginning to look like a crumpled Donald Trump. Johnson: Certainly not. The public love it… Harri: Do they now? Not what I’ve heard. Well, we’ve certainly got to wean you off the cake and booze. How is your drinking these days? Johnson: Much better. I now spill most of it. Harri: That’s a start, I suppose. We need to persuade the country that everyone in No 10 isn’t simply coming in to have parties and get pissed… Johnson: Then what will everyone in here be doing? Harri: I dunno. I haven’t worked that bit out yet. I’m more of an image guy. Do the staff in No 10 have to do anything? It might actually be better if they just did nothing. Johnson: Good thought, Guto. I’ll check in with Steve Barclay on that one. Now, how are we going to reconcile the fact that only a few weeks ago you were saying I was completely lacking in morality and that I should offer a grovelling apology for having been out of my head for most of lockdown. Harri: Oh, I don’t think we need to get too bogged down in that level of detail. Thinking about it now, I might have overreacted a little. Besides which, it would be very off brand for you to apologise for anything. We need to play to your strengths. What is it that everyone knows about you? Johnson: That I’m a stud. With … how many children is it now? Harri: Park that thought. What else? Johnson: Er… Harri: It’s that you’re a liar, stupid. I mean, sir. Your USP is that you are pathologically unable to tell the truth. So we need you to double down on the lies. Keep denying you were at parties when everyone knows you were. Keep up the Savile lies on Starmer. Then everyone will be reassured you’ve got your mojo back. Johnson: If you’re sure. Harri: I am. Trust me. The thing is that I know you’re not a complete clown… Johnson: That’s the nicest thing you’ve ever said to me… Harri: But the public doesn’t. They think you’re a total clown. So we have to show you have the integrity to demonstrate you’re prepared to sack anyone to hang on to your job. Even if it is only for a few weeks longer. Johnson: Gotcha. Which just leaves Brexit? Harri: So when are you going to admit you are an opportunistic chancer who never believed in leaving the EU? Johnson: I’m sure I did… Harri: You didn’t! I was with you when you were London mayor and back then you were an internationalist and pro the EU and the single market. Johnson: I’m sure I never said all that. In any case, it’s all water under the bridge. I’m now going to appoint a minister to promote the benefits of Brexit… Harri: Please don’t… Johnson: Why not? Harri: Because there aren’t any! It will be a disaster for Wales. But I guess we don’t really have to talk about Brexit as nothing much is going to happen before you go… Johnson: Go where? Harri: Don’t start all that again. Since you’ve got no morals, I’m sure I can manage not to have any too for a few months. Brexit is brilliant! There, I said it. Johnson: Tremendous… Harri: Now, I’ve done you a favour. Perhaps you could do me one. Would you be prepared to have another look at Huawei. They really aren’t that bad… Johnson: I’ll think about it… Harri: In the meantime, would you like a new handset? I can get you one with unlimited roaming for nothing. And the camera is fab. Johnson: Something tells me you’re going to be right at home here. • An evening with Marina Hyde and John Crace: join in person or online Join Marina Hyde and John Crace live in Kings Place, looking back at the latest events in Westminster, on Monday 7 March, 8pm GMT | 9pm CET | 12pm PST | 3pm EST. Book tickets hereSenior political figures, from Keir Starmer to Sajid Javid, have criticised negative briefings that suggest Carrie Johnson is partly to blame for the troubles of her husband’s premiership. MPs came to the defence of the prime minister’s wife after the publication of extracts from a new book by the Conservative peer Michael Ashcroft which suggested her “behaviour is preventing [Boris Johnson] from leading Britain as effectively as the voters deserve”. In response, a spokesperson for Carrie Johnson issued a statement saying she “plays no role in government” and had been targeted by enemies of the prime minister in a “brutal briefing campaign”. Boris Johnson’s leadership is hanging by a thread after scandals over No 10 parties – some of which were also attended by Carrie Johnson – and the funding of the No 11 flat refurbishment, which was her project with the celebrity designer Lulu Lytle. But Javid, who Carrie Johnson worked for in the past as an adviser, described some of the attacks on her as sexist and misogynistic. “This whole focus on Carrie Johnson in some of these reports, I think it’s very undignified and very unfair,” said the health secretary. Starmer said people should not be dragged “into the gutter”. The Labour leader said: “I approach politics on the basis that we should treat people with respect. We can profoundly disagree but we should treat people with respect. And I would take exactly that approach with Carrie Johnson. “Obviously, respect differences of opinion, but I do not go along with the idea that we should drag everybody into the gutter.” The shadow work and pensions secretary, Jonathan Ashworth, also waded in, saying: “I don’t think it’s fair or right at all, and I’ll tell you why. I just think as a general rule, a politician’s partner – any politician, any party – should be off limits. “It’s the politician that has chosen to have a public life … I think this whole focus on Carrie Johnson in some of these reports, I think it’s very undignified and very unfair.” Sources have previously told the Guardian that the prime minister’s wife had on occasions tried to have her say on policy issues, particularly on the environment. Former Downing Street insiders said they felt Carrie could make her husband change his mind, sometimes overnight, on an issue they thought was already agreed. The prime minister would also tell aides that if he did not take a particular course of action, it would anger his wife. They also reported Johnson receiving scores of messages from her during the working day – and her repeatedly calling his staff, insisting the prime minister be hauled out of meetings to talk to her. Paul Goodman, the editor of the ConservativeHome website, which is owned by Ashcroft, said on Monday that the idea that the prime minister’s wife had partly prevented Johnson from leading effectively was his “impression of the consensus view in Westminster, at least among ministers, MPs and spads”. However, he also agreed with Carrie Johnson’s defenders that the ultimate responsibility lay with the prime minister. “Whether the charge is true or not, it deflects from the main point. Which is that the prime minister himself, not his spouse, bears responsibility for his decisions,” he wrote. “It would be unfair to blame others for them, even his politically engaged wife. After all, he chooses who he divorces, marries and has children with.”Headteachers have cast doubt on the government’s efforts to ensure fairness for pupils sitting their GCSEs and A-levels in England this summer, warning that deprived pupils in areas severely affected by Covid will be at an unfair disadvantage as exams return. The warning came as exam boards published advance information about some of the content due to come up in the summer exams, to help teachers and pupils focus their revision. School leaders warned, however, that the information had come too late and would do little to mitigate widely varying levels of Covid disruption in schools across the country. “It’s very late in the day,” said Caroline Derbyshire, the chair of the Headteachers’ Roundtable and CEO of the Saffron academy trust in Essex, adding: “The extent to which students have been affected is quite different across different parts of the country, which makes it impossible to ensure fairness.” There are also warnings that tens of thousands of pupils could lose out on top grades compared with last year’s results, as the government attempts to rein in grade inflation over the past two years and begin a glided return to pre-pandemic grading. This summer is a transition year, when examiners will be asked to be more generous when setting grade boundaries to provide a safety net for students who might otherwise just miss out on a higher grade, but there will be significantly fewer top grades when results are published in August. On Monday, pupils and teachers were given access to long-awaited details of topics, themes and skills likely to be assessed during the exams. Advance information has been provided for the majority of GCSE and A-level subjects, including maths, biology, chemistry and languages. It does not provide exact questions that will appear in exams, however, and is one of a range of measures intended to recognise the impact of the pandemic on learning. Mike Walters, the chair of the Kent Association of Head Teachers, said pupils and staff were glad to have some advance notice of topics, but warned: “The extent to which this really mitigates, when there’s been such different levels of disruption for children in different areas of the country, is questionable.” Glyn Potts, the head of Newman RC College in Oldham, said areas such as the north-west and north-east of England had been more severely affected by Covid over a sustained period than other areas, with high levels of absence among staff and pupils. “I welcome anything that addresses lost learning, particularly for disadvantaged students, but this doesn’t actually do it. I think exams are the fairest approach, but this doesn’t seem to be fair to those students for whom challenges before Covid were then amplified during the pandemic.” Some heads complained there were inconsistencies in the advance content made available by different boards in different subjects, and that some were more useful than others. “Overall I think young people deserved better than this, especially at such a late stage,” said Ben Davis, the headteacher at St Ambrose Barlow RC high school in Greater Manchester. Analysis by the Liberal Democrats suggests about 90,000 pupils could miss out on top grades in their GCSEs and A-levels because of the government’s planned changes. Summer exams are due to go ahead this year after two years of cancellations owing to the pandemic. The teacher-assessed grades that were used instead led to record results for students. The exams regulator, Ofqual, has said it wants to get back to normal grading, but over a two-year period. According to Liberal Democrat analysis, planned changes for this summer could mean that almost 25,000 GCSE pupils miss out on grades 7, 8 or 9, and 66,000 A-level students miss out on As or A*s, compared with under the grading system last year. Ofqual said it was impossible to speculate about numbers as student entries have not yet been made. This year’s results are still expected to be higher than 2019. The Liberal Democrat leader, Ed Davey, said: “Students taking exams this year have had their entire course affected by the pandemic, from the start through to the finish. Lowering grades this year is arbitrary, senseless and heartless when the pandemic is still ongoing. “Our children have worked as hard as they can in incredibly difficult circumstances and their grades should reflect their hard work, instead of being artificially reduced by a thoughtless government.” In addition to the advance information published by exam boards on Monday, the government has introduced adaptations include a choice of topics in some GCSEs such as English literature and history, and support materials such as formulae sheets in maths. The education secretary, Nadhim Zahawi, said: “Exams are the best and fairest form of assessment, and we firmly intend for them to take place this summer, giving students a fair chance to show what they know.”If the thought of fractions or differential equations makes you break you out in a cold sweat, you are not alone. Maths anxiety – a negative emotional reaction to mathematics – is a global phenomenon, hampering maths achievement regardless of where people live, research has found. It’s not only a child’s own maths anxiety that affects their performance but that of their peers: the largest and most culturally diverse study to date shows that in about half of countries, including England, the average level of maths anxiety within the same school or classroom predicts individual students’ maths achievement, independently of their own anxiety levels. “Having found that the emotional state of one’s peer group may have an effect on children’s maths achievement, it is important for teachers, parents and policymakers to not only be mindful of a child’s own ability or emotional state, but the context in which they’re studying,” said Dr Nathan Lau, of the University of Western Ontario, who led the research. Many people experience some degree of discomfort when confronted with a mathematical problem, ranging from mild tension to intense dread. Some people also experience physical symptoms such as a racing heart, sweating or feeling sick. Besides avoiding everyday situations involving numbers, people with such feelings may hold back from applying for promotions or pursuing careers in related subjects such as science, technology or engineering. To better understand the contextual factors underpinning maths anxiety, Lau and colleagues analysed data from 1,175,515 students who participated in three large international studies of achievement. The study, published in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, found that students in countries with higher levels of maths anxiety tend to achieve lower maths grades. The strongest predictor of maths anxiety was how competent students perceived their maths teacher to be: those with less confidence in their teacher tended to feel more anxious. Being set large amounts of maths homework, and parental involvement in homework, also contributed to anxiety to a lesser degree. In about half of countries, it wasn’t only the child’s own level of maths anxiety that predicted their achievement but that of their peers. One factor appeared to be the cultural acceptance of uncertain situations. “It seems like the more rigid or less accepting of uncertainty [a culture is], the lower this peer group effect is,” Lau said. “We can’t really say if there’s a causal relationship, but one hypothesis is that teachers have a more organised way of teaching their materials [in such countries]. Possibly, children with maths anxiety prefer there to be fewer surprises, such as being called on to stand up and work out a question on a blackboard.” Prof Margaret Brown, the president of the Maths Anxiety Trust, said: “It shows for the first time that maths anxiety is not just an individual phenomenon which affects maths attainment, but it also strongly correlates with other contextual factors like the pupils’ confidence in their teacher, teachers’ own confidence in their maths, and the amount of homework and parental involvement in completing it. “It is also significant that maths anxiety varies across different countries. England’s results suggest that our secondary students are among the most seriously affected by maths anxiety, and that the effect of factors from both the school and home environment are particularly strong in England. This provides strong evidence that maths attainment in England could be improved by changing our mathematics curriculum, teaching styles and our examination system so that they cause less stress on students, teachers and parents.” Prof Denes Szucs, the deputy director of the University of Cambridge’s Centre for Neuroscience in Education, said: “This study confirms some of the things we already knew about maths anxiety, but using a giant sample.” His team recently interviewed 1,700 UK schoolchildren and found that a perception of maths being more difficult than other subjects often contributed to the problem. Teachers also played a role, with anxious children often reporting being confused by different teaching methods. “The big question is what to do about it,” Szucs said. On an individual level, he recommended trying to disentangle feelings of anxiety from ability. “Our UK research showed that most children who are maths anxious are not actually low achievers, they just feel anxious about maths. Possibly they picked it up from their family or school, but it is not necessarily a justified anxiety.” What is maths anxiety? Mathematics anxiety is officially defined as “a feeling of tension and anxiety that interferes with the manipulation of numbers and the solving of mathematical problems in a wide variety of ordinary life and academic situations”. Extreme maths anxiety is thought to affect 2-6% of UK secondary school pupils, although estimates vary, with another study suggesting that a third of UK apprentices experience “noticeable” maths anxiety, while 19% have a tendency to be anxious but may not show such clear signs. Females tend to express more anxiety about maths than males, although studies have suggested this gender gap does not develop until adolescence. It is separate to dyscalculia, a specific and persistent cognitive difficulty in understanding numbers, although sometimes the two conditions overlap. Maths anxiety does not necessarily correlate with ability: A 2018 study found that 77% of children with high maths anxiety were normal to high achievers on curriculum maths tests. However, it can limit performance in certain situations and contexts. One possibility is that the worries and intrusive thoughts associated with maths anxiety disrupt or compete for cognitive resources that are needed to solve mathematical problems.On a cold morning in July 2019, more than 30 Native Hawaiian elders gathered on top of a mountain, committed to getting arrested. “I wasn’t afraid,” says 83-year-old Maxine Kahaulelio. “The moment when the kahea [the call] went out, they said the big machines were coming and they were going to start the desecration … We stood there from 2:30 in the morning … freezing, 9,000 feet above sea level. They had all their gear but we didn’t have anything, just blankets and sweaters.” Kahaulelio and the others were at the top of Mauna Kea, which at 9,966m (almost 33,000ft) is the world’s tallest mountain from base to height and is considered sacred by Native Hawaiians. The arrests of Hawaiian elders was the climax of a decades-long debate over construction on the mountain, and in Hawaii in general. Some elders have been speaking out against construction on Mauna Kea since the 1970s, when the area began to be used by the University of Hawaii (UH) and government for astronomy purposes due to its lack of light pollution, its above-average number of clear nights and its dry atmosphere which allows more detailed studies. More than a dozen telescopes have been built there in the intervening years. But the project the kūpunas were protesting against was the construction of one of the world’s largest telescopes – the $1.4bn Thirty Meter Telescope (TMT) to be built by TMT International Observatory LLC. Supporters of the TMT say it will bring jobs and educational opportunities to the community, through scholarships like the THINK grant, that would provide $1m a year to Hawaii Island students. But for Kahaulelio and other elders, Mauna Kea is considered sacred in the Hawaiian creation story. “It’s like a shrine, our temple,” she says. ‘Our hearts were burdened’ During the 2019 protest the group of elders were told to move but did not. The standoff continued until law enforcement zip tied the 38 elders’ hands and escorted them to nearby vans. Kahaulelio says the decision to have the elders arrested as opposed to the younger activists was made in a friend’s garage days prior. “We decided we would get arrested because our hearts are burdened by what you folks went through,” she says about younger activists arrested in previous protests. Ana Nawahine Kahoopi’i, 66, says the protests in 2019 that led to her arrest was a sight she’d never seen in her entire life. “There were county police, units from Honolulu and Maui, DLNR [Department of Land and Natural Resources], and the sheriff’s department, they were dressed in riot gear and a sound cannon was being rolled out,” she recalls. The incident brought together leaders in Polynesia and other indigenous communities, along with civil rights activists, lawyers, professors, students and entertainers, all who stood in support of the Native Hawaiian people. Actors such as Jason Momoa, Dwayne “The Rock” Johnson, and artists like Ziggy Marley spoke out in support of Native Hawaiian land rights. The protests lasted for months, with thousands of people visiting the protest site, which eventually gained a daycare, cafeteria and medical tent. So far construction on the TMT has not started, having twice been stopped by protesters. But the UH Board of Regents recently approved a master plan for the area that accommodates the completion of the TMT. ‘Our people are still in court’ For months, Hawaiians and allies stayed on the mountain. When the risk of Covid-19 hit Hawaii’s shores, some from the movement remained on the mountain but many left. But three years later, many of the elders who were arrested are still waiting for their day in court. If convicted, they face a petty misdemeanour charge and 30 days of jail time. In August, a judge dismissed the charges against four of the 38 elders, including in Kahaulelio’s case. “So, we weren’t trespassing; we weren’t blocking any roads. We weren’t doing any harm. Yes, we were in the middle of the road, to what? To stop the desecration for what other people wanted to do for Mauna O Wakea. “This is 2022 and our people are still in court,” she says. Billy Freitas, 64, is one of those still waiting for his trial, but he isn’t hoping for a dismissal. He’s hoping to send a message. “All this effort – sacrificing our job, family, health, why just ask for a dismissal? I want to win this case on merits so that future generations that stand for the Mauna won’t get arrested. That’s where I stand and my attorneys know that,” he says. Luana Neff is baffled that the cases of four kūpunas were dismissed but the other 34 were not. “We’ve been in court for almost three years now and it’s crazy. We asked for a fast and speedy trial and here we are three years later,” she says. In the meantime, she says she will continue to spread awareness about Native Hawaiian land rights. “We’re doing this out of the love of this place, out of the love for our kūpuna, out of the love of our land, and out of the love for Mauna Kea, who houses the largest freshwater aquifer on this planet,” she says.You can’t accuse Jackie Weaver of not seizing the opportunity when a meeting of Handforth parish council, Cheshire, that she chaired via Zoom a year ago this week, became a viral sensation. She has since written a book, launched a podcast, and starred in The Archers. Live comedy was only a matter of time – and so it comes to pass with Comedians’ Council, which casts Weaver as chair and three standups as disputatious councillors fielding parochial questions from the crowd. I encountered the event as part of the streaming platform NextUp’s coverage of the Leicester comedy festival, which runs in the east Midlands and online this month. You won’t find the biggest names on NextUp’s livestreams – but this collection of up-and-comers and bubbling-unders offers a choice cross-section of UK comedy, particularly for those of us feeling festival-starved by Covid. The opening event First Night Funnies mainlined variety, with a character act, a Gen Z newcomer and a sketch double-act alongside dependable Live at the Apollo vet Nathan Caton. As Caton pointed out, this mixed-bill event at a “pizza shop in Leicester” was a far cry from the BBC’s bright lights. But it set the ball rolling, with likable material from Anna Magliano about a teenage trip to a sexual health clinic, sub-Flight of the Conchords spoof R&amp;B from Good Kids (AKA Kieran Ahern and Tom Dowling) – and Caton on being locked-down with his recently acquired girlfriend. On Saturday night, Jessica Fostekew also talked Covid cohabitation, in her case with a six-year-old son. With strong, no-nonsense material about parenting in London, and discovering her queerness in her 30s, Fostekew’s set was the standout on a bill that also featured giggling bundle of musical nonsense Katie Pritchard, and Richard Stott riffing on his Poland syndrome, which led him to have surgery so that he had two fingers replaced with toes on one hand. Like Stott’s, Jamie MacDonald’s set Reasonably Adjusted zeroes in on his disability, taking its cue from a poll in which blindness was voted “the worst thing that could ever happen to you”. In front of a small and tentative crowd, but with jokes that deserved a bigger, louder one, the Glaswegian doesn’t suggest life without vision is any bowl of cherries – see his gag about feeling “like a municipal pinball” on bin day, when everyone leaves their wheelie bins on the pavement. But, ranging from his school years, via the Disability Discrimination Act of 1995, which changed his life, to a droll gag about “disabled appropriation” in the present day, he offers an upbeat if unsentimental take on visual impairment. If I’d known in advance the format for Weaver’s show, I’d have submitted my own question for the council’s consideration. “Is it a comedy festival when you watch it all from your own front room?” Instead, the two-and-a-half participating comics (Suzi Ruffell arrives late) ad-lib to the likes of “should you wear Crocs over the age of eight?” and “how big a dog is too big?” The council-meeting conceit is stretched very thin, but Weaver makes up in spirit, and occasional humour, what she lacks in slick presentational skills. (Awkward pauses abound.) By the end, the arbitrariness of the questions has defeated Sunil Patel, and it’s only Paul Sinha’s quick wit and Ruffell’s eagerness to make amends that keep the show afloat. If this is a TV show in utero – and with Weaver’s recent record, you wouldn’t bet against it – it may need a little more development. Leicester comedy festival runs until 20 February.Monkeys that survived a devastating hurricane in Puerto Rico were prematurely aged by the experience, a study has found. Scientists say the findings suggest that an increase in extreme weather around the world may have negative biological consequences for the humans and animals affected. The scientists said the rhesus macaques that lived through Hurricane Maria in 2017 appeared to have aged by about two years more than expected, equivalent to seven or eight years of human life. “Studying the impact of exposure to adversity is depressing stuff. You’re showing … these have negative impacts at multiple levels, and here at the molecular level … that’s long term,” said Noah Snyder-Mackler, a professor at the Center for Evolution and Medicine of Arizona State University, and one of the authors of the paper, published in the journal PNAS. Snyder-Mackler and colleagues had been collecting blood samples from the free-ranging rhesus macaques in the conservation centre at Cayo Santiago island, near Puerto Rico, since 2014. Rhesus macaques are the most studied monkey in science because they are biologically quite similar to humans. After Hurricane Maria hit, the blood samples collected as much as a year later showed significant changes to the monkeys’ immune systems. By using genomic sequencing technology, the researchers found that up to 4% of the monkeys’ genes were showing changes. There was a decrease in the genes associated with properly folding proteins so they can carry out their functions seamlessly, something seen naturally as monkeys and humans age. There was also an increase in the genes associated with inflammatory responses. This is also commonly seen as primates age, with chronic inflammation sometimes leading to cardiovascular disease and some cancers. “I think that it resonates when we say, oh, something molecular is actually changing in our cells,” said Marina Watowich, a graduate student in the SMack Lab at the University of Washington, and the lead author of the paper. “And that’s going to have long-term effects.” Watowich said it was important to note that the study looked at the average changes in the macaque population, meaning not all the monkeys were sampled every year, and some fared much better than others. “This is not like an all or nothing, like every single animal was negatively impacted after the storm,” Watowich said. “There was actually quite a lot of variation. And so that’s what we’re getting into next is who’s doing well after these events and who’s not doing well, and how can we make everyone like those ones who weren’t really affected?”Good morning. Federal parliament resumes today, with the controversial religious discrimination bill on the agenda. We’ll be keeping a close eye on the bushfires threatening homes in Western Australia and following the latest news on the Neighbours saga. Taxpayers have been paying more than $10,000 a month for George Christensen’s “e-material” in the same period that he racked up an $85,000 Facebook advertising bill for issues including “vaccine discrimination” and a conspiracy theory about the “unelected global elite”. Government records show Christensen claimed $12,641 for e-material in the second quarter of last year, jumping to $33,500 in the third quarter as the controversial Queensland MP began ramping up his campaign against vaccine mandates. Voters are less angry about the Morrison government’s handling of the pandemic than they were a fortnight ago, but a majority of respondents disagree with the current definition of “fully vaccinated”, according to the latest Guardian Essential poll. Morrison confirmed Australia’s international border would be reopened from 21 February for double vaccinated tourists and travellers – but 57% of poll respondents think the definition of fully vaccinated needs to be three jabs, not two. The border announcement provoked mixed emotions for those in Australia who have been separated from family or missed funerals in recent months but has been welcomed by the tourism industry. The UK will send 350 troops to Poland amid concerns the Ukraine crisis could spill over into eastern Europe. The bilateral move – meaning it takes place outside Nato’s structures – comes a few days after the US announced it would send in 1,700 paratroop reinforcements into Poland. French president Emmanuel Macron has warned against expecting “miracles” ahead of his talks with Vladimir Putin in Moscow, as other world leaders met in a flurry of diplomatic activity. Joe Biden hosted Olaf Scholz, the German chancellor, in Washington DC and a European delegation was in Kyiv. A recent trip by the Guardian to Russia found a hive of barely hidden military activity, with the latest reports stating troops and weapons are leaving their bases for forward staging posts in Kursk and Voronezh. Australia Electric cars could recharge Australia’s automotive industry, a new report suggests. With sections of Australia’s old car factories still intact and components being made locally, Australia has a “once-in-a-lifetime opportunity” to carve out a spot in the global automotive supply chain, according to the Rebuilding Vehicle Manufacturing in Australia report. A new consumer guide cuts through the “greenwash” of energy providers, ranking 48 Australian energy retailers based on climate criteria including: providing renewable energy, ending coal use by 2030 and halting fossil fuel expansion. The world A soundproofed torture chamber believed to have been used by a narcotics gang should remind cocaine users of the consequences of their habits, a Dutch public prosecutor has said. Protesters against Covid vaccine mandates for truckers have defied government calls for them to end an 11-day occupation of Canada’s capital, a day after Ottawa’s mayor declared a state of emergency and promised to “get the city back”. Boris Johnson’s new communications director has said Johnson is “not a complete clown”, as he revealed that the UK prime minister initiated a defiant rendition of Gloria Gaynor’s I Will Survive when the pair met last week. Israel will launch an inquiry into the alleged police use of Pegasus spyware against a wide range of public figures including politicians, businessmen, officials and activists. Recommended reads “We did our dance set to seated guests whose attention was mostly fixed on Princess Diana – as was ours. She was the most attentive person in the room, sitting forward across the banister, clapping and beaming her support. She kind of glowed,” says Kate Ceberano, recounting her most memorable gig as singer in funk band I’m Talking. But it wasn’t just Diana that had Ceberano’s attention at the Rocking With the Royals gig in 1985. “Michael Hutchence was luminous like a sun god – I always sat in the wings when we opened for INXS, transfixed by his presence and the romance of their sound,” she recalls. A former political staffer who was sexually assaulted by an Australian parliamentarian’s chief of staff in the early 2000s says it’s time to speak up and demand action from political leaders. “[Allegations of sexual assault, sexual harassment and bullying], both recent and historical, need to be investigated and, where substantiated, acted upon. In some cases, that may mean that the perpetrators lose their jobs. In others, it may also mean that they need to be dealt with by the courts. What cannot be allowed to happen is what has happened up until now – for these people to be protected and, in many cases, promoted, while only their victims have to face the devastating consequences of their behaviour.” The La Niña weather has brought humid conditions to many parts of the country, and with it, mildew. Thankfully there are plenty of ways to prevent mildew, including mould-resistant fabrics and proper storage. There are also plenty of options to bring a garment back from the brink after the rot has set in, according to Alice Payne, an associate professor of fashion at Queensland University of Technology. “A hot wash with some bleach” or spot treatment with lemon juice or hydrogen peroxide and drying the garment in the sun are among some of Payne’s suggestions. Listen With a federal election just months away, all eyes are turning to the leader of the opposition party, Anthony Albanese, with the question: will he be our next prime minister? In today’s Full Story, Laura Murphy-Oates speaks to political editor Katharine Murphy about Albanese’s rise through Labor’s political ranks and the party’s strategy to win the election. Full Story is Guardian Australia’s daily news podcast. Subscribe for free on Apple Podcasts, Spotify or any other podcasting app. Sport Australian football must broaden its scope if the Socceroos and Matildas are to exit current mire, writes Joey Lynch. “If a side consistently plays flawed football but keeps winning – perhaps a world-record 11 times in a row – things are good. If that team plays the same way but results suddenly dry up, that’s bad. The underlying condition is largely the same, but that was obscured by the contrasting outcomes being delivered. A major review is needed, but only now that World Cup qualification looks unlikely.” The Chinese tennis player Peng Shuai has given her first interview to an independent media organisation since she alleged on Weibo that a senior Chinese official had coerced her into sex, saying it was an “enormous misunderstanding”, and announcing that she was retiring from tennis. Media roundup The Sydney Morning Herald says there is growing pressure for Scott Morrison to act on his election promise to deliver a federal anti-corruption watchdog, despite just 10 days for parliament to meet before a potential May election. With a date set for international borders to reopen, there are calls by Sydney business leaders for the government to lift the ban on international cruises to revive the billion-dollar industry, reports the Daily Telegraph. Coming up Federal parliament resumes. Sign up If you would like to receive the Guardian Australia morning mail to your email inbox every weekday, sign up here. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com. Discover Australian Weekend Every Saturday at 6am, enjoy early access to the best journalism planned for the weekend in one elegant app, plus a curated selection of the week’s news and analysis from Australia and the world.Boris Johnson has been accused of a “shameful spinning” of key pledges on cancer care in an attempt to distract from the NHS’s record 6 million-strong backlog of people on waiting lists. The prime minister used a visit to a cancer centre in Kent to unveil plans for what were portrayed as two new care standards that would ensure people in England with the disease get diagnosed more quickly. But opposition parties condemned the move as a “pathetic rehashing of old pledges” and a cynical attempt to try to persuade the media to reduce their focus on a row between the government and NHS chiefs over how quickly hospitals can be expected to treat the hundreds of thousands of patients who have been waiting between one and two years for surgery. The spat overshadowed and forced the postponement of Monday’s launch of the long-awaited “elective recovery plan”, which was due to set out the government’s plans to tackle the backlog. NHS England is now expected to finally publish the plan – which was originally due in early December – on Tuesday. However, it quickly emerged that Johnson’s pledge that 75% of people who develop cancer will be diagnosed early by 2028 matched an objective first announced by NHS England in its long-term plan in January 2019, when Theresa May was still in Downing Street. The shadow health secretary, Wes Streeting, pointed out that a second promise – that 75% of suspected cancer patients will be told if they have the disease or not within 28 days of being urgently referred by a GP – was an NHS standard that was already in place. “This is an existing target that was introduced in April and has never been met,” Streeting said. NHS England figures covering April to November 2021 show the 75% target was not met during those eight months, and that in November just 71.3% of people displaying potential symptoms of cancer were told within 28 days that they had or did not have it. Johnson also said that by March next year the NHS would have reduced the backlog of cancer patients who have been waiting more than two months for cancer treatment to pre-pandemic levels. But in a Commons debate on the elective recovery plan, Streeting told MPs that the NHS had pledged to give cancer patients their “first definitive treatment” within 62 days back in late 2009, when Labour was in power. The target had not been hit since 2015, he said, adding: “Isn’t this another example of the Conservatives lowering standards for patients because they consistently fail to meet them?” Streeting said: “The prime minister announced what he called two ‘tough new cancer targets.’ One is a reannouncement and the other is actually weaker than the existing target. The Conservatives are lowering standards for patients because they failed to meet them.” Macmillan Cancer Support also noted that the claimed new target was nothing of the sort. “It’s welcome to see a focus on clearing the backlog of people waiting more than two months to start cancer treatment, but this is a target that’s been promised previously and repeatedly missed,” said Eve Byrne, the charity’s director of advocacy. Daisy Cooper, the Liberal Democrats’ health spokesperson, accused Johnson of playing politics with cancer. About 360,000 Britons a year are diagnosed with cancer, and it kills 155,000. “This pathetic rehashing of old pledges for the unprecedented challenge we face is an insult to the millions of frightened cancer patients and their families,” Cooper said. “Johnson needs to understand that there are lives on the line right now – and that’s bigger than saving his job. Spinning something as vital as how quickly someone is diagnosed with cancer is shameful. Cancer is a terrible disease, not a PR opportunity for a desperate and embattled prime minister.” Michelle Mitchell, Cancer Research UK’s chief executive, said that for years cancer patients had not been getting care they are supposedly entitled to within set timeframes. “We’re happy to hear the prime minister is doubling down on cancer targets. But our current targets have been missed for years, and getting back to pre-pandemic levels simply isn’t good enough,” she said. Mitchell urged Sajid Javid, the health secretary, to make addressing what she called major shortages in the cancer workforce that were hampering the NHS’s ability to diagnose and treat people quickly the top priority of his newly declared “war on cancer”. The elective recovery plan will commit hospitals to make treatment of the 307,000 patients who have been waiting for a year and 18,600 who have been forced to wait two years a priority. They will also be expected to give 10% more patients elective care – mainly surgery such as joint replacements and cataract removals – in 2022-23 than they did before Covid struck in March 2020. Doctors’ leaders have said the backlog-busting plan will falter unless it is accompanied by a strategy to end the endemic understaffing across the NHS. “Simply put, any promises or unrealistic targets for returning to pre-pandemic levels of activity will fall flat without the staff to do the work”, said Dr Vishal Sharma, the chair of the British Medical Association’s consultants committee. Dr Dolin Bhagawati, the vice-chair of the Doctors’ Association UK, said: “The NHS is broken through years of underspend even before Covid hit. Any plan that does not provide realistically for staff recruitment and retention is simply worthless and not worth the paper it’s printed on. Talking about putting an MRI scanner in a novel place, for example, may grab headlines but frankly is a chocolate fireguard in front of an inferno.”Bruno Guimarães barely had time to settle into his seat at St James’ Park and survey the sea of unfamiliar faces in front of him before the conversation turned to global domination. “We’re going to be a big power in world football,” said Newcastle’s new £33.3m Brazil midfielder. “The owners were very up front that, this season, the idea is to stay in the Premier League but the main objective in the years to come is to be in the Champions League and, eventually, to win the Champions League.” Some of those present may have looked a little doubtful but his optimism seemed infectious and it was not long before the 24-year-old was asked whether he regarded Newcastle as potentially a bigger club than Arsenal. “Definitely,” said the former Lyon player, who was heavily courted by Arsenal. “It’s already a club with a great tradition, a big history. I have no doubts about my decision to come here. I believe in everything the owners told me about their project.” If the diamonds adorning his watch caught the eye, his answers, transmitted through an interpreter, betrayed no sign of brashness. Granted, the player Eddie Howe hopes to build his side around appeared confident but there was also a certain modesty and a refreshing politeness. After beginning by apologising, unnecessarily and in fairly decent English, for his lack of fluency in the language, Guimarães explained his attachment to the No 39 shirt he hopes to wear for the first time when Everton visit Tyneside for Tuesdays relegation six-pointer. “My dad was a taxi driver for 20 years and No 39 was his taxi number,” he said. “So when I signed for my first professional club, Athletico Paranaense, he asked me to take his number for my shirt. It sustained my family when I was growing up and we won four league titles at Paranaense so it has also proved lucky for me on the pitch. I take it everywhere with me.” An only child, Guimarães is close to his parents and, along with his girlfriend, they were on the private jet that brought him to Newcastle last week. “My family are everything,” he said. “I carry them with me everywhere. I have my mum and dad’s names tattooed on me.” Newcastle need to build on their dismal record of two Premier League wins this season but the new boy appears undaunted by this challenge. Indeed, consultation with compatriots playing in England indicates Newcastle have been underachieving. “Thiago Silva, Gabriel Jesus and Alex Telles have told me how difficult it is to play at Newcastle, given how passionate the fans are,” he said. “Their words meant I didn’t really have to think twice about coming here.” Newcastle have spent more than £90m on five January signings and Guimarães will be seen as the principal catalyst, speeding the transition from a cagey counterattacking team to a more front-foot, possession-based side. Happily a manager further bolstered by Dan Ashworth’s impending relocation from Brighton as technical director seems on a similar philosophical wavelength to his marquee signing. “I’ve always been inspired by two Spanish players, Andrés Iniesta and Xavi,” Guimarães said, before explaining that playing futsal while growing up in Rio de Janeiro accelerated a purist streak shared with Howe. “I owe a lot to futsal. It’s the small space, you have to think quicker than others. With futsal your close control is so important and that’s something you’re going to see a lot in my games. I’m really happy with the legacy futsal gave me.” Similarly life at Lyon provided some vital toughening up for a man proud to follow in the footsteps of Mirandinha, the first Brazilian to play professionally in England when he joined Newcastle in 1987. “There’s similarities between the Premier League and Ligue 1,” Guimarães said. “Ligue 1’s very physical, there’s a lot of contact so French football really prepared me for the physical battle ahead.” Newcastle’s pursuit of Guimarães was aided by the presence of Cláudio Caçapa on Lyon’s coaching staff. From 2007 to 2009 the Brazilian made 29 largely nondescript, defensive midfield performances at St James’ Park. “I spoke a lot to him about coming here and he helped me in my decision.”Six million people are waiting for non-urgent surgery and hospital treatment in England. NHS England has been formulating an “elective recovery plan” – delayed by the onset of Omicron – to get waiting times closer to the 18-week maximum enshrined in the NHS constitution. What is the elective recovery plan? It is the government and NHS’s joint plan to tackle the unprecedented 6 million-strong backlog of people awaiting non-urgent hospital treatment, mainly surgery, in England. It was originally due to be published in early December. However, its launch was delayed by the emergence that month of the Omicron variant of Covid and behind-the-scenes wrangling between ministers and NHS England over how demanding the targets imposed on hospitals – to clear the backlog and in particular to eradicate waits of up to two years for care – should be. Who has drawn up the plan? NHS England has been in charge and will launch the plan this week, possibly on Tuesday. Sir James Mackey, the chief executive of Northumbria NHS trust, has played a leading role in formulating the plan and suggesting changes to help hospitals provide quicker care. He is widely admired in the NHS and Whitehall as an original thinker and someone whose trust has managed to keep more elective care going, despite the turmoil of Covid, than many others. What is likely to be in the plan? A number of initiatives intended to get back to most patients waiting no longer than the supposed 18-week maximum enshrined in the NHS constitution. For example, hospitals will stop inviting many patients for at least some of the checks and follow-up appointments that have been standard for years, in an attempt to free up doctors and nurses so they can spend more time in operating theatres and less time in clinics. Mackey believes many such appointments are “pointless” and tie up consultants unnecessarily. He wants to see change “on an industrial scale”. Could patients seek treatment outside their home area where the waiting list is shorter? Yes, the plan will break new ground for the NHS by giving patients the right to have their operation at a hospital many miles from their home, if it has spare capacity. The NHS will also be expected to help patients overcome the challenges involved, such as transport. But hospital bosses stress privately that the sheer size of the backlog, lack of staff and practical difficulties involved for patients mean that few are likely to select to have their operation this way. How can the number of operations be increased when Covid is still around? There will be an expansion of the separation between “hot” and “cold” sites that some NHS trusts have used during the pandemic to maintain as much planned care as possible. While “hot” sites have treated Covid patients, huge efforts have gone into keeping “cold” sites – usually smaller hospitals that do not have an A&amp;E – free of the disease so that cancer surgery, heart operations, hip and knee replacements and other types of surgery can still go ahead. Trusts such as Wolverhampton, Northumbria and University College London hospital have all done that, enabling important surgery to go ahead.Max Verstappen has been quiet since stepping back from the wild drama and surreal shootout of the last lap of the Abu Dhabi Grand Prix in which he overtook Lewis Hamilton and won his first world championship in December. After the elation, as well as the bitter controversy and angry appeals from Hamilton’s Mercedes team, Verstappen has needed time to recover. But now, on a tranquil afternoon in Milton Keynes, he is ready to slip back into the cockpit. The new Red Bull car, RB18, will be unveiled on Wednesday afternoon but, first, Verstappen takes a fresh spin around the final lap of the race that brought such a gripping Formula One season to its tumultuous conclusion. The grand prix and the championship had been blown apart by the decision of Michael Masi, the race director, to allow a one-lap lottery between two great drivers who had been fighting for supremacy all season. Until Nicholas Latifi crashed his Williams car with just five of the 58 laps of the race left, it had looked as if Hamilton would deny Verstappen and make history by winning his eighth driver’s title. Mercedes had been much quicker the whole race and Christian Horner, Red Bull’s team principal, admitted live on television that they needed “a miracle”. It duly arrived in a staggering sequence of events. Latifi crashed and, after much procrastination, Masi made the fateful choice to allow five lapped cars to overtake the safety car so that the wide gap between Hamilton and Verstappen would be replaced by a head-to-head race for the chequered flag. Hamilton still had the much quicker car but he was on worn tyres – while Verstappen was racing on new rubber. But Hamilton is perhaps the greatest driver in the history of Formula One and the 24-year-old Verstappen was under immense pressure. “What was going on in my head?” Verstappen asks himself as he returns to those agonising moments. “I was like: ‘I need to overtake him. There’s only one option here. I’m not going to finish second.’” Verstappen leans forward in an otherwise empty boardroom. “I tried to be really on it with the restart. It was all working well until I crossed the line and started to feel cramp in my leg. It’s one of the most painful things that can happen because you’re going full throttle for a long time. You feel the muscle clenching and becoming like a tennis ball. Of course the adrenaline helps because, if it were to happen when you’re just walking around, you cannot move. It’s impossible. But there was no option; I had to. So I was just keeping it full throttle and I could feel my leg hurting more and more. Luckily, turn five arrived and I went for the [overtaking] move. I had like three seconds off throttle. “You then have two very long straights and, on the second one where Lewis came back at me, I could feel my foot vibrating. I couldn’t control it because the muscle was having a spasm. My foot on the last sector was like this …” Verstappen laughs as he shakes his hand in a juddering motion. “If you go back over the data you will not see a very smooth throttle input. I was screaming on the radio [after he had won] but the whole lap my foot was going like that.” He flaps his hand helplessly again. “It was completely done. One more lap and I couldn’t have finished the race like that. The stress levels were so high in the final lap that probably your body reacts to that. But you cannot give up.” If he needed a huge slice of good fortune in the form of Masi’s intervention, Verstappen was a worthy champion. He was on pole 10 times, won 10 races and stood on the podium a record 18 times. His racing brilliance was also evident when, despite his cramping, he had the audacity to surprise Hamilton with a daring and early overtaking manoeuvre on turn five of the deciding lap. “I knew I had more grip so I was like: ‘I’m going to surprise them on that corner.’ Even my dad [Jos Verstappen, the former F1 driver] didn’t expect me to do it there. These kind of things make the difference. But two long straights were coming up.” Hamilton came at him hard but Verstappen held him off as their wheels nearly touched. It was incredible sporting drama and, once he crossed the line, Verstappen says: “I couldn’t believe it – especially after the whole race when everything looked like it was not happening. Suddenly your emotions swing 100% the other way. So crazy. It’s what we had worked for my whole life. It was always my dream. Once you cross the line you realise you finally have it. I jumped out of the car and all the mechanics and my dad were running towards me.” Verstappen smiles at his father’s reaction. “I thought he could die because it looked like he was about to have a heart attack. He was so pale, it was incredible. His skin colour was definitely not healthy.” What did they say to each other? Verstappen blows out his cheeks. “Like: ‘We did it!’” What does Verstappen recall of his exchange with Hamilton after the race? “I only saw him quickly, when we took our helmets off, and I think it was: ‘Congrats, man.’ I don’t even know the words any more. But it was nice of him, of course, to immediately come over.” Verstappen’s relationship with Hamilton deteriorated during an acrimonious season. He does not show sympathy for his rival when I suggest that, if he had suffered Hamilton’s fate, Verstappen would have been devastated. “For me it’s difficult to picture myself in that situation, because I’m not a seven-time world champion. If I was already a seven-time world champion it hurts a bit less than when I am fighting for my first, leading all the way, controlling it all the way, and then losing it on the last lap. That would be way more painful than already having seven in the bag.” He shrugs when I say Hamilton felt terrible hurt as he had come so close to an historic eighth title which would have taken him one ahead of Michael Schumacher. “Yeah, but just look back on the seven you have. I don’t think it’s so bad, is it?” He and Hamilton have not texted each other since and, Verstappen stresses, “That’s quite normal – we live our own lives and see each other quite a lot already [when racing]”. Had he felt genuine concern that the title would be taken from him after Mercedes launched their furious appeal? “Not that it could be taken away from me but just it was dragging on. That whole night we were waiting and then the result came out.” The result of the inquiry into the Abu Dhabi GP will be released before this season’s first race in Bahrain on 20 March. “Yeah, but they can’t do anything,” Verstappen says. Does he feel his victory had been overshadowed by the controversy? “Not at all. I had a very good season and I think I really deserved it. I have been really unlucky as well. People always remember the last race but, if you look at the whole season, the championship should have been decided way earlier.” As he revisits some of the twists and turns that defined the season, with both teams and drivers accusing each other of chicanery and pushing too hard, Verstappen settles on the British Grand Prix as his lowest moment. He and Hamilton clashed on the first lap when Hamilton tried to force his way down the inside at Copse Corner. Hamilton clipped Verstappen’s rear wheel and the Red Bull spun off the track and smashed into the barriers at 180mph. Horner accused Hamilton of “dirty driving” and he and Red Bull were furious that Mercedes celebrated their victory so loudly while Verstappen was being examined in hospital. “It was the most painful one of all,” Verstappen says. “It was tough points-wise but literally, it was very painful. My neck, my back, my shoulders. I’m quite tough and I can take quite a hit but it’s not good for your body or your brain to have an impact like that. I got home and for four days I was not watching TV or doing any sim [simulated virtual reality] racing because your brain has to rest.” Were he and his team even more motivated to win the title after the Mercedes celebrations? “No, I don’t think we work like that. It’s disrespectful what happened there but we looked at what we could have done better. Once we came back from the break as a team we really did a good job because we won races in the second half of the season we shouldn’t have won.” Verstappen was exhausted after a year of intense and nerve-shredding racing and he admits: “You can’t have that drama every single year, for sure. It’s not good for me, it’s not healthy for anyone in the team, both teams.” Helmut Marko, an important adviser at Red Bull, suggested last week that Verstappen’s career would be shortened if he had to endure many more brutally competitive seasons. But, looking replenished after his break, Verstappen says life has not changed since he became world champion. “Not for me at least. Once I get home I prefer to do the things I was doing before becoming champion.” Verstappen is such a ferocious competitor that much of his leisure time is taken up by sim racing. Even against the professional virtual reality competitors, he is one of the best in the world. Last month he just missed making pole for the 24 Hours of Le Mans Virtual by 0.002sec. Verstappen still scorched into the lead on the first lap but he laughs ruefully when describing what happened next. “I binned the car! But luckily my team’s other car won. Of course I was very disappointed I crashed but it was also a big satisfaction to see how dominant we were.” Back in real life Verstappen believes F1’s new regulations will mean the cars are slightly slower this season which should encourage even closer racing. But, as he points out: “It depends on what people find within the regulations. Maybe there is a grey area or a loophole.” There is uncertainty how Hamilton will respond this coming season; but Verstappen believes his own position will be stronger. “That little pressure in the back of your mind, of having to win a world championship or trying to win it, has gone. It’s already happened. I’ve done it. So when it’s tough or you’re having bad luck you probably will deal with it easier than normal.” Verstappen is 13 years younger than Hamilton and so does he harbour ambitions of winning as many championships as his rival? “Not really. If I never get to a No 7 or No 8, it’s fine. You need a lot of luck to be in such a dominant position for such a long time. I just want to enjoy it and I know that, when I get to the track, I still want to win. ”