The NHS has severed its links with the charity GambleAware due to concerns over its connections to the gambling industry. Announcing two new clinics to deal with record demand for gambling addiction services in England, the mental health director of the NHS, Claire Murdoch, decried the “predatory tactics” of gambling companies. The decision comes as the health service begins to distance itself from an industry that officials believe is causing serious damage to the nation’s mental health. “Gambling addiction is a cruel mental health condition that can devastate people’s lives,” Murdoch said. “It is also absolutely right that the NHS now funds these clinics independently, recognising the harmful effects this addiction can have, and that predatory tactics from gambling companies are part of the problem, not the solution.” According to NHS England figures, 668 people suffering with severe addiction issues were referred to gambling clinics between April and December last year, a 16.2% increase on the 575 referrals made during the same period in 2020. Writing separately to the CEO of GambleAware, Zoë Osmond, Murdoch said the move had been made after assessing complaints from patients and doctors. “Our decision has been heavily influenced by patients who have previously expressed concern about using services paid for directly by industry,” she wrote. “Additionally, our clinicians feel there are conflicts of interest in their clinics being part-funded by resources from the gambling industry.” GambleAware, which describes itself as “an independent, grant-making charity commissioning prevention and treatment services” is funded almost entirely by donations from the gambling industry. Last year it announced a three-year funding arrangement with the UK’s four biggest gambling companies totalling £100m. It has previously been criticised for having too big an influence on the funding of research into and treatment of gambling addiction. NHS England has had a “dual commissioning and funding” arrangement with GambleAware since 2019, with £1.2m a year going into the National Gambling Treatment Service, which currently operates five clinics in London, Leeds, Manchester and Sunderland as well as a national telephone helpline. The two new clinics, set to open in Southampton and Stoke-on-Trent, are now to be funded entirely by the health service, as part of a £2.3bn increase in mental health spending authorised by the government. Murdoch wrote to Osmond that the NHS remained “committed to maintaining a constructive operational relationship with GambleAware”. In a statement released to the Guardian, Osmond said: “There may be up to 2.9 million people in Great Britain at risk of gambling harm and we welcome NHS England’s commitment to open two new NHS-funded gambling harm treatment clinics. “Gambling is a serious public health issue which requires a collaborative approach, involving the third sector and the NHS within a coherent system of care. We look forward to continuing to work with NHS England and supporting them to provide an integrated solution to preventing and treating gambling harm. “The charity has robust governance processes in place to ensure the gambling industry has absolutely no influence over any of our work. “We are also accountable to the Charity Commission and the Gambling Commission, which fully endorses the charity’s activity and governance structure, while working to deliver the national strategy to reduce gambling harms.”Dashel Drasher is a tough horse to pass around Ascot so the fact that last year’s Ascot Chase winner is only fifth-favourite for a repeat success on Saturday is a sign of the quality of the field in this year’s renewal. He should get a fairly easy time of it in front, however, and while Fakir D’Oudairies is a serious opponent on his Grade One-winning form at Aintree last season, Cheltenham and Liverpool may be his major targets this year. Dashel Drasher (3.38), in contrast, has probably been working towards this race all season and Jeremy Scott’s chaser is a decent bet at around 6-1 to record the fifth course win of his career, in the final Grade One in Britain before the Festival. Ascot 1.50 Likely favourite Does He Know and Doyen Breed both finished within a few lengths of Threeunderthrufive on their most recent starts and there may not be as much between them here as the odds suggest. Sandy Thomson’s gelding has progressed with every start over fences and has to be the bet at around 11-2. Haydock Park 2.05 Third Wind has struggled to repeat his form when winning this race last season in three subsequent starts, which could leave the door open for Molly Ollys Wishes. Dan Skelton’s mare remains unexposed at staying trips, having taken her record to 2-2 at around three miles with a comfortable success at Ascot in January. Ascot 2.25 Fiddlerontheroof put up a career-best over fences to finish within half a length of Cloudy Glen in the Ladbrokes Trophy in November. He is giving weight to all his rivals here but the Newbury form suggests that Colin Tizzard’s runner should be up to the task. Haydock Park 2.40 Sam Brown was better than ever when he ran Gold Cup outsider Royale Pagaille to half a length in the Peter Marsh at this track last month. He is up just 2lb in the weights and the heavy ground will not be an issue. Ascot 3.00 Good Risk At All could prove to be well ahead of his mark but this is a competitive handicap and odds of around 2-1 make little appeal. With most firms paying five places, Small Bad Bob is a solid each-way alternative at around 33-1, as his recent efforts at Fontwell and Fakenham are backed up by the clock. Wincanton 3.20 The Kingwell Hurdle card is subject to a 7.30am inspection due to damage caused by Storm Eunice. Goshen will be a warm order for the feature event if it gets the go-ahead after a recent return to winning form, but the consistent Adagio produced a fine run under top weight in the Greatwood in November and could upset the favourite.The New South Wales government has promised a “manufacturing renaissance” in the state to help workers who will lose their jobs as a result of coal-fired power plant closures. The state’s treasurer, Matt Kean, responding to the early closure of the Eraring power station in Lake Macquarie in 2025, announced a jobs package that would create 3,700 roles in clean industries. It included 2,700 construction jobs associated with delivery of transmission infrastructure that is needed to connect new sources of generation such as the renewable energy zones in the New England and Central West Orana regions and the Hunter transmission project. The state will invest $250m over five years to boost local manufacturing of components for the renewables sector such as wind towers, electrolysers and batteries, which Kean said would create a further 500 jobs. An additional $300m would be spent over 10 years to create 500 more jobs to expand the state’s clean manufacturing base – in particular the green hydrogen industry – via programs that were established as part of the state’s net zero strategy. “We know some existing industries face challenges as the world decarbonises,” Kean said. “That’s why we need to make sure the low carbon economy thrives in NSW to create the jobs of tomorrow.” Kean said the replacement of ageing energy infrastructure would create a once in a generation investment boom around the world. “I want to turn it into a manufacturing renaissance for NSW, particularly our industrial heartland,” he said. Saturday’s announcement builds on an earlier promise made on Thursday to build the “biggest battery in the southern hemisphere” to support transmission lines. Origin Energy’s decision to bring forward the closure of the Eraring power station by seven years shocked some workers when it was announced on Thursday, unions have said. Warrick Jordan, the coordinator of the Hunter Jobs Alliance – a coalition of unions and environment groups – said the challenges for the Hunter had been recognised and the priority now was the pace at which new investment occurred. Companies have already shown strong interest in investment in the Hunter renewable energy zone, with the government confirming this week it had received expressions of interest worth more than $100bn. “Downstream manufacturing and renewables and hydrogen components manufacturing are exactly the type of jobs we need to attract to the Hunter,” Jordan said. “We need to get the right policy and investment and we need to get moving otherwise we’ll miss out on those jobs and they will go offshore.” Jordan said the government’s announcements were a welcome start. “This is a good investment because it starts to provide real and tangible job opportunities and put infrastructure on the ground,” he said. “It won’t happen overnight and there’s a critical imperative to make sure as many jobs as possible are located in the Hunter.” Sam Mella, the Hunter program manager for Beyond Zero Emissions, said the state was embracing sustainable job opportunities in clean industries. “The NSW government has acted swiftly and this investment will help create thousands of jobs in clean industries and renewables concentrated in the Hunter Valley when we need them,” Mella said. WWF-Australia said it demonstrated that energy and manufacturing jobs could thrive in the regions when governments showed leadership. “It is a big step towards the Hunter and Central Coast becoming a centre of renewable-powered manufacturing,” said Nicky Ison, WWF-Australia’s energy transition manager.Authorities have released new phone data, including unsent text messages pleading for help, in the case of the young California family killed by extreme heat during a hike in a remote area of the Sierra Nevada mountains in August. The new details surrounding the deaths of 45-year-old Jonathan Gerrish, his 35-year-old wife, Ellen Chung, their one-year old daughter, Aurelia “Miju” Chung-Gerrish, and their dog Oski, were released on Thursday by the Mariposa county sheriff’s office, and included family photos taken during the hike, text message and phone call attempts, and GPS locations. The information sheds light on the family’s final hours on the trail, including that the couple attempted at least six phone calls and messages by 12.36pm. None went through because of poor cellular reception in the remote area. In one ultimately unsent message, Gerrish wrote: “[Name redacted], can you help us. On savage lundy trail heading back to Hites cove trail. No water [over] heating with baby.” Law enforcement officials announced last October that the family was killed by hyperthermia and a lack of water. “Using the information extracted from the phone we were able to re-create the path and timeline based on the GPS locations. The details found on the phone support the findings of a heat-related incident,” the sheriff’s office said in a statement on Thursday. According to authorities, at 7.44am on 15 August, the couple took a photo and video just a few yards from the trail head. The couple then took a photo of the trail 15 minutes later. Authorities found a photo of the Merced River taken an hour later at 9.05am. An additional 10 photos were found on Gerrish’s phone that were taken between 9.35am and 10.16am, which featured the river, the couple, and selfie-style family photos. The last picture found on the phone was taken at 12.25pm and was a screenshot of the couple’s location from AllTrails, a hiking trail app. According to earlier police reports, a US Forest Service volunteer who hiked the nearly eight-mile loop over a dozen times told authorities that the family appeared “completely unaware of the dangers”. Records revealed that the couple only carried a sippy cup and a backpack with a 2.5-liter reservoir for water. “If you are hiking in triple-degree temperatures you will need at least a liter of water for every hour you plan to be out,” Wesley Trimble, a communications and creative director with the American Hiking Society, previously told the Guardian. On the day of the family’s hike, the temperatures were in the high 70s during the morning and then quickly rose to 109 in the afternoon while they were on the trail. When officials found the family’s bodies on 17 August, the sheriff’s department described the case as an “unusual, unique situation” due to the absence of evident signs of death. In the months that followed, authorities considered but ultimately ruled out various causes of death, including carbon monoxide poisoning, exposure to gas from surrounding mines, a lightning strike, suicide and drugs. In Thursday’s statement, Sheriff Jeremy Briese said: “The cell phone data results were the last thing both the family and detectives were waiting on. The extracted information confirms our initial findings. I am very proud of my team and our partner agencies for all the work they put in. Their dedication has allowed us to close this case and answer lingering questions the family had, bringing them a little peace.”Police in Ottawa have begun arresting protesters and towing away vehicles in an effort to break up the so-called “freedom convoy” that has paralysed Canada’s capital for weeks and prompted the prime minister, Justin Trudeau, to declare a national emergency By Friday evening, at least 100 people had been arrested, mostly on mischief charges, and at least 21 vehicles had been towed, including all of those blocking one of the city’s major streets, as police exercised emergency powers that Trudeau invoked earlier this week. Officers “continue to push forward to take control of our streets,” said the city’s interim police chief, Steve Bell, on Friday afternoon, adding: “We will work day and night until this is completed.” Bell said one officer had a minor injury but no protesters were hurt. Truck horns blared as hundreds of police, some carrying rifles, others with riot shields and gas masks, moved in on a protest camp near Parliament Hill in the morning. A police drone hovered overhead as more officers on horseback and at least three armoured vehicles arrived at the scene. Officers in grey fatigues climbed atop two semi trucks as they took the first of two main camps close to parliament. Warnings blared from police loudspeakers: “You must leave! You will be arrested!” Police commanders had made it clear on Thursday they were preparing to end the siege and remove more than 300 trucks, camper vans and other vehicles that have blockaded the city since late January. Bell warned that “action [was] imminent,” and two prominent protest leaders were arrested on Thursday night. Chris Barber and Tamara Lich will face charges of mischief and counselling to commit mischief. Other prominent figures were arrested on Friday: Pat King was arrested during a Facebook Live stream. BJ Dichter, another prominent figure in the movement, told supporters it was “time to leave” and pleaded for Ottawa police to let drivers remove their vehicles. For the first time since the protests began, police vastly outnumbered the demonstrators, allowing officers to take control of sections of the protest camps. The heavily increased presence allowed them to use greater force, including smashing the windows of vehicles and dragging out drivers. Some protesters linked arms and refused to move as the police line pushed forward; some sang the national anthem O Canada! and called for non-violence while others scuffled with officers and shouted insults. “You’re the ones who are evil,” shouted one woman. But the police move was welcomed by some local residents who have complained of harassment and intimidation, and obtained a court order to stop the truckers’ incessant horn honking. “I live down here, and I haven’t been able to get to anything, including my pharmacy, for three fucking weeks!” one passerby shouted at the protesters. “And now you’re going to go home, thankfully. Because you lost!” Several children were present during the skirmishes at the protest camp, despite warnings from police that parents in the convoy should find alternative care in the event they faced arrest. “The pictures of these irresponsible parents putting their children on the front lines of the police action is beyond description,” tweeted Cindy Blackstock, head of the First Nations Child and Family Caring Society. “So sad for these children and I hope they have a loving caregiver to look after them b/c there are serious questions about the judgement of the parent.” As police pushed from the south of one camp, protesters scrambled for snow shovels and began creating makeshift barriers. “A beautiful day to see the snow cleared!” shouted one. Police said they set up a “red zone’ in the city’s downtown core on Thursday evening with 100 checkpoints throughout the area as a way to prevent protesters from entering – a move meant to also prevent large crowds coming to the city over the weekend. They also blocked key highway exits into the city. Canada’s House of Commons canceled its work on Friday, with the speaker, Anthony Rota, warning lawmakers to “stay away from the downtown core until further notice” because of the expected police operation. With temperatures with windchill hovering around -23C (-9.4F), protesters had started their day digging out their vehicles from a heavy overnight snowfall. A bitter wind blew through the protest camps as dozens of protesters huddled round fires and watched warily as the police numbers grew. Some protesters at the main blockade were defiant, convinced that officers would not move against the encampment. “I took a look those cops and they look cold. They don’t want to be here,” said Zack, an Ottawa resident carrying a flag that read “We Ain’t Leaving”. One protester, dressed in a high-visibility jacket, shouted “Freedom!” as he pulled a trolley with 12 canisters of diesel past a group of Royal Canadian Mounted Police officers towards the blockade. Ottawa police issued a stark warning on Twitter: “DEMONSTRATORS: You must leave. You must cease further unlawful activity and immediately remove your vehicle and/or property from all unlawful protest sites. Anyone within the unlawful protest site may be arrested.” As the day progressed, more and more trucks gradually left the blockade. Large tow trucks also arrived near the camps as police arrested drivers and took control of vehicles. The towing industry has long resisted calls to move the trucks, fearing their companies risked being targeted by convoy supporters. Many of the tow drivers in Ottawa on Friday wore masks or balaclavas and the decals of their company trucks were covered. On Monday, Trudeau became the first prime minister to invoke the Emergencies Act, granting his government sweeping powers to bar gatherings in certain locations, tow away vehicles, suspend driving licenses and freeze bank accounts. The encampment in the capital represented the movement’s last stronghold after three weeks of demonstrations and blockades that shut down several border crossings into the US and triggered a political crisis. The demonstrations initially focused on a vaccine requirement for truckers entering Canada, but some protesters’ demands escalated to the repeal of all Covid health measures, and even the toppling of the Trudeau government. Fringe elements, including far-right activists, nationalist groups and conspiracy theorists, have played a central role in the protests from the start, and officials had expressed concern about the potential for violence. Officers had hesitated to move against the protesters, partly due to fears that some were armed. But the occupation was stoking growing tensions with local residents who complained of harassment and intimidation, and obtained a court order to stop the truckers’ incessant horn honking. The protesters represent a small minority in Canada. The country has one of the highest rates of full vaccination anywhere in the world, with more than 80% of people covered. The protests also have inspired similar convoys in France, New Zealand and the Netherlands. With Associated PressThis blog is now closed. For updates on the Ukraine crisis you can go to our new blog here: Russia’s leader will oversee major military drills along Ukraine’s borders on Saturday, according to Agence France-Presse, while Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky was due to travel to Germany to meet Western leaders. Zelensky was expected to meet with US Vice President Kamala Harris, AFP reported. However, Biden, who has said he is “convinced” Putin has decided to invade Ukraine, has suggested that “in the pursuit of a diplomatic solution, it may be the wise choice” for Zelensky to stay. The US says it believes an attack by Russia is inevitable. It points to an estimated 149,000 Russian troops are stationed on Ukraine’s borders - as many as 190,000, when including the Russian-backed separatist forces. Russia’s defence ministry announced that Putin would personally oversee previously scheduled drills involving nuclear-capable missiles on Saturday. NATO chief Jens Stoltenberg, who attended the Munich Security Conference, has warned the size of the assembled Russian force far exceeded that needed for military drills, and that Russia had the capacity to invade without warning. Australia would not send troops to Ukraine in the event of a Russian invasion, but would provide other forms of practical assistance, prime minister Scott Morrison said. Morrison told reporters in Darwin on Saturday that an invasion is “regrettably inevitable”, according to a report by Australian Associated Press. It quotes the following comments by Morrison: Australia has not been asked or nor would we be providing support through troops or anything of that nature. We work with our allies and partners in many other ways, and we will seek to do that with the practical things that we can do to assist those efforts. We have had such discussions with the UK prime minister and others about how we proceed along that basis... They cannot use the threat of war and invasion as a way of trying to leverage and negotiate other changes that they may be seeking. This is not how free nations, democratic nations, nations in favour of peace, should behave. We have seen this before and we cannot allow it to stand. The OSCE Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine says it has observed “a dramatic increase” in attacks along the front line in eastern Ukraine. In a statement, it said: In recent days, the OSCE Special Monitoring to Ukraine (SMM) has observed a dramatic increase in kinetic activity along the contact line in eastern Ukraine, equal to the numbers of ceasefire violations reported before the July 2020 agreement on the Measures to strengthen the ceasefire took effect. The OSCE’s Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine has been deployed in eastern Ukraine since war broke out in 2014. It added: The SMM is currently following up on the allegations made by the sides, and its access to these areas must be ensured without hindrance. All corroborated and established facts continue to be made public in the SMM’s reports. At this time of high tension, the SMM reiterates its call to the sides to strictly adhere to all of the commitments they have made, and take all necessary steps to reduce tensions and work towards immediate de-escalation for the benefit of the lives of innocent civilians on both sides of the contact line who continue to suffer from this conflict. The OSCE reported there had been 222 ceasefire violations for the Donetsk region on Thursday, including 135 explosions, up from 189 the previous day and 24 on Tuesday. For the Lugansk region, it reported 648 violations, including 519 explosions, up from 402 the previous day and 129 on Tuesday. Reuters is reporting that Russia and China have watered down a G20 finance leaders’ statement on geopolitical risks to the global economy - removing a reference to “current” tensions. Warnings of a possible war in Ukraine have prompted nervousness in the financial markets. Here is more from Reuters’ report: The gathering of finance ministers and central bank governors from the Group of 20 major economies was one of the most fractious since the start of the Covid-19 pandemic in 2020, according to people familiar with the discussions. Canadian Finance Minister Chrystia Freeland strayed from the G20 economic script to issue an impassioned plea to her Russian counterparts to not invade Ukraine, warning that such action would hurt the global economy and bring “crushing” sanctions against Russia, according to two sources familiar with her remarks. Other sources familiar with the meeting said China and Russia had objected to the reference to “current tensions” in an earlier draft communique, as well as disagreements on debt restructuring for poor countries and carbon pricing. The group’s final communique simply said: “We will also continue to monitor major global risks, including from geopolitical tensions that are arising, and macroeconomic and financial vulnerabilities.” As the meeting concluded, US and European stocks fell on worries that a Russian invasion of Ukraine was imminent after Russian-backed separatists announced a surprise evacuation of their breakaway regions in eastern Ukraine. Hello, Rebecca Ratcliffe here in Bangkok, taking over from Lois Beckett. Here’s the latest from President Biden on Twitter: Earlier this evening, Biden said he was convinced that Putin had decided to invade Ukraine and target its capital, Kyiv - but that, until the attack began, “diplomacy is always a possibility”. Watching TV. Waiting for a bus. The vulnerable facing violence on the front lines. There’s been a lot of diplomatic rhetoric today about the possibility of a “catastrophic” war in Ukraine. Reporters at the front lines in eastern Ukraine, including my colleague Shaun Walker, have already been documenting the toll of violence on “the mainly elderly and vulnerable people” there. “I just hope there isn’t going to be any more of this. I can’t sleep at night. My arms and legs are shaking, and it’s scary,” a 77-year-old man whose roof was damaged in the attacks told Walker. Reporters for BuzzFeed reported similar anguish among the elderly, as well as the very young. Other residents were finding different ways of coping. At a youth centre in Mariinka, Buzzfeed reported: “12-year-old twins Veronika and Yeva were hard at work on art projects in a room where rocket shrapnel had shattered a window the day before....They weren’t scared, they said, because the shelling hadn’t happened ‘in a while’ and they weren’t convinced that it would continue or grow worse.” There’s been a lot of Ukraine news in the past day. Our live coverage will continue, but here’s a recap of some key events of the past few hours: Joe Biden said in a speech late Friday that he is ‘convinced’ Vladimir Putin has decided to invade Ukraine, but says there’s still time for diplomacy to avert war. The invasion could come in the next days or week, the US president said. Biden said that the US and its European allies were ready to impose “severe” economic sanctions on Russia in response to an attack, but that it would not send troops to fight in Ukraine. As Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy was reportedly still mulling whether or not he would leave the country for a conference in Germany on Saturday, Biden said that “in the pursuit of a diplomatic solution, it may be the wise choice” for him to stay. Leaders of Russian-backed breakaway regions of Luhansk and Donetsk claimed to be under attack from Ukraine and ordered the mass evacuation of civilians. As the US and its allies warned of “false flags” that would give a pretext for a Russian attack, a gas pipeline in Luhansk caught fire after explosions, and a second blast hit the city about 40 minutes later. Earlier on Friday, a car bomb detonated in an empty lot in Donetsk. Biden called out Russian “disinformation” and said that claims in the Russian media that Ukraine was the aggressor and planning a major attack “defies basic logic” of what a country would do over 150,000 troops arrayed at its borders. Reporters at the front lines in eastern Ukraine are already documenting the toll of escalating violence on civilians, many of them elderly and especially vulnerable. Reporting from Washington and Munich, my colleagues Julian Borger and Patrick Wintour have a definitive summary of the day’s developments, from Biden’s warnings, to reports of gas pipeline explosions in eastern Ukraine, to satellite imagery of troop movements. It’s worth a read in full. New satellite images show large deployment of helicopters in Belarus: report The US image company Maxar said on Friday that satellite images showed a large new deployment of helicopters in Belarus and a gathering of tanks and personnel carriers not far from the Ukraine border, my colleagues Julian Borger and Patrick Wintour report. Buzzfeed’s Christopher Miller posted some Maxar satellite images on Twitter: White House on US call with allies: ‘Swift, coordinated economic costs on Russia’ There’s not much new in the White House summary of Joe Biden’s call with transatlantic leaders earlier today, and echoes the president’s own remarks this evening: “deep concern” over Russia’s build-up of forces, “strong support” for Ukraine’s sovereignty, a commitment to continued diplomacy, and a promise of “readiness to impose swift, coordinated economic costs on Russia should it choose further conflict”. Biden said explicitly in his press conference earlier today that he would not send troops to fight in Ukraine. Biden: It’s Zelenskiy’s choice whether to leave the country, but ‘wise choice’ is to stay At Friday evening’s press conference, Joe Biden said that it was up to Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy to choose whether or not he would leave the country for a conference in Germany on Saturday, but that “in the pursuit of a diplomatic solution, it may be the wise choice” for him to stay. Privately, administration officials have urged Zelenskiy to stay in Ukraine given their concerns about an imminent invasion, CNN reported. Russia will ‘stand up’ for compatriots in eastern Ukraine, parliamentary speaker says Another sign of the political atmosphere: Russia’s parliamentary speaker, Vyacheslav Volodin, said on his Telegram channel today that “Russia does not want war,” but that it will “stand up” for compatriots in Donetsk and Lugansk if their lives are threatened, TASS, a major Russian news agency, reported. First reactions: Biden’s speech on Russia’s potential ‘catastrophic and needless war of choice’ Some early reactions after Biden’s press conference this evening: Is Biden hoping that Putin will want to prove him wrong on the imminence of an invasion? Like Biden, French officials are saying the path for diplomacy is still open. Biden: Russian claims that Ukraine is planning a Donbas attack ‘defies basic logic’ Joe Biden said that the reports in Russian media “claiming Ukraine is planning to launch a massive offensive attack in the Donbas” were “disinformation.” “It defies basic logic to believe that the Ukrainians would choose this moment, with well over 150,000 troops arrayed on its borders, to escalate a yearlong conflict,” the US president said. Biden highlighted Russian media’s “phony allegations of a genocide taking place in the Donbas,” as well as the shelling of a Ukrainian kindergarten yesterday, which he said Russia had “falsely asserted was carried out by Ukraine.” These were all part of the Russian “playbook to set up a false justification to attack Ukraine,” Biden said, which the US and allies have been warning about for weeks. Biden praised the “restraint” and “judgement” of Ukrainian troops, who “have refused to allow Russia to bait them into war.” Biden said the US was “calling out Russia’s plans loudly and repeatedly, not because we want a conflict, but because we are doing everything in our power to remove any reason that Russia may give to justify invading Ukraine.” President Joe Biden said that he is “convinced” that Vladimir Putin has “made the decision” to invade Ukraine, an invasion that might come in the next days, based on US intelligence. But it was not too late to reverse that decision, Biden warned: “Russia can still choose diplomacy. It is not too late to deescalate and return the negotiation table.” Biden said the US and its European allies were united in their resolve to impose “severe” economic sanctions on Russia in response to an attack on Ukraine, and that Russia would also face the “moral outrage” of the rest of the world should it choose war. “There are many issues that divide our nation and our world, but standing up to Russian aggression is not one of them. Americans are united...the entire free world is united,” he said. “Make no mistake, if Russia pursues these plans, it will be responsible for a catastrophic and needless war of choice.” “United States and our allies are prepared to defend every inch of NATO territory from any threat to our collective security,” Biden said. “We also will not send troops in to fight in Ukraine, but we will continue to support the Ukrainian people.” He cited hundreds of millions of dollars in previous US military support to Ukraine. Reports of explosion causing a pipeline fire in eastern Ukraine A part of a gas pipeline near Luhansk, one of the main cities in Ukraine’s breakaway region of People’s Republic of Luhansk, caught fire late on Friday after a blast, Russian news agencies reported, citing correspondents on the ground. The pipeline was struck by “a powerful explosion,” Interfax news agency reported, citing a local natural gas supplier. The new report of a pipeline fire comes as the US and others have been warning of “false flag” incidents that could be used by Russia as a pretext for an attack on Ukraine. Pro-Russian Telegram channels are claiming the fire is the result of Ukrainians blowing up a gas pipeline near Luhansk. In other news, the foreign ministers for Germany and France released a joint statement today warning about Russia constructing pretext to justify a military escalation. German minister Annalena Baerbock and French minister Jean-Yves Le Drian released the statement shortly after 3:00 pm eastern time, with the two ministers stating towards the latter half of the statement: We have noted the announcement of the leaders of the self-proclaimed “People’s Republics” of Donetsk and Luhansk to evacuate the region’s residents to Russia as a so-called precautionary measure in anticipation of a possible Ukrainian attack. We do not see any grounds for these allegations and urge Russia to use its influence over the self-proclaimed republics to encourage restraint and contribute to de-escalation. We are concerned that staged incidents could be misused as pretext for possible military escalation. A White House official confirmed again today that cyberattacks against Ukraine came from Russia. During a briefing, Deputy National Security Advisor for Cyber and Emerging Technology Anne Neuberger said that the US believes Russia is behind the cyberattacks targeting at least two major banks in Ukraine and Ukraine’s Ministry of Defense earlier this week. The British government issued a similar confirmation: “The UK Government judges that the Russian Main Intelligence Directorate (GRU) were involved in this week’s distributed denial of service attacks against the financial sector in Ukraine,” a spokesperson for the Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office said. “The attack showed a continued disregard for Ukrainian sovereignty. This activity is yet another example of Russia’s aggressive acts against Ukraine.” The UK Foreign Office announced today that it will be temporarily relocating its Ukrainian embassy in light of heightened tensions between Russia and Ukraine. The UK will be moving the embassy from Kyiv to Lviv, located near the Poland border, while also urging British nationals in Ukraine to leave while commercial options were still available. “Any Russian military action in Ukraine would severely affect the British government’s ability to provide consular assistance in Ukraine,” said the department. The UK is one of the latest western countries to relocate their embassy with Melinda Simmons, the British ambassador to Ukraine, gaining praise for her decision to remain in Kyiv with a small staff and help British nationals leave the country. Here’s the Guardian’s Patrick Wintour analyzing the impact of Simmon’s previous decision to remain in Kyiv: Her decision to stay put, along with most EU embassies, will be popular with Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy. He is deeply unhappy that some western embassies – including the US, Canada and Australia – decided to move from Kyiv to Lviv or other cities in the west of the country. At a joint briefing on Monday Zelinskiy said he was determined to prevent an exodus of his political and business class, and questioned their logic. “There is no western Ukraine,” he said. “There is Ukraine; it is integral. Because if, God forbid, something happens, it will be everywhere.” Melinda Simmons, the British ambassador to Ukraine, has been winning plaudits for her decision to stay in post in Kyiv, working with a much-reduced staff to help UK citizens out of the country and to manage the steady flow of British dignitaries still flying to the country to show their solidarity. Read Wintour’s full article here. According to a tweet from Ukraine’s defense ministry, Ukraine Military Intelligence has information that Russian special services are possibly planting bombs in buildings in Donetsk, Ukraine. “These measures are aimed at destabilizing the situation in the temporarily occupied territories of our state and creating grounds for accusing Ukraine of terrorist acts,” said Ukraine’s defense ministry in a subsequent tweet. In a final tweet, the Ukraine’s defense ministry advised those living in Donetsk to stay home and not use public transit. The first buses carrying people who are evacuating from eastern Ukraine have arrived in Russia’s Rostov region late Friday according to Russia’s state news agency TASS, reported Reuters: The self-proclaimed Donetsk People’s Republic announced a mass evacuation of the region’s residents to Russia earlier on Friday after an increase in shelling. Separatist forces and Ukrainian government forces blamed each other for the spike in tensions. In other news, here is a read out of US Vice president Kamala Harris and Baltic leaders, discussing their readiness capabilities if Russia were to invade Ukraine, including position adjustments from the US and NATO. More from Germany’s foreign minister Annalena Baerbock, who said “all options” would be on the table if Russia launches an attack on Ukraine, including scrapping the Nord Stream 2 pipeline deal intended to bring Russian gas to Germany. Western powers are united in their preparation of “unprecedented sanctions” on Russia, Baerbock said in a speech at the Munich Security Conference. She said that Germany is ready to “pay a high economic price”, adding: That’s why all options are on the table for me, also Nord Stream 2. Separately, Germany’s defence ministry said Berlin will raise the deployment readiness of German troops in the Nato response force, enabling them to deploy more quickly to protect eastern European allies in case of an escalation of tensions with Russia. In a statement, the ministry said the decision is a reaction to Russia’s conduct and meant to reduce the time needed to prepare for deployment in case of an activation of the Nato Response Force (NRF). The announcement that civilians will be evacuated from Russia-backed areas in eastern Ukraine is a “cynical” move by Moscow, a US State Department spokesperson said. Speaking to reporters at the Munich Security Conference, the State Department official said: Announcements like these are further attempts to obscure through lies and disinformation that Russia is the aggressor in this conflict. It is also cynical and cruel to use human beings as pawns to distract the world from the fact that Russia is building up its forces in preparation for an attack. There is no evidence that Ukraine is planning an offensive in the region, despite Russia’s claims to the contrary. The West must gear up for years of heightened Russian pressure on Ukraine and on Europe as a whole, whether or not Moscow launches an attack on Ukraine in the coming days, Latvia’s prime minister Krišjānis Kariņš said. In an interview with POLITICO, Kariņš said Vladimir Putin’s goal was to suppress Ukraine’s independence and bring it back into “the Russian fold.” The Russian president could pursue his strategy of “neo-imperialism” not just through a direct military attack but also by ramping up efforts to destabilise the Ukrainian economy and society, Kariņš warned. Kariņš said: In the best-case scenario — best-case meaning no war — we will be facing long-term pressure from Putin on Ukraine and on Europe as a whole. Latvia borders Russia and Belarus, where Moscow has massed tens of thousands of troops as part of a huge buildup of forces around Ukraine. Kariņš said he had told his European Council counterparts to prepare themselves for the long term, whatever the coming days may bring. What I argue with my colleagues in the Council is that we have to be prepared for probably a long haul — not two weeks or two months or even two years … probably it will be much longer. And we have to start thinking in terms of the long game. In this long game, we are interested in supporting the Ukrainian state, supporting its independence, its democracy, helping it with reforms, helping it financially, helping it withstand the outward pressures of Moscow. Our correspondents, Shaun Walker in Vrubivka, and Andrew Roth in Moscow, report on how warnings by leaders of pro-Russian proxy states of an imminent assault by Ukrainian forces are fueling fears that Moscow is seeking to create a pretext for invasion. The leaders of pro-Russian proxy states in eastern Ukraine announced a mass evacuation of citizens to Russia on Friday evening, amid fears Moscow is manufacturing tension in the region to provide a pretext for renewed military intervention in Ukraine. After the evacuation announcement, warning sirens sounded in Donetsk and other cities in the two Moscow-backed statelets, supposedly due to an upcoming Ukrainian military assault on the region. On Friday evening the Russian-separatist authorities said that a car had been blown up near their government building in the centre of Donetsk. There were no reports of casualties and a video seemed to show it was in an empty car park. Vladimir Putin swiftly dispatched a top official to the border region and announced those arriving would be given a payment of 10,000 roubles (£95). However, Ukrainian officials insisted they had no plans to launch any assault, and said that, in fact, recent days have seen a dramatic upsurge in fire by Russia-backed forces across the frontlines. In Vrubivka, one of many towns on the Ukrainian side of the frontline that has seen an uptick in violence in the past two days, humanitarian monitors were analysing the damage on Friday afternoon and helping residents with repairs. Twelve buildings in the town were damaged by incoming artillery fire on Thursday, the first time the town has been hit since August 2018. “I just hope there isn’t going to be any more of this. I can’t sleep at night. My arms and legs are shaking, and it’s scary,” said Anatoly Romanenko, 77, whose roof was damaged in the attacks. More on the statement released this afternoon by Ukraine’s foreign ministry, who said claims that the Ukrainian government plans to launch an offensive operation in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions are “divorced from reality”. The statement reads: Ukraine is also not conducting or planning any sabotage acts in Donbas. We categorically reject the attempts of Russia to aggravate the already tense security situation. We remain firmly committed to politico-diplomatic settlement and, together with our partners, maximise efforts to reduce the tension and keep the situation in line with diplomatic dialogue. A Russian attack on Ukraine would mean the end of the post-cold war and “the end of our hopes and illusions”, Gérard Araud, a former French ambassador to the United States, United Nations and Israel said. Araud tweeted: The most likely scenario for a Russian attack on Ukraine is not a fully-fledged invasion but rather a false flag operation or a coup, German foreign minister Annalena Baerbock said. Speaking at the annual Munich Security Conference, Baerbock said: The scenario of a full invasion might be possible but I am not sure this is really the most likely scenario. She added, apparently alluding to a cyber attack or an attack on Ukraine’s critical infrastructure: I would be more afraid that the most likely scenario is a false flag (operation) or a coup or also other things like...if all the electricity will fall down here at this hotel, we would all go nuts and totally crazy. The US has obtained intelligence that Russia is building lists of Ukrainian political figures and other high-profile political opponents to be targeted for either arrest or assassination in the event of a Russian assault on Ukraine, Foreign Policy reports. Four people familiar with US intelligence told the website that if Russia moves forward with plans to invade Ukraine, it may target prominent political opponents, anti-corruption activists, and Belarusian and Russian dissidents living in exile. A fifth person, a US official who spoke on condition of anonymity, said that the US has been downgrading its intelligence classification in order to share threats to specific groups within Ukraine with Ukrainian government officials and other partners in the region. The US official said: As we’ve seen in the past, we expect Russia will try to force cooperation through intimidation and repression. These acts, which in past Russian operations have included targeted killings, kidnappings/forced disappearances, detentions, and the use of torture, would likely target those who oppose Russian actions, including Russian and Belarusian dissidents in exile in Ukraine, journalists and anti-corruption activists, and vulnerable populations such as religious and ethnic minorities and LGBTQI+ persons. The report comes after US secretary of state Antony Blinken hinted that Russia would target political opponents with arrest or assassination in a speech at the United Nations yesterday. “We have information that indicates Russia will target specific groups of Ukrainians,” Blinken said, without providing details. The UK is advising against all but essential travel to Belarus, the Foreign, Commonwealth &amp; Development Office said. In an update on its website, the FCDO says it is advising “against all travel to Yelsk, Mazyr, Rechitsa, Luninets, Gomel, Asipovichy, Baranovichi and Brest”. “The FCDO advise against all but essential travel to the remainder of Belarus,” it continues. Ukraine’s foreign ministry has called on the international community to condemn what it said were provocations by Russia in separatist-held eastern Ukrainian areas. The ministry said that a lack of proper reaction, or a neutral position, would lead to more escalation by Russia. The foreign ministry’s spokesperson said in a statement: ...we are watching the Russian Federation launch a campaign to spread mass disinformation, increase shelling of Ukrainian positions and civilian infrastructure with weapons banned by the Minsk agreements, and escalate the security situation. Lack of a proper reaction or a neutral position will only fuel the escalation of the situation by Russia. Russian state media say a blast has occurred outside the separatist-controlled administration building in the rebel-held city of Donetsk in eastern Ukraine. Nobody was injured in Friday’s blast, which was caused by a car bomb, Russian media reported, quoting separatist leaders. Video filmed by Russian reporters at the scene showed a fire burning. The car belonged to the head of the DNR’s police force, Denis Sinenkov, reports said. The explosion follows multiple warnings by the US and others of a “false flag” incident, used by Russia as a pretext to justify a military attack on Ukraine. It comes hours after the leader of the Donetsk People’s Republic (DNR), Denis Pushilin, announced that residents would be evacuated from the city to Russia’s Rostov region. Pushilin said the move was necessary because of an impending attack on the territory by Ukrainian forces. Ukraine’s pro-western government has vehemently denied the claim and says it has behaved with restraint despite heavy shelling on Thursday and Friday from rebel held territory. Here’s more on the reports that an explosion took place in central Donetsk in eastern Ukraine. According to the Tass news agency, the large explosion occurred near a government building in the separatist-held city. Separatist authorities in east Ukraine say a car was blown up in the centre of Donetsk, Tass news agency said. Russia’s Interfax news agency reports no one was hurt by the explosion. US president Joe Biden will give an update on the situation in Ukraine at 9pm UK time today, the White House said. Russian state media is reporting a “major” explosion near a government building in the centre of Donetsk in eastern Ukraine. From Oksana Pokalchuk, head of Amnesty International Ukraine: The Guardian has not been able to independently verify these reports yet. Western officials hinted on Friday that sanctions could be launched against Russia in the event of cyber, paramilitary or another non-conventional attack against Ukraine ordered by the Kremlin. Although a conventional military attack is still considered possible “with very little notice,” western officials are also concerned about a possible escalation of the conflict by Russian separatists in Ukraine’s Donbas region or further cyber attacks on Ukraine, following the targeting of banks and government earlier this week. An official said the simplest scenario for triggering economic sanctions would be that “missiles might start firing, tanks start coming across the border”. But they stressed there were alternative scenarios that would lead to a triggering of sanctions. The official said: “There are other scenarios, very plausible ones, under which the kinds of events we’ve seen over the last 48 hours continue to increase in frequency and intensity, that you see more cyber attacks, that you see a really big escalation of cyber attacks against the government of Ukraine. And in that situation, the reality is, it would be more difficult to call exactly when a line had been crossed.” The topic of what conflict situation would lead to the triggering of economic sanctions against Russia has been under active discussions between the US, EU and UK. It “cannot only be if there are missiles or tanks or whatever. We may need to judge response in a more complex situation,” the official added. Officials added they believed the Ukraine crisis was now “in its most dangerous phase” because of the combination of the military build up, ongoing exercises in Belarus and the escalating tensions in the Donbas region, in the east of Ukraine. French president Emmanuel Macron has called for calm, describing the shelling in Donbas as “very worrying”. He called on Vladimir Putin to make good on his claims of drawing down troops at the Ukrainian border. I welcome what president Putin has said but I believe that if you want to be a reliable partner then deeds should be in line with declarations and I would like to see specific actions. As regards to pressure, military pressure, from Russia, destabilising acts, the increasing number of shelling in the contact zone, firstly we call for a ceasefire on such military actions, resume dialogue, because we continue to believe that dialogue is the way to move this situation forward. He added that in the coming hours there will be close cooperation between the European allies and the US. In our view we must all keep calm in this situation. From Estonia’s ambassador to Ukraine … The analyst Michael A Horowitz is sharing images of people being evacuated from Donetsk and Luhansk. Some remarks from the White House pool as Harris meets Baltic leaders … Lithuania’s president, Gitanas Nausėda, has warned that “the ghost of war” is hovering over Europe and that “security for Ukraine means security for the Baltic states”, adding: The more we are united … the better we will send the signals to Russia not to start what they intend to do. Estonia’s prime minister, Kaja Kallas, said: We have all lost our independence to Russia once, and we don’t want it to happen again. We understand what is at stake here. AP reports that the US vice-president, Kamala Harris, has hailed Nato unity during the escalating Ukraine crisis and warned Russia that the US and western allies stand ready to respond with tough sanctions if President Vladimir Putin moves forward with an invasion of Ukraine. In a meeting with the Nato secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, as the annual Munich Security Conference got under way, Harris thanked the alliance for “all that you have done” throughout the crisis, adding: We remain, of course, open to, and desirous of, diplomacy, as it relates to the dialogue and the discussions we have had with Russia, but we are also committed, if Russia takes aggressive action, to ensure there will be severe consequence in terms of the sanctions we have discussed. And we know the alliance is strong in that regard. The US estimates that Russia probably has massed between 169,000 and 190,000 personnel in and near Ukraine – up from about about 100,000 on 30 January. Harris said it was “intentional” that she was holding her first meeting at the annual security conference with Nato’s secretary general. The administration is trying to drive the message to Putin that the crisis has only bolstered the 30-country military alliance’s resolve to push back against Moscow’s aggression. Stoltenberg echoed Harris’s sentiment of growing Nato unity during the crisis, saying: I also welcome the fact that European allies are stepping up, also increasing their presence in the eastern border of the alliance and also investing more in defence. So the reality is that North America and Europe are doing more together now that we’ve done for many years. The head of the Russia-backed separatist states in Ukraine has announced a mass evacuation of citizens in what may be part of a plan to trigger a Russian intervention in Ukraine. Denis Pushilin, the head of the self-proclaimed Donetsk People’s Republic, announced that he believed Ukraine was planning to attack the separatist state and said he would begin a mass evacuation of its citizens to Russia on Friday. The Luhansk People’s Republic, another Russian-backed separatist state, announced similar plans. There is no indication that Ukraine is planning an offensive operation in south-east Ukraine, where the front lines of the conflict have remained static for nearly seven years. Russia has also moved an estimated 150,000 troops to the border area and appears to be seeking a pretext for which to launch an intervention. Nonetheless, Pushilin said that he believed that the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy was planning to launch an offensive and that the army would shell cities and towns in the Russian-backed separatist areas of southeast Ukraine. In a video statement, Pushilin said he was organising a “mass, centralised departure” of the population to the Russian Federation, adding that “women, children and elderly people are subject to evacuation first”. He also claimed that he had agreed with the Russian leadership to prepare sheltering points for the population in the Rostov region of south-west Russia. The buy-in from the Russian authorities for what would be a difficult logistical operation to move hundreds of thousands of people could indicate that this is a serious development. Ukraine immediately denied Pushilin’s claims, as well as others in Russian-backed media that claimed the Ukrainian army was targeting a chemical facility. “We categorically refute Russian disinformation reports on Ukraine’s alleged offensive operations or acts of sabotage in chemical production facilities,” said Dmytro Kuleba, Ukraine’s foreign minister. “Ukraine does not conduct or plan any such actions in the Donbas. We are fully committed to diplomatic conflict resolution only.” There has been a flare-up in fighting along the frontlines of the conflict this week. The Ukrainian army has said that shells fired from separatist-held territory had hit a kindergarten on Thursday, injuring several adults. At a press conference in Moscow on Friday afternoon, Vladimir Putin said he was witnessing an “aggravation of the situation in the Donbas”. Asked about the evacuation plan, Kremlin spokesman Dmitri Peskov told journalists that he “didn’t know what was going on there with Pushilin”, the Interfax news agency reported. A brief readout of today’s call between the US secretary of defence and his Russian counterpart, courtesy of the Pentagon: On February 18, Secretary of Defense Lloyd J. Austin III spoke with Russian Minister of Defense Sergey Shoygu. Secretary Austin called for de-escalation, the return of Russian forces surrounding Ukraine to their home bases, and a diplomatic resolution. The Belarusian president, Alexander Lukashenko, has said the “irresponsibility” of western leaders over Ukraine has left Europe on the “verge of a conflict” that will involve the whole continent, PA Media reports. Speaking following talks in Moscow with President Vladimir Putin, Lukashenko said people were already fleeing the Russian-speaking Donbas region of eastern Ukraine. We are on the verge of a conflict that will involve the whole continent. We see that the irresponsibility of a number of Western leaders has led to the situation and we see that this irresponsible or irrational behaviour of our neighbours has led to this situation. As the picture shows, Lukashenko was pointedly spared the big table treatment meted out to Emmanuel Macron and Olaf Scholz … From Ukraine’s foreign minister … East-west tensions are at their highest point since the collapse of the Soviet Union in the 1990s, according to the UN secretary general, António Guterres. However, the UN chief still believes there will not be a military conflict in Ukraine. Guterres warned in his opening speech at an annual security conference in Munich that a small mistake or miscommunication between major powers could have catastrophic consequences. I am often asked whether we are in a new cold war. My answer is that the threat to global security now is more complex and probably higher than at that time. During the decades-long standoff between the Soviet Union and the US in the 20th century, “there were mechanisms that enabled the protagonists to calculate risks and use back-channels to prevent crises”, Guterres said. Today, many of those systems no longer exist and most of the people trained to use them are no longer here with us. But Guterres said he still believes the buildup of Russian troops around Ukraine won’t result in a military conflict. He added: I urge all parties to be extremely careful with their rhetoric. Public statements should aim to reduce tensions, not inflame them. (Via AP) Reuters has this from the German foreign minister, Annalena Baerbock: All options are on the table regarding sanctions on Russia in the event it attacks Ukraine, including the Nord Stream 2 pipeline intended to bring Russian gas to Germany, according to Baerbock. Western powers are united in their preparation of “unprecedented sanctions” on Russia, Baerbock said in a speech at the Munich Security Conference. She added: We, Germany, are prepared to pay a high economic price for this. That’s why all options are on the table for me, also Nord Stream 2. Despite the lack of a Russian delegation at the security summit for the first time in decades, Baerbock sent a message to the Kremlin, saying that security cannot come at the cost of others. A Russian-backed separatist leader in eastern Ukraine has announced the evacuation of his breakaway region’s residents to southeast Russia after an increase in shelling. Announcing the move on social media, Denis Pushilin, head of the self-proclaimed Donetsk People’s Republic, said Russia had agreed to provide accommodation for people leaving and that women, children and the elderly should be prioritised. There was no immediate comment from Russian officials or from Kyiv, and a Reuters witness in the region’s capital of Donetsk said there were no signs yet of an evacuation. Pushilin said: As of today, Feb. 18, a mass centralised evacuation of the population to the Russian Federation has been organised. Women, children and the elderly are to be evacuated first. (Via Reuters) The West needs to keep talking to Russia to make it more difficult for Moscow to launch an attack on Ukraine, Latvia said on Friday, as two days of increased shelling in eastern Ukraine sparked fears a Russian invasion could be imminent. Diplomatic efforts to solve the crisis must continue, Latvian Foreign Minister Edgars Rinkevics told Reuters on the sidelines of the Munich Security Conference, a three-day gathering of world leaders that looks set to be dominated by the tensions with Russia. He said: While there are diplomatic efforts going on, it is actually very difficult for Russia to invade or to do any kind of provocation. The EU is considering new restrictive measures to close loopholes on existing sanctions against Belarus, diplomats said - an issue that is likely to come up at a meeting of EU foreign affairs ministers on Monday. The discussion comes amid concern over a possible Russian invasion of Ukraine, which could include Russian troops stationed in Belarus. Moscow denies that it is planning an invasion, but Western countries believe the opposite. As a sign of further escalation on the EU’s eastern front, the EU last week told non-essential staff to relocate from Kyiv, one EU diplomat said, while Ukraine is urging the EU to provide emergency support and military training. Sanctions on Belarus were initially imposed after the president, Alexander Lukashenko, crushed protests following elections in August 2020, and have been tightened several times since then. The diplomats said new measures could be aimed at closing loopholes that Baltic diplomats said are being exploited by Minsk to circumvent existing sanctions. The EU has banned Belarus’ exports of potash, a fertiliser made of potassium, and oil products. But diplomats said Belarus is still exporting it to the EU via Ukraine, and has also boosted its export to the EU of oil products obtained from coal. Baltic country officials are expected to raise these issues at Monday’s meeting of EU foreign affairs ministers, even if Belarus is not on the agenda of the meeting. No decision on the matter is expected on Monday. A spokesperson for the EU diplomatic service declined to comment on discussions over sanctions. (Via Reuters) Greece has dispatched its foreign minister, Nikos Dendias, to Moscow for talks with Sergei Lavrov. As Christian Orthodox nations, the two countries have long shared traditionally strong ties although in more recent years Greece, a member of the western alliance, has also shored up relations with the US, signing an expansive mutual defence agreement with Washington that has granted the superpower unfettered access to four major military bases. The facilities are likely to be increasingly used to transfer US troops and equipment to Bulgaria and Romania in the event of a Russian invasion. Following the talks, Athens’ top diplomat warned: We will all lose if there is a clash in Ukraine ... the aim of all of us is maintaining peace and security in Europe. Greece is always in favour of peaceful dialogue with Russia. We listen with attention to the demands of Russia regarding its security, as we listen to all the others. Asked by a reporter with the Greek daily Kathimeri about the escalating tensions in the eastern Ukrainian region Donbass, where a sizeable ethnic Greek minority resides, the Russian foreign minister said: We are very concerned by the radical increase in fire on the front line. For years the regime in Kiev has violated ceasefire agreements. Lavrov also described Ukraine’s aspirations to join Nato as a “caprice”. Analysts in Athens have suggested that Hellenic navy ships will be deployed to evacuate members of Ukraine’s Greek diaspora in the event of an invasion. The US figure includes Russian-backed separatists, which will partially explain why it is so much higher. “This estimate includes military troops along the border, in Belarus, and in occupied Crimea; Russian National Guard and other internal security units deployed to these areas; and Russian-led forces in eastern Ukraine.” The US has claimed the number of Russian troops on Ukraine’s borders is significantly higher than previously known. Michael Carpenter, the US ambassador to the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe said in a statement to an OSCE meeting that the number may have nearly doubled since the end of last month. We assess that Russia probably has massed between 169,000-190,000 personnel in and near Ukraine as compared with about 100,000 on January 30. (Carpenter saying “in and near” is likely a reference to areas of eastern Ukraine controlled by Russian-backed separatists) He added: This is the most significant military mobilization in Europe since the Second World War. The US has accused Russia of moving up to 190,000 military personnel in and near Ukraine. The figure is significantly higher than previous estimates. Washington has once again dismissed Moscow’s claims of a withdrawal. Ukrainian government forces and Russian-backed rebels in the country’s east have traded fresh accusations of shelling and other ceasefire violations as tensions continue to escalate. Poland has said it is ready to help people who would be forced to leave Ukraine in the event of a Russian invasion. Russia announced Vladimir Putin will personally oversee exercises on Saturday of Russia’s strategic deterrence forces, including ballistic and cruise missile launches meant to simulate a nuclear attack. Bulgaria’s prime minister, Kiril Petkov, has said his country is fully behind EU sanctions against Russia if Moscow were to order an invasion of Ukraine - a move he described as “close to insanity”. Petkov, attending his first EU summit since becoming Bulgaria’s prime minister last December, told the Guardian the severity of any Russian attack would determine the scale of the EU’s response. EU leaders meeting in Brussels on Thursday held an impromptu meeting on the Ukraine crisis, ahead of a scheduled summit with 40 heads of state and government from the African Union. It remains unclear what would trigger EU sanctions: a full-scale invasion or other forms of aggression, such as cyber-attacks; intensified disinformation, or increased attacks by Moscow-backed separatists in eastern Ukraine. Petkov said that “shelling as usual” in the Donbas region “would not be a trigger”, but added: If we have a direct invasion both directly into the special regions [of the Donbas] or if we have some move [by Russia] from the Belarusian side – any of those aggressive manoeuvres into the territory of Ukraine would trigger an immediate response. Petkov said EU leaders had not gone “into the details” of the sanctions package, which is being drawn up by the European Commission, and which would need to be agreed unanimously by all 27 member states. He said that, despite its dependence on Russian gas, Bulgaria would support the sanctions if Ukraine was invaded. We are the most dependent of the EU nations [on] Russian gas. Sometimes we are 100% dependent, which is staggering. EU officials are working on plans to keep gas flowing should Russia choose to retaliate against Western sanctions by cutting energy supplies to Europe. Petkov reiterated his hopes to see a gas interconnector and 182km pipeline connecting Bulgaria to Greece complete by the summer, bringing cheaper gas from Azerbaijan and breaking Russia’s monopoly. The Bulgarian government said last month delays to the project had cost it €250m in lost revenues in 2021. Petkov spoke to his Greek counterpart, Kyriákos Mitsotakis, about the project on Thursday. In the interim, Bulgaria had a contingency plan to deal with any shortfall in gas supplies, he said, promising: “You won’t see a softening of positions due to fear from sanctions.” Any invasion of Ukraine by Russia would be “close to insanity”, Petkov added. You cannot be in full isolation from the whole world, where the majority of your revenue is coming from. Continuing to bring up the tension, trying to negotiate as it is right now, I understand the strategic moves from that side. But going into Ukraine, that for me would be close to insanity if you have a fully fledged invasion. Poland is ready to help people who would be forced to leave Ukraine in the event of a Russian invasion, the Polish defence minister, Mariusz Blaszczak, has said. Speaking during a joint press conference with his US counterpart, Lloyd Austin, Blaszczak said: As for the crisis that would certainly be caused if Russia attacked Ukraine, I want to stress that we are ready to help those who will be forced to leave Ukraine. The US defence secretary, Lloyd Austin, has once again dismissed Russian claims of a withdrawal from areas around Ukraine. On a trip to Warsaw, Austin said the US was committed to the defence of its Nato allies, adding: What Mr Putin did not want was a stronger Nato on his flank, and that’s exactly what he has today. The US defence secretary, Lloyd Austin, has announced the planned sale of 250 Abrams tanks to Poland, as Washington moves to strengthen the defences of a key European ally amid a mounting threat of war between neighbouring Ukraine and Russia. Austin told reporters in Warsaw: This is the most modern version of the Abrams, and will provide Poland with a highly advanced tank capability. It will also strengthen our interoperability with the Polish armed forces, boosting the credibility of our combined deterrence efforts and those of our other Nato allies. (Via Reuters) The UN children’s agency, Unicef, has just put out this release calling for children in eastern Ukraine to have access to safe education. Attacks on kindergartens and schools have been a sad reality for children in eastern Ukraine over the last eight years. More than 750 schools have been damaged since the beginning of the conflict, disrupting access to education for thousands of children on both sides of the contact line. The conflict has taken a severe toll on the psychosocial wellbeing of an entire generation of children growing up in eastern Ukraine. Furthermore, children in eastern Ukraine live in one of the world’s most mine-contaminated stretches of land. Every day, they live, play, and go to and from school in areas littered with landmines, unexploded ordnances, and other deadly explosive remnants of war Unicef calls on all parties to respect the Safe School Declaration and protect children and their caregivers from attacks, regardless of the circumstances they might find themselves in. Educational facilities should remain a safe space where children can be protected from threats and crises and a haven where they can learn, play, and grow to their full potential. A child’s right to education cannot be safeguarded in conflict settings without education itself being protected. Finance leaders from the Group of 20 major economies were set on Friday to agree that rising inflation and geopolitical risks could threaten a fragile global recovery, as the crisis in Ukraine and the Covid-19 pandemic’s fallout cloud the outlook. But a draft final communique seen by Reuters contained no direct mention of western concerns that Russia might invade Ukraine, with one source at the talks saying even a reference to “current” tensions had been vetoed by Russia and China. In a draft text seen by Reuters, the finance chiefs from the world’s leading economies pledged to use “all available policy tools to address the impacts of the pandemic”, while warning that future policy space was likely to be “narrower and uneven”. (Via Reuters) Vladimir Putin will personally oversee exercises of Russia’s strategic deterrence forces, including ballistic and cruise missile launches meant to simulate a nuclear attack. The annual strategic Grom drills will take place on Saturday “under the supervision of Russian Armed Forces Supreme Commander-in-Chief Vladimir Putin”, Russia’s defence ministry has said in a statement. “Ballistic and cruise missiles will be launched in its course.” Western governments had warned that Russia was planning to hold the strategic nuclear drills this month, rather than in late summer as is customary. The exercises coincide with the final day of Russia’s Allied Resolve military drills in Belarus amid concerns that Russia is preparing an invasion of Ukraine. The Russian drills will “involve forces and hardware belonging to the Aerospace Forces, the Southern Military District, the Strategic Missile Forces, the Northern Fleet, and the Black Sea Fleet”, the ministry said. It added: A scheduled exercise of the strategic deterrence forces aims at checking the preparedness of military commands and crews of missile systems, warships and strategic bombers to accomplish their missions and at verifying the reliability of weapons of strategic nuclear and conventional forces. AP has this report from a shelled village in eastern Ukraine. Shells struck by the hundreds along the tense front lines in eastern Ukraine, drones monitoring a fragile ceasefire lost their way when the GPS signal they rely on was jammed, and then the cellphone network went dark. In a sliver of land where pro-Russian separatists have battled for years against Ukrainian government forces, a group of international monitors tasked with keeping the peace reported more than 300 explosions in 24 hours ending Thursday, around four times as many as an average day over the past month. The village of Stanytsia Luhanska suffered more than its share of explosions on Thursday. One shell crashed into a kindergarten, blasting a hole in the wall that sent soccer balls flying off the classroom shelves just as the school day started. Others blasted craters into the schoolyard and shattered windows of nearby homes. Olena Yaryna, the school director, said: We heard the sound of broken glass. The children were very scared. Some kids started crying immediately, and the explosions continued for the next 20 minutes. At Valentyna Melnychenko’s nearby home, the explosions filled her living room and hall with smoke. I switched off the TV, and there were seven more shellings and then it stopped Three people were wounded and half the village lost power. Oleksandr Pavliuk, a Ukrainian army commander, said the explosions were intended to provoke a response and ultimately a counter-response, echoing the warnings from the US. Monitors from the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe have been in place in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions since 2014 to try and maintain the ceasefire. But even they were drawn into the fray this week. In addition to the explosions, the OSCE recorded nearly 600 ceasefire violations over the course of a day, more than double the average for the past month. And three of the organisation’s small surveillance drones went astray after the GPS signal was jammed; a fourth couldn’t make it off the ground without a signal. Electronic interference went further overnight, when the cellphone network went down in Luhansk for hours, for the second night in a row, according to an Associated Press journalist working in the area. The Russian president, Vladimir Putin, and his Belarusian counterpart, Alexander Lukashenko, are set to meet shortly in a summit that could have important implications for the military crisis on Ukraine’s borders. The two leaders are set to discuss what will happen to the estimated 30,000 Russian troops in Belarus after the Allied Resolve joint exercises conclude on 19 February. “We will make all appropriate decisions tomorrow,” Lukashenko said when asked about the troops during a visit to the Osipovichi training ground on Thursday. He arrived in Moscow on Friday morning and will meet with Putin at the Kremlin. Up to 30,000 Russian troops, as well as almost all of the Belarusian armed forces, are taking part in the drills, according to the Russian defence ministry. Western officials have warned that the drills could be cover for preparations for an invasion of Ukraine and threaten a possible attack on Kyiv. Satellite imagery has shown Russian armour and artillery within miles of Belarus’ border with Ukraine and Western officials have pointed out unusual military activity such as the construction of a pontoon bridge over the Prypyat river in the Chernobyl exclusion zone. Russian officials have pledged that the troops will leave Belarus after the exercises conclude. But in contradictory remarks, Lukashenko on Thursday said that “if it makes sense to keep Russian troops here, we will keep them as long as necessary. I emphasise once again: this is our territory and this decision is up to us”. Lukashenko criticised US deployments of troops to Poland and said he would not “ask permission”. Leaving Russian troops in the country would be a controversial decision in Belarus. Many Belarusians, even supporters of Lukashenko, do not want to see further integration with Russia and would view a large Russian military presence as an occupation. Lukashenko has resisted efforts to integrate his economy and politics with Russia under a Union State plan, but increasingly needs Russia’s financial and diplomatic support in his own standoff with the West. The Russian troops in Belarus are seen as some of the most concerning to Western analysts because they have been sent thousands of miles from Russia’s eastern military district. Thomas Bullock, Senior OSINT Analyst at Janes, a defence intelligence provider, said that the troops were among the Russian units that would have to withdraw in order for Russia to meaningfully decrease tensions. “You want to see those long distance journeys being pulled back,” he told the Guardian. Rochan Consulting, a military consultancy, has estimated that Russia has sent 50-70% of the Eastern military district’s combat potential to Belarus. Units include armour, artillery, speznaz special forces, engineering brigades, iskander ballistic missile battalions, SU-35 fighters, paratroopers, and anti-air systems. PA has a little more on the UK government’s fears that Russia could use “false flag operations” to provoke war in Ukraine. Home Office minister Damian Hinds has told Times Radio that the West needs to be “steeled” to misinformation from the Kremlin. False flag is a form of disinformation. There are other forms of disinformation as well. The Putin regime is a global leader in the deployment of disinformation and wider information ops. We need to be steeled to that. We need to understand what might be coming, what might be portrayed as some sort of spurious justification for an attack, for an invasion, and not take things at all at face value. Hinds said he didn’t know what kinds of disinformation strategies might be planned, but gave the aftermath of the Salisbury poisonings as an example of Russia’s recent past strategy. Information operations have become a part of modern warfare and we need to be very alive to that, we need to be prepared for that. The minister also said Britain could revoke the so-called “golden visas” already issued to people living in the country, a day after the government scrapped the programme over concerns about the inflow of illicit Russian money. On Thursday, the home secretary, Priti Patel, said she had closed the Tier 1 system, which had offered a route to residency for those investing at least £2m. “There are routes to revoke when needed,” Hinds said. Sam Jones here, taking over from Samantha Lock. One of today’s main events will be the Munich security conference, where world leaders including US vice-president Kamala Harris, Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, and the German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, will gather to discuss the crisis. The meeting comes amid continuing fears that a Russian invasion is imminent. Australia’s defence minister has voiced those growing concerns, saying Russia is on the cusp of an “all-out conflict” in Ukraine. As the US government warned a Russian invasion could occur in the coming days, Peter Dutton said there were multiple signs this was on the cards. He told Nine Network: It’s tragic and we’ll see terrible scenes unfolding. You would expect that President Putin – who obviously can’t be taken at his word – is manufacturing some sort of trigger, or is in the process of executing the final stages of his plan to go into Ukraine. (Via Australian Associated Press) Before I hand you over to my colleague, Sam Jones, here is a quick recap of where we stand. Ukrainian government forces and Russian-backed rebels in the country’s east have traded fresh accusations of shelling and other ceasefire violations. Ukraine’s ministry of defence says it has recorded 60 ceasefire violations by separatists in the Donbas region over the past 24 hours, with one soldier injured, according to its ministry of defence. Ukraine’s commander of the Joint Forces, lieutenant general Alexander Pavlyuk, claimed Russian-backed troops have increased provocative actions in a bid to provoke Ukraine’s armed forces to fire. Russia’s defence ministry claims to have withdrawn several infantry units from Crimea. The tanks are said to have returned to their bases in the regions of Dagestan and Chechnya after completing drills in Crimea. Russia has offered an explanation as to why it expelled deputy US ambassador to Moscow, Bartle Gorman, earlier this week. US secretary of state Antony Blinken is to meet the Russian foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, next week, “provided there is no further Russian invasion of Ukraine” according to the US state department. Blinken earlier told a UN security council meeting that the crisis in Ukraine was a “moment of peril for the lives and safety of millions of people”. US president Joe Biden will also host a call on Friday with Nato allies to discuss the Ukraine crisis, a White House official has confirmed. Russian-backed rebels in eastern Ukraine have accused Kyiv government forces of shelling a village with artillery on Friday, the Interfax news agency is reporting. Similar accounts emerged on Thursday in operations that western leaders described as “false flag” operations. Global leaders are preparing to meet in Germany for Friday’s Munich security conference. Attendees include Blinken and vice-president, Kamala Harris, along with the German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, the UK foreign secretary, Liz Truss, and Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy. Germany’s foreign minister, Annalena Baerbock, has criticised Russia for its “cold war demands” and for declining to attend the Munich meeting. The US Senate has voted in a rare bipartisan moment late on Thursday to send a show of support for an independent Ukraine whilst condemning Russian aggression, the Associated Press reported. Western leaders accused Moscow of attempting to stage a pretext for war. The US president, Joe Biden, said he believed an attack would happen in “the next several days” and that a false-flag operation was under way. Ukrainian government forces and Russian-backed rebels in the country’s east have traded fresh accusations of shelling and other ceasefire violations as tensions continue to escalate. Russia’s Interfax news agency reported the Luhansk self-proclaimed rebel republic reported several incidents of mortar fire this morning. However, the Kyiv government hit back saying the rebels fired artillery or mortars four times on Friday. Separately, the Ukrainian military said in a statement late on Thursday they had no plans to launch an offensive on the rebels’ positions or shelling of civilians and would “strictly adhere to the Minsk agreements and norms of international humanitarian law”. “Our actions are purely defensive,” commander-in-chief of the armed forces of Ukraine lieutenant general Valery Zaluzhny said. Ukraine’s commander of the Joint Forces, lieutenant general Alexander Pavlyuk, also released a statement overnight, claiming Russian-backed troops have increased provocative actions ahead of the Munich security conference in a bid to provoke Ukraine’s armed forces to fire. Pavlyuk addressed reporters from Kramatorsk in eastern Ukraine. The Ukrainian ministry of defence published a report from his speech below: The Russian Federation is trying to hide another crime against the defenders of Ukraine and the civilian population behind an information campaign … Russia is spreading [fake news] about the alleged shelling of the kindergarten by the United Forces.” Referring to the “multiple shelling incidents” reported earlier by the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), Pavlyuk said. All this was done to provoke the armed forces to retaliate and accuse them of genocide. Instead, our armed Forces abide by the Minsk agreements, and respond only after all means of ceasefire through the OSCE and the SCCC have been exhausted, when the lives of servicemen are threatened.” Ukraine’s ministry of defence says it has recorded 60 ceasefire violations by separatists in the Donbas region over the past 24 hours, with one soldier injured, according to its ministry of defence. A recent update published on the ministry’s website reads: The Russian occupation forces continue to ignore the agreements reached on July 22, 2020 within the Tripartite Contact Group. During the past 24 hours, on February 17, the armed forces of the Russian Federation recorded 60 violations of the ceasefire, 43 of which using weapons prohibited by the Minsk agreements.” On Thursday morning, Russian-backed separatists launched an intense artillery barrage across the line of control with Ukrainian forces, shelling a nursery school and injuring three people, in what western leaders said was a “false flag operation”. Russia’s defence ministry claims to have withdrawn several infantry units from Crimea. The tanks are said to have returned to their bases in the regions of Dagestan and Chechnya after completing drills in Crimea. In recent days Russia has claimed to have withdrawn troops from Ukraine’s borders, even broadcasting videos of retreating infantries. However, western leaders have cast doubt on these assertions. US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, reiterated that there was no evidence it was pulling out any troops, telling a recent UN security council meeting that he believes Russia is preparing an invasion “in the coming days”. The Interfax news agency cited a statement from Russia’s defence ministry: Transportation of tanks and armoured tracked vehicles is carried out by rail over a distance of about one thousand kilometres. Separately, Interfax cited the ministry as saying that a train loaded with tanks has departed an undisclosed location to deliver them back to their base in the Nizhny Novgorod province. Global leaders are travelling to the southern German city to hold talks on the crisis in Ukraine. In attendance will be the US secretary of state, Antony Blinken and vice-president, Kamala Harris, along with the German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, the UK foreign secretary, Liz Truss, and Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy. UN chief Antonio Guterres, EU Commission head Ursula von der Leyen and Nato chief Jens Stoltenberg will also be there. The foreign ministers of the Group of Seven (G7) nations are set to speak at length over the four-day conference, discussing efforts to get Russia to de-escalate and ways to strengthen European security. Germany’s foreign minister, Annalena Baerbock, has released a statement ahead of the Munich security conference that begins today. She criticises Russia for its “cold war demands” and for declining to attend the meeting. Baerbock said in a statement: With an unprecedented deployment of troops on the border with Ukraine and cold war demands, Russia is challenging fundamental principles of the European peace order. I am travelling to Munich today to discuss how we can still counter the logic of threats of violence and military escalation with the logic of dialogue. It is a loss that Russia is not taking advantage of this opportunity.” Moscow needs to show “serious steps towards de-escalation”, she added. Russia has offered an explanation as to why it expelled deputy US ambassador to Moscow, Bartle Gorman, earlier this week. The decision was made in response to the expulsion of the minister-counselor of the Russian embassy in Washington, the Russian foreign ministry said in a statement. Spokesperson Maria Zakharova said: The American diplomat was indeed ordered to leave Russia, but strictly in response to the unreasonable expulsion of the minister-counsellor of our embassy in Washington, despite his status as a leading official. Moreover, the State Department defiantly ignored our appeal with a request to extend his stay at least until the arrival of the ‘replacement’. As a result, he was forced to leave without a replacement, which aggravated the already critical shortage of personnel in the Russian diplomatic mission, formed as a result of the ‘visa war’ unleashed by the Americans.” At the time, the US embassy called the expulsion an “escalatory step” but Zakharova claimed that “it was the American side that initiated the next exchange of expulsions in September 2021, demanding the departure of 55 Russian diplomats and administrative and technical employees”. DCM Gorman was the second-most senior official at the US embassy in Moscow. Hello it’s Samantha Lock with you as we take a look at all the latest live news on the Ukraine crisis. Let’s jump in with a summary of the key events overnight. US secretary of state Antony Blinken is to meet the Russian foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, next week, “provided there is no further Russian invasion of Ukraine” according to the US state department. Blinken earlier told a UN security council meeting that the crisis in Ukraine was a “moment of peril for the lives and safety of millions of people”. US president Joe Biden will also host a call on Friday with Nato allies to discuss the Ukraine crisis, a White House official has confirmed. Russian-backed rebels in eastern Ukraine have accused Kyiv government forces of shelling a village with artillery on Friday, the Interfax news agency is reporting. Similar accounts emerged on Thursday in operations that western leaders described as “false flag” operations. Global leaders are preparing to meet in Germany for Friday’s Munich security conference. Attendees include Blinken and vice-president, Kamala Harris, along with the German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, the UK foreign secretary, Liz Truss, and Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy. Germany’s foreign minister, Annalena Baerbock, has criticised Russia for its “cold war demands” and for declining to attend the Munich meeting. The US Senate has voted in a rare bipartisan moment late on Thursday to send a show of support for an independent Ukraine whilst condemning Russian aggression, the Associated Press reported. Western leaders accused Moscow of attempting to stage a pretext for war. The US president, Joe Biden, said he believed an attack would happen in “the next several days” and that a false-flag operation was underway.Western Australia has reported its highest number of daily Covid cases since the pandemic began, while New South Wales, Victoria, Queensland, South Australia and Tasmania recorded a total of 45 Covid-19 deaths on Saturday. WA reported 257 new infections, a day after the premier, Mark McGowan, announced the state would reopen its border to triple-vaccinated arrivals from interstate on 3 March. Five new travel-related cases were also reported, taking WA’s number of active infections to 877. Victoria recorded 20 new virus deaths on Saturday, as well as 6,820 new infections. There were 48,420 total active Covid cases and 365 patients in hospital, of whom 55 were being treated in intensive care and 13 were on ventilators. NSW reported 12 deaths and 7,615 new coronavirus cases. Some 1,297 Covid patients remained in hospitals across the state, with 81 of them requiring intensive care and 40 in need of ventilation. There were another 10 deaths in Queensland together with 4,919 cases. The state’s chief health officer, Dr John Gerrard, said the fatalities involved people aged in their 50s to 90s and four of them were residents in aged care facilities. There were 414 coronavirus patients in hospitals across Queensland, a small rise on the previous 24 hours. Of those, 31 were in intensive care, down from 33. South Australia reported two Covid-related deaths along with 1,336 new cases. There were 182 people in hospital, including 12 people in intensive care. Tasmania recorded one additional fatality, a man in his 60s who was being treated for pneumonia and tested positive to Covid the day before he died, and 585 new cases. The ACT recorded 355 new infections. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The WA premier has said he will spend a week in hotel quarantine on his return to the state to avoid perceptions he will personally benefit from the timing of the state’s border reopening. McGowan is due to fly to Sydney next Thursday to prepare to give evidence in the federal court defamation action launched against him by Clive Palmer. He is expected to appear in court between 26 and 28 February, meaning his quarantine period upon returning to WA will coincide with the border coming down. “It is a coincidence that, when I return, the border will come down a couple of days later,” he said. “It’s a coincidence I am unable to avoid. But I’ll be doing seven days of quarantine. “I’ll be working from a hotel room, doing the full seven days, just so there can be no argument that somehow this was put in place to benefit myself.” The government’s modelling has suggested WA’s caseload will peak at the end of March at around 10,000 daily infections, almost 500 hospitalisations and four deaths. An official announcement on the easing of restrictions in Queensland is likely next week. The state currently has mandatory quarantine for virus cases and isolation for close contracts. Face masks are mandatory indoors and double vaccination is required for venues such as cafes and bars, cinemas and sports stadiums. Victoria is expected to welcome the first cohort of unvaccinated international travellers to its newly built $200m quarantine hub within days. The Victorian Quarantine Hub, which will replace hotels and become the state’s only quarantine site from April, will officially open to residents on Monday. The police minister, Lisa Neville, and the Covid-19 Quarantine Victoria commissioner, Emma Cassar, toured the facility, which is located at Mickleham in Melbourne’s north, on Saturday. Cassar said the hub’s open-air setting would “eliminate” many of the challenges hotel quarantine posed. The site can accommodate up to 1,000 residents at any one time with standalone cabins allowing for constant fresh air flow, individual ventilation systems and CCTV monitoring. Residents of NSW, Victoria and the ACT enjoyed their first night back on the dancefloor on Friday night, with some jurisdictions scrapping most QR check-in requirements and density limits. The AI Group chief executive, Innes Willox, has said bringing Covid rules together Australia-wide should be a top priority for the next national cabinet meeting, due to be held in the second week of March. But health experts are warning some restrictions may need to be reintroduced in the lead-up to winter. The University of Melbourne epidemiologist Tony Blakely welcomed the eased restrictions on Channel Seven but warned new variants of the virus could emerge in the next few months.The ravens are back and displaying. A blue-sky morning, frost on the ground, and they arrow in from the west, returning from Ravenopolis, the huge forest roost behind Malltraeth Bay (formerly their home was in Siliwen woods between Roman Camp and Afon Menai). Rock walls amplify the creak of wings as they rise to a ramshackle nest above Allt Ddu quarry. For days they’ve been flying back and forth to oak woods opposite, fetching sticks and heather stems, weaving them in to shore up their nest’s tottering structure. Derek Ratcliffe notes that the raven “is generally believed to pair for life”, and considers 25-30 to be their potential maximum age. These two may well be the ones to which I could approach within yards at the top of my back garden years ago. They became used to my presence, conversed with me, tolerated me nearby. Each morning at my front door, I’d hold out food (my son ate meat, so there’d be bacon rind, pork fat, chicken skin as well as toast crusts) and call them. One or both would soon appear, swooping down with hissing pinions to snatch the proffered scraps. I loved these birds, imitated their speech, seemed to be understood. Their strangely irised brown eyes met and held mine. After seven years I moved away, but offered advice on how to keep the relationship going. Their aerobatic displays have always been something to wonder at. Ravens are spectacular flyers, particularly now during display. They breed early. An old Welsh gnomic verse tells of red throats in the ravens’ nest by the end of February. That’s at the early end of the spectrum, but by mid-March there are often eggs hatched and parent birds feeding young. That this coincides with the start of lambing is crucial. The birds fly to the nest with strips of sheep’s afterbirth trailing from their massive bills. The young develop fast on this nutrient-rich diet. By late May the quarry resounds with clamour of flying lessons – another generation of these wary, sagacious birds fledged and flown! On this clear winter morning I called out to the parents. “Kronk, kronk,” comes the response, harsh and resonant across the still air. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryIt is 8am on a Friday and I am walking around Bury, Greater Manchester, looking for toothpaste. The immediate area is unpromising: an overpass in one direction, an underpass in the other, and no shops in sight. My phone dings in my pocket. It’s a text from my wife that reads, “In case you were feeling guilty”, and is accompanied by a photo of a brand-new hairbrush. Yes, I packed our only hairbrush, forcing her to buy another, and no, I don’t feel guilty. The previous day I had looked at my hair in the mirror and decided mine was the greater need. She’s lucky I didn’t take the toothpaste; it had certainly been my intention. I find a chemist on an otherwise deserted corner, buy some toothpaste and stomp back to the hotel as an icy rain begins to fall. Several weeks of rehearsal have reminded me what it’s like to be in a band, but I’d forgotten what it’s like to be on tour. There are moments of apprehension and of adulation, but they are brief compared with everything else: the setting up and breaking down, the loading out and loading in, the waiting around, the endless getting ready. “Move back,” I say, in the dressing room half an hour before showtime. “I need to set this up.” The accordion player looks at me with concern. “You’re gonna iron now?” he says. “I have to,” I say, “the shirt’s a mess.” The iron is empty. I motion for a bottle of water from the table. “It’s not distilled,” says the accordion player. “I don’t care,” I say, filling the iron. “This is how I roll.” The next morning we sit drinking coffee in the hotel breakfast area. “When are we leaving?” I say. “Wheels turning, 11 o’clock,” says the fiddle player. This is the expression we always use, to convey a sense of urgency where there is none: even if we left at 12, nobody would be ready for us at our destination. We have nothing but time. On the road north I speak briefly to my wife. “Yeah, it was good,” I say. “I got told off by an audience member for talking about local politics from the stage, and I left my phone charger behind, but otherwise good.” “Where are you tonight?” she says. “Newcastle,” I say. At breakfast at the Travelodge the next morning, we sit surrounded by a large stag weekend party: a dozen young gentlemen wearing T-shirts bearing an image of the groom’s smiling face photoshopped onto the head of a cartoon penis, a pair of hairy testicles dangling beneath. “Where can I get one of those?” says the guitarist. “They’re not for sale,” says a groomsman. Wheels begin turning at 10am. Once again we arrive at our destination long before we are required. I find myself outside a restaurant, scrolling through alternating five-star and one-star reviews. Depending on who one chooses to believe, this is either the best or worst establishment in Yorkshire. The fiddle player rings me from the venue, just down the road. “What do you think?” he says. “Some describe it as ‘shocking’,” I say. “Others as ‘the perfect meal’.” “Hmm,” he says. “Food unpleasant, staff sarcastic,” I say. “But also delicious, friendly and Covid-safe.” “Shall I ask the venue to recommend somewhere?” he says. “Please,” I say. Despite our being early, the extra hours somehow get used up. By the time we’ve finished setting up and sound-checking, it is once again dangerously close to the point where they let everybody in. The opportunity for a nap never materialises. Our brief moment on stage arrives and disappears. Afterwards, a contingent of us sit in my hotel room, drinking red wine, eating pulverised crisps and pointing out each other’s mistakes. Suddenly it’s 10am again, and wheels are turning. I ring my wife on the journey south. “It was good,” I say. “I mentioned nothing about local politics.” “Well done,” she says. “I left an ironed shirt in a hotel closet in Newcastle,” I say. “But all in all, a success.” “So where are you now?” she says. “Watford Gap,” I say. “Already?” she says. “Yeah,” I say. “I’ll be home in, like, an hour.” “Oh,” she says. “I wasn’t expecting that. I’m not really ready for you.” I think: no one ever is.Market vendors sat on the ground next to mountains of carrots, beetroots, radishes and onions. What struck me about this Moroccan market, however, wasn’t just the sheer scale of these piles of fresh vegetables, but the fact that they all had their green tops still. Bushy-tail-like carrot tops outshone and complemented the vivid colour of the carrots themselves, beetroot leaves were perky and reminded me of ruby chard, and the radish greens were crisp and appetising. Seeing all this abundance made it all too clear that this was fresh, nutritious food that’s often stripped from the plant and discarded, and not even saved for animal feed or composting into the soil. Especially once you learn that the tops and even the stalks can be whizzed up, so long as they are finely cut before blending to avoid any stringy, fibrous pieces ruining your root top pesto or salsa. Carrot top pesto and kohlrabi salad My sister in-law Clea Relly’s zero-waste practices are an inspiration. She’s always got a yummy pot of carrot top pesto in the fridge, on hand to use with pasta, as a dip or in sandwiches. Lots of nuts or parmesan are essential, and help give it a creamy texture. And always use no more than 50% carrot tops, or the pesto will be too bitter. In this recipe, I use kohlrabi tops, but basil, parsley or other herbs or leafy greens work just as well. Just pick whatever you’ve got that needs using up. Wash carrot tops in plenty of fresh water, to remove any soil and sand. Shake dry, then cut out any very thick woody stalks before preparing. Make double the recipe if you, too, fancy having your batch in the fridge to use throughout the week. Serves 4 For the pesto 25g carrot tops, plus a few extra to garnish 25g kohlrabi tops or herbs such as parsley or basil (leaves and stalks) 1 small garlic clove, peeled and finely chopped 1 heaped tsp hazelnuts, or breadcrumbs, plus 1 shelled hazelnut, to serve 1 tbsp nutritional yeast or grated parmesan ¼ unwaxed lemon, zested and juiced 110ml extra-virgin olive oil, plus a little extra to loosen, if need be For the salad 150g carrots 1 small kohlrabi First make the pesto. Finely chop the cleaned carrot tops and kohlrabi leaves (or herbs, including the stalks). Put the chopped greens in a food processor with the garlic clove, hazelnuts or breadcrumbs, nutritional yeast or parmesan, the lemon zest and juice, and the olive oil. Pulse-blend until the mix is a rough but even texture (add more oil to loosen, if necessary). Use at once, or keep in a clean, sealed jar in the fridge for up to a week. To make the salad, peel the carrots and kohlrabi, then cut into ribbons. Put in a bowl with all the pesto, and toss to coat. Transfer the salad to a plate, garnish with a few extra whole carrot tops, finely grate the whole hazelnut over the top and serve, perhaps drizzled with more good olive oil.Rhys on Kate What were you hoping for? A lovely evening, getting to know someone, good food, great company. First impressions? A very smiley, happy lady. No awkwardness at all. What did you talk about? No stone was left unturned. Baking. Broken ovens. Family. Running. Flying trapeze. Boxing. How a comedian’s brain works. How easily we both cry at films and TV. And sleeping habits. Any awkward moments? I made a mess with an appetiser – I lost my tenuous chopstick grip on it. She was kind enough not to mention it. Good table manners? Brilliant. She decided early doors that chopsticks weren’t the way for her – I wish I’d gone with that, too. Best thing about Kate? How interested and engaged with everything she was. Would you introduce her to your friends? Yes – especially the flying trapeze group, as I think she’d enjoy that. Describe Kate in three words? Warm, engaging, driven. What do you think she made of you? I honestly have no idea. I would hope that she found me to be at least entertaining and interesting company! Did you go on somewhere? Only the tube. She’s a very early riser and I had a long journey back to Oxford. And … did you kiss? No. If you could change one thing about the evening what would it be? The conversation on the tube back was ludicrously difficult, between the noise and masks. I feel that it all ended rather oddly. Marks out of 10? 8.5 Would you meet again? Happily so. If we ever did I suspect it would be at a parkrun, though she’d be ahead of me all the way around! Kate on Rhys What were you hoping for? A good time and, if nothing else, a great story for the grandchildren. First impressions? Not my usual type. What did you talk about? The pronunciation of Llanelli. Our love of A-level maths. How Holiday Inns are better than Travelodges. And why pets should always have human names. Any awkward moments? Not until the end on the underground. Conversations on noisy London tubes were hard work even before face masks. Good table manners? Impeccable. He always ensured my water glass was full, and mastered the chopsticks (unlike me). Best thing about Rhys? A great storyteller and has a kind laugh. Would you introduce him to your friends? Not as a romantic interest, but maybe when I drag them to one of his shows. Describe Rhys in three words? Intriguing, genuine, magic. What do you think he made of you? Overexcitable, easygoing, not ready to settle down. Did you go on somewhere? We got as far as Oxford Circus, at which point we said our goodbyes. And … did you kiss? No. It never felt like the evening was heading in that direction. If you could change one thing about the evening what would it be? He didn’t show me any magic tricks. Marks out of 10? 7 Would you meet again? Probably not “meet” again, but I told him I’d come to his magic show – and I’m a woman of my word. Kate and Rhys ate at Nanban, London SW9. Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.comPaul Sinha’s TV Showdown 9.40pm, ITV Calling all telly-heads: this comedy quizshow, which first launched during last year’s lockdown, is back to test your TV trivia. Paul Sinha – AKA star of The Chase and all-round genius – is on quizmaster duties once again, with actor Fay Ripley and comedian Rob Beckett returning as team captains. Tonight they are joined by Katherine Ryan, Denise Lewis, Gregg Wallace and Big Zuu – who, surely, must know a thing or two about television between them. Hollie Richardson Ant &amp; Dec’s Saturday Night Takeaway 7pm, ITV Fresh from introducing their big money gameshow Limitless Win, Ant and Dec return with the format that has always worked hugely well for them. In tonight’s Takeaway, all the usual ingredients: Stephen Mulhern helms Ant v Dec, and a chance for a live audience member to win items from the adverts. Plus, the pair pull a welcome prank on newbie farmer Jeremy Clarkson. HR Pointless Celebrities 7.40pm, BBC One An edition all about family, the competing celebrity pairings are: father and son David and James Acaster, partnered commentators Steve Cram and Allison Curbishley, dad and stepdaughter Chris Packham and Megan McCubbin, plus sporty siblings Anyika and Iffy Onuora. Graeme Virtue Wondrous Wales 8pm, Channel 4 There’s no time like a miserable February for a summertime safari through Wales. In this delightful tour, we meet workers in three national parks, from Snowdonia to the Brecon Beacons. There’s lots to see, but it’s impossible not to fall for the residents of Cardigan Bay – Britain’s biggest population of bottlenose dolphins. Henry Wong Stevie Wonder at the BBC 8.30pm, BBC Two The Beeb goes big on celebrating Stevie Wonder tonight, airing his 1995 studio concert A Night of Wonder and 2008’s Live at Last show at the O2. First up, though, he’s getting some “at the BBC” treatment – like all the musical greats do. Expect archived performances of classics such as Love’s in Need of Love Today, Superstitious and, of course, I Just Called to Say I Love You. HR The Promise 9pm, BBC Four The compelling, bleak French crime drama continues to patiently unfurl across two connected timelines. At times, Sarah (Sofia Essaïdi) seems doomed to walk the same troubled and obsessive path as that of her detective father Pierre (Olivier Marchal) a couple of decades previously. Tonight, she fights to stay on the case of the missing girls. Phil Harrison Film choices Kimi 12.40pm, 8pm, Sky Cinema Premiere Steven Soderbergh’s lean, gripping Hitchcockian thriller stars Zoë Kravitz as Angela, a “voice stream interpreter” for an Alexa-style virtual assistant called Kimi. She has become trapped in her (salary-inappropriate) apartment with agoraphobia, as trauma from an assault is exacerbated by Covid lockdowns. But after hearing what she thinks is a murder she pushes herself to go outside to solve the “crime”. Rear Window and The Conversation are clear touchstones but that doesn’t detract from the film’s pleasures. Simon Wardell Kes 9.05pm, Talking Pictures TV A classic of British social realism, Ken Loach’s 1969 drama also has a large dose of symbolism in its story of a poor boy and his wild bird. David Bradley’s put-upon working-class teenager Billy is looking at a dismal future stuck on his Barnsley estate, but training a baby kestrel offers him an imaginative freedom unavailable in his school life or at home. The ritual humiliations of a PE lesson and canings by the headmaster show how education without empathy can destroy lives, but a glimpse of hope is offered by the natural world. SW Live sport Premier League Football: West Ham v Newcastle United 11.30am, BT Sport 1 At the London Stadium. Followed by Manchester City v Tottenham Hotspur at 5pm on Sky Sports Main Event. Premiership Rugby Union: Bath v Leicester Tigers 2.30pm, BT Sport 2 From the Recreation Ground. Boxing: Amir Khan v Kell Brook Sat, 6pm, Sky Sports Box Office A welterweight bout between rivals Khan (pictured above) and Brook at the Manchester Arena.For Black employees at Tesla’s flagship California plant, coming into work could mean being harassed, bullied by a supervisor or finding racist graffiti sprayed on factory walls. That’s according to a new lawsuit filed by California’s Department of Fair Employment and Housing (DFEH), which alleges that Black workers in the company’s Fremont factory experienced “rampant racism” that the company left “unchecked for years”. In the suit, filed on 9 February in an Alameda county court in California, the agency says Black workers reported they were subjected to racist slurs and drawings and were assigned the most physically demanding jobs. “Workers referred to the factory as the ‘slaveship’ or ‘the plantation’, where defendants’ production leads ‘crack the whip’,” the agency said in the complaint. “Tesla has continued to deflect and evade responsibility,” the lawsuit adds. “While it claims to not tolerate racial harassment or discrimination at its factories, Tesla’s investigations of complaints are not compliant with law.” Allegations of racial discrimination at Tesla’s US facilities aren’t new. The company has been hit with several discrimination lawsuits from employees over similar allegations in recent years. But filed by a government agency, the new suit may have far wider implications. “When a single worker sues Tesla, the company may be motivated to sweep the allegations under the rug. But here, the potential for actual, systemic change is much greater,” said Veena Dubal, labor law professor at the University of California, Hastings College of the Law. Tesla has called the lawsuit “misguided” in a public blog post, noting that it focuses on alleged misconduct that took place between 2015 and 2019, but that in more recent years the DFEH has dismissed dozens of individual discrimination complaints against the company. The company said it does not tolerate harassment and has disciplined and fired workers who engaged in misconduct. “A narrative spun by the DFEH and a handful of plaintiff firms to generate publicity is not factual proof,” Tesla said. The company, which has disbanded its media relations department, did not respond to additional requests for comment. The case is just the latest spat between the carmaker and US regulators. “At a time when manufacturing jobs are leaving California, the DFEH has decided to sue Tesla instead of constructively working with us,” the company said in its blogpost. Earlier this week, Tesla CEO Elon Musk accused federal regulators of unfairly targeting Tesla, saying in a recent filing that the Securities and Exchange Commission has engaged in “outsized efforts” to monitor the company that “seem calculated to chill its exercise” of free speech. The claims The claims center around allegations in Tesla’s Fremont factory in the San Francisco Bay Area. Black workers at the facility were subjected to “offensive racial harassing conduct so severe and pervasive that it created a hostile work environment”, according to the 39-page complaint from DFEH. Many workers reported derogatory comments came directly from their superiors, the agency writes. One Black worker reported hearing racial slurs as often as 50-100 times a day, being called the “N-word”, and “hood rats”, according to the complaint. Other workers told of racist graffiti found in factory common areas, including swastikas, KKK, the N-word, and other racist writing that Tesla did not remove for months at a time, according to the suit. Black workers reported being assigned difficult, menial jobs in segregated areas of the factory known as “the dark side”, DFEH also says, and are less likely to be promoted to management positions. “For many Black workers, the stress from the severe and pervasive racial harassment, the risk of a physical altercation and escalation with harassers, the blatant discrimination, the disproportionately severe discipline, and the futility of complaining, made the working conditions so intolerable that they resigned,” the complaint says. Years of complaints The complaint also alleges Tesla has been ignoring “years of complaints from Black workers”. “These numerous complaints by Black and/or African American workers about racial harassment, racial discrimination, and retaliation lodged over a span of almost a decade have been futile,” the lawsuit reads. A diversity report published by Tesla in December 2020 showed employees identifying as Black and African American make up 10% of its US workforce, but only 4% of employees at director level. Employees who identified as Hispanic and Latino employees make up 22% of the total workforce, but represent only 4% of employees at the director level and above. According to the DFEH complaint, Tesla’s human resources department is “understaffed and inadequately trained”, leading to a failure to address complaints by workers. In 2020, the company had one HR professional for every 740 employees, DFEH said. “One Black worker stated that immediately after she complained about race harassment, [Tesla] human resources official texted her harasser, who was also her supervisor, about her complaint against him,” the complaint says. Lawsuits pile up Last week’s filing is just the latest in a number of discrimination lawsuits to hit what has become the world’s most valuable automaker. A federal jury in October awarded $137m to Owen Diaz, an employee at the Fremont plant in 2015 and 2016 who said managers ignored his complaints about repeated racial harassment including slurs and swastikas scrawled on bathroom walls. A judge in that case is considering Tesla’s bid for a new trial or to lower the award, which is one of the largest in a discrimination lawsuit by a single worker. In December, six female plaintiffs working in plants across the US alleged that they experienced physical assaults, harassment, and catcalling at Tesla facilities. Another female employee made similar claims in a lawsuit filed in November. “The through line for all of these lawsuits is the systemic nature of the harassment and discrimination in Tesla’s workplace,” said attorney David A Lowe, a partner at the firm representing the women. “The extent of the complaints show that it is a widespread, egregious problem – it’s clearly not just a couple of bad apples.” The company is also still fighting a lawsuit filed in 2017 by Marcus Vaughn, yet another employee at the same Fremont factory who alleged he was repeatedly called the “N-word” by managers and co-workers. Vaughn also claims he was fired for “not having a positive attitude” when he brought complaints about the treatment to HR. A judge in 2018 rejected Tesla’s bid to force Vaughn’s case into arbitration. Tesla has also moved to force the recent sexual harassment case into arbitration, a motion that will be ruled on in coming weeks. Tesla has denied wrongdoing in all cases, and has said it has implemented various policies in recent years to prevent racist conduct and punish it when it does occur. “Our company has more than 33,000 employees, with over 10,000 in the Fremont factory alone, so it is not humanly possible to stop all bad conduct, but we will do our best to make it as close to zero as possible,” Tesla said regarding the case filed by Vaughn. Why this is different While DFEH’s suit may not be the first discrimination suit filed against Tesla, it may be the most consequential, said Dubal, the labor law professor. That’s because the agency is not bound by agreements most Tesla employees have signed to bring legal claims in arbitration rather than court. “While an individual suing may be sent to arbitration, the state will not be. This means that this lawsuit can change the alleged pattern and practice of discrimination,” said Dubal. The department can also seek the same kind of relief as workers who file lawsuits, including court orders barring future discrimination and money damages. Such penalties can be significant: in December, gaming company Riot Games agreed to pay $100m to settle a sex discrimination lawsuit by the agency. Tesla is accused of violating the Fair Employment and Housing Act and the California Equal Pay Act, and could face fines of millions of dollars in addition to enforced changes to internal policies. The company may also be required to provide back pay to employees who say they were unfairly compensated for their work due to discrimination. The odds do not look good for Tesla, said Dubal. State agencies have “limited resources” and typically only take on cases where “there is very clear evidence” of wrongdoing and they are “very likely to win”, she said. “There are many issues with racial discrimination in Silicon Valley – from executive suites to the factory workers,” she said. “This shows state enforcement agencies are listening to what people are experiencing and going after these companies.” Reuters contributed to this report.Going Out: Cinema A Bread Factory: Parts One &amp; Two Out now A battle between grassroots culture and a corporate impression of it plays out in the fictional upstate New York town of Checkford, in Patrick Wang’s new two-part avant-garde epic. Both parts are on release now, alongside a retrospective of his other work to date. The Real Charlie Chaplin Out now The talented documentarians Peter Middleton and James Spinney, who last graced the big screen with their sensational Notes on Blindness, are back with an exploration of the life of Charlie Chaplin. It uses beautifully restored archival material to explore the lighter and darker sides of one of the world’s most famous men. Here Before Out now Starring Andrea Riseborough, this directorial debut from Stacey Gregg explores grief and obsession through the lens of a woman, Laura, who is still mourning the loss of a young child. Laura begins to perceive eerie, perhaps supernatural, connections between her late daughter and Megan, the girl next door. Dog Out now A shaggy dog story in every sense, and one that harks back to the days of wholesome Disney live-action animal yarns, this canine odd-couple movie stars Channing Tatum as a former army ranger tasked with returning a recalcitrant Belgian shepherd called Lulu to her former owner’s family. Catherine Bray * * * Going out: Gigs Sinéad Harnett 20 February to 28 February; tour starts Glasgow After honing her craft collaborating with dance acts such as Disclosure, Ryan Hemsworth and Rudimental, singer-songwriter Harnett (above) has blossomed into one of the UK’s best R&amp;B vocalists. Her recent album Ready Is Always Too Late, which will be showcased on this delayed tour, was one of 2021’s slowburn success stories. Michael Cragg The Lumineers 24 February to 4 March; tour starts Nottingham New Jersey indie-folk stalwarts the Lumineers have built a pretty solid career around their breakthrough debut single, 2012’s ubiquitous, thigh-slapping Ho Hey, scoring three top 10 albums in the UK alone. This tour of cavernous arenas is in support of January’s sun-dappled Brightside album. MC Scottish National Jazz Orchestra With Joe Locke &amp; Kenny Washington Dundee, 24 February; Edinburgh, 25 February Saxophonist Tommy Smith’s Scottish National Jazz Orchestra, one of the great international big band hosts US star guests Kenny Washington (vocals) and Joe Locke (vibraphone) on this Pop! Rock! Soul! programme, putting multi-horn jazz clout behind classic pop hits by Stevie Wonder, the Beatles, Steely Dan and more. John Fordham Uproar Cardiff, 25 February, then touring The Welsh new-music ensemble tour a programme of premieres. There are first performances of Guto Pryderi Puw’s Popping Candy, Joseph Davies’s Collider and Carlijn Metselaar’s Forest Bathing, before two works new to Wales: Unsuk Chin’s Gougalon and Du Yun’s fierce, cataclysmic Impeccable Quake. Andrew Clements * * * Going Out: Art Louise Bourgeois Hayward Gallery, London, to 15 May This long-lived super-artist brought the art movements of her youth kicking and screaming (if you are scared of spiders) into the 21st century. Bourgeois grew up in the France of Jean Cocteau and later collaborated with Tracey Emin. This show (above) focuses on her use of fabrics in her late works. Surrealism Beyond Borders Tate Modern, London, 24 February to 29 August The surrealist movement was started by Parisian poets after the first world war but grew to inspire artists in Spain, Belgium, Britain and – as this exhibition shows – all over the world. This is a diverse collection of dreams and nightmares from Egypt to Mexico and beyond. Surrealism flourishes wherever life seems a bit … surreal. Eric Ravilious The Arc, Winchester, to 15 May During the surrealist era in the 1930s, British artists mixed its quirky freedom with homegrown romanticism. Ravilious, who died in the second world war, expressed this gentle style in everything from watercolours to Wedgwood pottery designs. His England is a white horse on a hillside seen from a train. A Century of the Artist’s Studio Whitechapel Gallery, London, to 29 May In the early 20th century, Matisse made his studio one of his main subjects and his abstract visions put studio life at the heart of modernism. The caves where artists make their magic have been richly mythologised ever since. Picasso, Lisa Brice, Walead Beshty, Kerry James Marshall and more hang out here. Jonathan Jones * * * Going Out: Stage The Collaboration Young Vic theatre, London, to 2 April Kwame Kwei-Armah directs the world premiere of Anthony McCarten’s intense new drama about artists Warhol and Basquiat, in 80s New York. Starring Paul Bettany and Jeremy Pope. 71 Coltman Street Hull Truck theatre, to 12 March Comic maestro Richard Bean (One Man, Two Guvnors) has written a new play to celebrate Hull Truck’s 50th anniversary – and it’s all about how this popular theatre first began. Miriam Gillinson Josh Widdicombe Crewe, 19 February; touring to 30 May Devotees of his twice-weekly Parenting Hell podcast might imagine there is no Widdicombe musing – however trivial – they haven’t been privy to, but he’ll have doubtless kept back the cream of the bewildered-at-modern-life observational crop for this Covid-delayed nationwide tour. Rachel Aroesti Firedance New theatre, Peterborough, 22 February; touring to 25 March Strictly Come Dancing faves Karen Hauer and Gorka Márquez resume their UK-wide Firedance tour, two years after it was shut down thanks to you know what. Unlike other Strictly spin-offs, there’s no chat, just pure passion-fuelled performance in the story of two rival Latin dancers coming face to face in the ballroom. Lyndsey Winship * * * Staying In: Streaming Frayed Sky Max/Now TV, Wednesday This frenetic, late 80s-set comedy-drama from Perrier-nominated standup Sarah Kendall returns to chronicle the exploits of an Australian housewife with a very large fringe who ricochets between a life of luxury in London and a far less salubrious existence down under. Vikings: Valhalla Netflix, Friday The sequel to the long-running Canadian drama may feature questing, kingdoms and endless sword fights, but this is no fantasy epic. Instead, think of it as a pec-heavy history lesson: characters include real figures such as explorer Leif Erikson and Norwegian king Harald Hardrada. Cat Burglar Netflix, Tuesday Having already experimented with interactive storytelling in the Black Mirror episode Bandersnatch, Charlie Brooker returns to multiple choice with this cartoon for kids. Co-created with the BoJack Horseman team and executed with a headily nostalgic Looney Tunes-style aesthetic, there’s plenty to keep adults interested too. Billy Connolly Does … Gold, Thursday Filmed at the standup luminary’s Florida home, this autobiographical series merges archive footage with Connolly’s own reflections on his 50-year career. Not, of course, in a dull chronological fashion – instead each episode is organised around a theme, with the opener focusing on tales of wild debauchery. RA * * * Staying In: Games Total War: Warhammer 3 Out now More large-scale dark-fantasy strategy warfare (above) from a long-established series that’s as popular now as ever. Martha Is Dead Out Thur, PC. Xbox, PlayStation An unusual, unsettling thriller game set against the backdrop of 1940s Tuscany, mixing the real-world horrors of war and loss with the supernatural. Elden Ring Out Fri, PC, Xbox, PlayStation 4/5 This is likely to be one of the year’s best games: an uncompromising yet inviting fantasy collaboration between the Dark Souls creators and George RR Martin. Keza MacDonald * * * Staying In: Albums Metronomy – Small World Out now After six albums of slippery arch-pop, Joseph Mount et al (above) return with a pared-back collection of songs exploring nature, simple pleasures and reconnecting with what’s important. Lead single It’s Good to Be Back harnesses a sliver of that old playful side, but with a stronger beating heart underneath. Beach House – Once Twice Melody Out now On their eighth album, US dream-pop pioneers Victoria Legrand and Alex Scally have crafted an 18-track album, handily split into four sections. Chapters one to three started emerging last November, allowing fans time to sit with songs whose elegant grandeur unfurls slowly and purposefully. Kanye West – Donda 2 Out 22 February Given the long delays to West’s 10th album, Donda, perhaps we should take the mooted release date of this sequel with a hefty pinch of salt. Executive produced by Future, the album is rumoured to feature A$AP Rocky, the Game, Travis Scott and, more disappointingly, Marilyn Manson. Josef Salvat – Islands Out now While Australian-born, Paris-based Josef Salvat (below) has made two albums of sophisticated, melancholy pop, the independently-released Islands aims for all-caps fun. Out go the ballads and in comes Blinding Lights-esque sugar-rush synthpop (I’m Sorry), strutting sex-positive anthems (Promiscuity) and a new more-is-more carefree attitude (The Drum). MC * * * Staying In: Brain food Life Kit Podcast Podcasts claiming to improve your life are a dime a dozen but this NPR offering tackles some genuinely intriguing (and niche) topics with nuance and accessibility. Find out how to be more creative and how to face your money woes. Modernist Journals Project Online This month marks the centenary of the publication of James Joyce’s Ulysses and on the Modernist Journals Project site you can read the landmark novel in its original serialised form, alongside other formative periodicals such as Blast and Crisis. Downfall: The Case Against Boeing Netflix, out now Not one for nervous flyers, this documentary by Rory Kennedy eloquently examines why two Boeing 747-Max aircraft fell from the sky in 2018 and 2019, killing 346 passengers and crew. A lesson in the tragedy of corporate greed. Ammar KaliaAs Britain emerges from the Omicron wave, ministers are thrashing out a “living safely with Covid” plan for England expected to be announced next week. The strategy should see freedoms expanded back towards pre-pandemic norms in an attempt to readjust people’s attitudes towards coronavirus. The decisions taken this weekend in Whitehall will have major repercussions for public health across the country. While vaccines have drastically blunted Covid hospitalisations and deaths, and restrictions came with significant downsides, lifting further measures is unlikely to come without a cost – particularly for those in vulnerable groups. Here we take a look at what could change, and the potential implications: Testing Free home-delivered lateral flow tests (LFTs) for all are likely to be scrapped, possibly within weeks. Ministers are divided over when the tests, designed for people who do not have Covid symptoms, should be wound down – with “hawks” pushing for a reigning in of billions of pounds in public spending while “doves” believe mass surveillance of the virus should continue. Discussions are also under way about when over the next month advice should be rescinded for people in schools and universities to get tested twice a week. Those with Covid symptoms may be moved off PCR tests, which are also likely to cease being free at some point in March, and on to LFTs. About 1.3 million of the country’s most vulnerable people will probably continue to get free access to tests. Some scientists have raised concerns at the proposals, pointing out that reducing PCR testing may compromise the UK’s capacity to spot and monitor new variants. They also worry about the availability of LFTs being reduced because of their importance for detecting Covid outbreaks and letting people manage the risk of spreading the virus to vulnerable contacts. “If testing is not free, people won’t do it,” said Dr Julian Tang, a clinical virologist at the University of Leicester, adding that would mean relying on hospital tests and so-called “sentinel testing networks” to track the virus, as is the case for flu. Tang said he believed the virus is likely to evolve to become milder, but added: “On the way, there may be the occasional more virulent variant that causes more hospitalisation briefly before dying out – as we have seen with Beta, Gamma, Lambda, Mu variants.” Isolating Johnson announced in his final Commons appearance before recess that the legal requirement for anyone with Covid to isolate was expected to end a month earlier than the planned date of 24 March. Contact tracing will also likely be scaled back, along with an end to “support payments” worth £500 for low-income workers who would struggle to afford missing work by isolating. According to a paper from behavioural scientists advising the government, withdrawing testing and making isolation voluntary might give some the message it is acceptable to socialise with others despite being infected or having symptoms. The scientists warned that removing restrictions would disproportionately impact vulnerable sections of the population such as those in precarious employment. While Downing Street has stressed “we would never recommend anyone goes to work when they have an infectious disease”, this may not have much effect: that advice is often unheeded. Prof Susan Michie, director of the UCL Centre for Behaviour Change and part of the writing group for the paper, said: “We need to change our whole culture to be more oriented to health and safety, with presenteeism at work disapproved of and people told by employers to stay at home if unwell or likely to be infectious.” Though a surge in cases may not be as alarming as it once was, experts warn that the high prevalence of Covid means an uptick could see hospitalisations quickly reach levels seen over the festive period, putting more pressure on the NHS when waiting lists are already at a record high. Vaccines Driving up the level of jabs administered to help increase the population’s immunity will remain a key priority for the government. So far, around a third of people over the age of 12 have still not had a Covid booster. According to the UK Health Security Agency, protection against death in over-50s was about 60% 25 weeks past the second vaccine dose, while two weeks after a booster dose it was about 95%. Two jabs offered 25-35% protection against hospitalisation after 25 weeks, compared with about 75% 10 to 14 weeks after a Pfizer booster. However the World Health Organization has warned that offering further boosters of the original Covid jabs is not a “viable strategy” against new variants. Instead, it has stressed the importance of developing vaccines that do a better job at preventing transmission, and which elicit a broad, long-lasting immune response. Experts are divided about the best route to take when it comes to vaccinations, not least because of a lack of data on the benefits of repeated mRNA boosters. Ministers are also understood to be keen to help make more use of antiviral treatments – currently available to about 1.3 million people – to help treat those who catch Covid and limit the risk of severe illness developing. Travel While most of the toughest travel restrictions have already been scrapped, the currently empty “red list” will remain in reserve should ministers need to use it again to redirect all arrivals from a particular country into hotel quarantine. For now, unvaccinated people will continue to need to continue to take a Covid test before they travel to England and another within two days of arrival. The passenger locator form will remain mandatory, but be “simplified” and could be scrapped later in the year. Dr Michael Head, senior research fellow in global health at Southampton University, said the success of vaccines in reducing both symptomatic infection and onward transmission has been pivotal. Masks Since plan B was scrapped in England a month ago, masks have returned to being optional rather than mandatory on most public transport and in shops. Some services, such as Transport for London, still require face coverings to be worn. Ministers are still discussing what should happen in healthcare settings like hospitals and care homes, the last remaining places where masks are mandatory. Michie said that for masks, as with other measures, removing legal requirements wrongly signalled that the risk was not great or that the measures were not effective enough. “The extent to which they will be retained will depend on the messaging from government and other institutions,” she said. Shielding The government ended shielding advice for people previously considered to be clinically extremely vulnerable in September 2021. Further specialist advice for those people, which included suggestions such as asking home visitors to wear face coverings and avoiding enclosed crowded space, also looks set to be withdrawn. Baroness Brinton, a Liberal Democrat peer who is clinically extremely vulnerable, said she was “utterly astonished” that the reported change had received little publicity. “It’s all part of the prime minister’s tactic of pretending the pandemic’s over, while making no mention of the millions of clinically vulnerable people who will suffer as a result,” she told the i.Sausage rolls instead of toilet rolls? Sponge scourers instead of Victoria sponge cake? These are some of the strangest substitutions shoppers have received in their online grocery orders, according to research from consumer group Which? that found two in five of those polled had received unusual replacement items in their supermarket delivery. One bemused customer received cooking oil in place of milk, while another had hoped to dine on breaded fish fillets but ended up with a tub of Ben and Jerry’s Phish Food ice-cream. Other unexpected items in the bagging area included a box of eggs instead of Cadbury Creme Eggs, while another disappointed shopper had a good excuse not to clean the house after the Domestos cleaning product they had ordered was exchanged for orange squash. Strange substitutions often arise when supermarket pickers – people who select items for online orders – receive a computer-generated prompt on their handheld scanner if the customer has chosen a product that is not available. These suggestions are not always suitable, so the retail worker often has to manually override it, which can be time-consuming when they are trying to meet tight targets. “While product substitutions in your online shopping can sometimes be genuinely helpful, our research has shown that they can also be downright ridiculous,” said Ele Clark, retail editor at Which?. Customers can reject substitutions when their delivery arrives or opt out of receiving replacement items, Clark said. Some of the swaps may be amusing – who wants to do DIY with duck paste instead of duct tape? Or dine on dog food instead of breadsticks? But shoppers with dietary requirements or food intolerances said it was no laughing matter. Vegan and vegetarian customers said they sometimes received meat or dairy instead of plant-based alternatives, while one shopper with a gluten intolerance was not impressed when their gluten-free flour was exchanged for regular self-raising. The discount supermarket Aldi was the most likely to provide substitutions to customers placing click-and-collect orders, Which? found, with nearly half of shoppers (49%) receiving replacement products in their most recent shop. Customers from all of the UK’s largest supermarkets that offer online shopping – including Sainsbury’s, Tesco, Asda, Morrisons and Ocado – reported receiving substitutions in their most recent orders. Many product substitutions leave shoppers disappointed and forced to make last-minute changes to their dinner plans. Nevertheless, occasionally customers strike lucky. One shopper said they had received three £60 bottles of whisky in place of three of the £25-per-bottle version they had ordered.We’re going to wrap things up for the day. Here are today’s key events: NSW, Victoria, Queensland, South Australia and Tasmania recorded a total of 45 Covid-related deaths. Western Australia recorded its highest number of daily Covid-19 cases for the pandemic, with 257 local infections. The former Australian of the year Grace Tame has written an open letter regarding the publication this week of an old photo of her near a bong. Tame wrote that publication of the photo let her down as an individual but even more so as an advocate for survivors of child sexual abuse. The NSW government announced a jobs package to support workers affected by the closure of coal-fired power stations in the state. The state’s treasurer, Matt Kean, says the investment in clean industries will create 3,700 jobs. Thanks for joining us and we’ll see you again tomorrow. Victorians aged 18 and over will be able to access the Covid-19 vaccine Novavax through selected state-run centres as well as GPs and pharmacies from Monday, the state’s health minister, Martin Foley, says. The vaccine will be available through more than 400 general practices and community pharmacies across the state, as well as the Royal Exhibition Building in Carlton, Sandown racecourse in Springvale, Sunshine hospital in St Albans, the former Ford factory in Geelong and the McIntosh Centre in Shepparton. Pop-up vaccination clinics will offer the vaccine over coming weeks in parts of Melbourne where there has been strong interest in Novavax. The Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation recommends the Novavax vaccine be given in two doses at least three weeks apart. Novavax is not currently approved for use as a third dose or for children. It can be used with another approved Covid-19 vaccine as either a first or second dose. An update on the byelection count in the former NSW premier Gladys Berejiklian’s seat of Willoughby: Firefighters are battling a scrub fire in suburban Hobart, AAP reports: Tasmanian fire crews including aerial water bombers are fighting to contain a blaze in suburban Hobart. A ‘watch and act’ warning was in place on Saturday afternoon for several streets in the suburb of Dynnyrne due to the vegetation fire which briefly reached the emergency warning level. “The fire is expected to be difficult to control,” the Tasmania Fire Service said. Several tankers, pumpers and multiple aircraft have been mobilised to fight the blaze. “Take action now to protect yourself, your family, and your home,” the TFS advised. “If you are not prepared for a bushfire, be ready to leave for a safer place.” The West Australian premier, Mark McGowan, is set to cop a week in hotel quarantine to avoid perceptions he will personally benefit from the timing of Western Australia’s border reopening, AAP reports. McGowan, who says the reopening date is locked in, is due to fly to Sydney next Thursday to prepare to give evidence in the federal court defamation action launched against him by Clive Palmer. He is expected to appear in court between 26 and 28 February, meaning his quarantine period upon returning to WA will coincide with the border coming down. Anyone isolating in WA under the current travel restrictions will be free to depart from 3 March regardless of whether they have served the full seven days. But the premier says he will commit to a week in isolation regardless. “It is a coincidence that when I return, the border will come down a couple of days later. It’s a coincidence I am unable to avoid,” he told reporters on Friday. “But I’ll be doing seven days of quarantine. I’ll be working from a hotel room, doing the full seven days, just so there can be no argument that somehow this was put in place to benefit myself.” Western Australia has reported its highest number of daily Covid-19 infections. The state recorded 257 local infections to 8pm on Friday and five travel-related infections. The state’s health service says there are currently no Covid-related hospitalisations. That’s it from me today, thanks for reading. Lisa Cox is back to take you through the afternoon. I missed this late yesterday, just in case you were already wondering whether the Novak Djokovic saga would continue next Australian Open. AAP has also filed this update on the Covid situation in South Australia: South Australia has reported another two Covid-19 related deaths along with 1,336 new cases. SA Health says a woman in her 70s and a man in his 60s have died with the virus. Their deaths take the toll since the start of the pandemic to 166. There are 13,585 active cases in SA with 182 people in hospital, including 12 people in intensive care. Four people are on ventilators. Saturday’s figures continue SA’s run of consistent case numbers. New infections have remained between 1,000 and 2,000 each day for more than three weeks, after dipping below 2,000 on January 27. The daily case tally during the current outbreak peaked at 5,679 on January 14. Some 8,867 people received a PCR test in SA during the latest testing period, a 1.7 per cent decrease on the previous 24 hours. Of the results returned, 1,004 PCR tests were positive, while 332 positive rapid antigen test results were reported. We have mentioned a few times today that it is the 80th anniversary of the bombing of Darwin, but I have neglected (until now) to direct you to this wonderful photo gallery: The former Australian of the Year, Grace Tame, has published an open letter regarding the publication earlier this week of a photo of her near a bong. I will only post the start, as it’s reasonably lengthy (I am referring to the letter but this also applies to the bong): The effectiveness of the Covid vaccine remains high in the first two months after receiving a booster, and then begins to wane, a report published by the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has found, providing insight into how immunity against the virus fares after a third shot. The CDC report says that during the Omicron-predominant period, vaccine effectiveness against emergency department visits and hospitalisation was 87% and 91%, respectively, in the two months after a third dose. By the fourth month after a booster dose, this decreased to 66% and 78% respectively, which is still strong protection. By comparison, Australian data suggests influenza vaccination is associated with a 31% reduction in influenza-related deaths, though this changes depending on influenza strain and vaccine. More on that story here: First official day of the SA election campaign, and we already have a funding announcement, via AAP: A $160 million deep maintenance and modification facility for high-tech military aircraft will be constructed in South Australia. The state’s Liberal government on Saturday announced it would fund the purpose-built Boeing 737 facility, to be constructed next to the Edinburgh RAAF base about 30 kilometres north of Adelaide. It is expected to be fully operational in 2025, with construction to begin in mid-2023. Simon Birmingham, the federal finance minister and South Australian senator, said it will allow deep maintenance of 14 P-8A Poseidon aircraft to occur in Australia rather than the United States. The facility will also service six RAAF E-7A Wedgetail early warning and control aircraft, which will be relocated from Queensland. Mr Birmingham said 200 jobs will be created during construction and more than 120 long-term skilled employees will be needed to provide ongoing maintenance work. Air Commodore Ken Millar said Boeing 737 aircraft would be inducted for maintenance in the middle of the year, with work to be undertaken in a 1970s hangar. “Unfortunately, the aircraft doesn’t fit in those hangars, and the tail is going to hang out the back and we have to enclose that,” he told reporters. “There’s also not enough of them, so we do need state-of-the art facilities long term.” Mr Birmingham said the facility was another vote of confidence in South Australia’s booming defence industry. Another “Voices of” candidate has entered the fray: the former chief executive of Sustainability Victoria, Claire Ferres Miles, will contest the seat of Casey in Melbourne’s outer-east. The current member, Liberal MP and former speaker Tony Smith, is retiring. Aaron Violi, a former adviser to Senator James Paterson, has been preselected by the Liberal party. More on that story in The Age here. AAP has filed this piece on the ceremony marking 80 years since the bombing of Darwin: The bombing of Darwin serves as a painful reminder of the cost of war as Australia ‘watches with alarm’ at events in Ukraine, the Northern Territory’s chief minister says. Just before 10am on February 19, 1942, a formation of 188 Japanese aircraft descended on the Top End in the first of two raids that day. The bombing would go down in history as the largest single attack ever mounted on Australia, with more than 230 people killed and hundreds wounded. Veterans, descendants, army personnel and members of the public have gathered on a hot and humid Saturday to mark eight decades since the World War II bombing, in a ceremony at Darwin’s Cenotaph. Governor-General David Hurley, Prime Minister Scott Morrison, Opposition Leader Anthony Albanese, NT Chief Minister Michael Gunner and the Japanese Ambassador to Australia were among the dignitaries and politicians to attend. At 9.58am local time, sirens blared to mark the exact time air raid sirens began 80 years ago, with a re-enactment playing out and cannons shooting clouds of red smoke as military aircraft flew by. Speeches followed, with Mr Morrison remembering the day when more bombs dropped on ‘this small city of Darwin’ than had hit Pearl Harbour 10 weeks prior. ‘So here, in Australia’s only north-facing city, the city that engages with our neighbours and trades with the world, we remember what was, but we give thanks for the peace gifted to us,’ he said. Mr Gunner said the 80th anniversary served as a reminder of the ‘painful cost of war, wherever it plays out’ as he pointed to the unfolding conflict in Ukraine. ‘Whether hot or cold, war has been a constant part of every generation’s life for the last 80 years. Moments of enduring peace have been precious few,’ he said. ‘And the way things are around the world at the moment, that doesn’t look like changing. ‘We watch with alarm the events in Ukraine and, as ever, tensions in our own region.’ Both Mr Gunner and Darwin Mayor Kon Vatskalis called for February 19 to be made a national public holiday. ‘With great pride we celebrate Gallipoli, something that happened on the other side of the world. I think it is about time we celebrate something that happened in Australia,’ Mr Vatskalis said Prior to the memorial, one of the last surviving veterans, Brian Winspear, vividly recalled when the first bombs fell from the Darwin sky “just like confetti”. The 101-year-old, who attended the memorial, says he received shell splinters in his hand and eye during the raid as ‘bombs landed all around us’. Descendants of Darwin’s Larrakia people also took part and acknowledged how Indigenous and non-Indigenous worked side-by-side to contribute to the war effort. Elder Christine Fejo-King, whose her grandfather was in active service at Darwin Harbour, said the bombing traumatised the Indigenous community, A remembrance and reconciliation event was being held on the esplanade as part of Saturday’s commemoration, with the descendants of both Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal service personnel sharing stories. A message of apology from a Japanese man from Himeji to a Larrakia Traditional Owner was also being read. And here is that story I promised you earlier about the NSW government’s announcement of how it plans to support workers affected by coal-fired power station closures: On the situation in Ukraine, Albanese has called for Russia to “back off”. He says there is “no place for the intimidation that we have seen from Russia”. “We know that the ravages of war have real consequences, and the ravages of a war in the Ukraine, if Russia carries out a military intervention, will be devastating for the people of Ukraine.” “So I would say to Russia, it needs to respect Ukrainian sovereignty and it is to back off now.” Anthony Albanese has been speaking in the Northern Territory after a ceremony marking 80 years since the bombing of Darwin. He said comments by the government this week that have been called out by the Asio chief, Mike Burgess, were acts of desperation. “Scott Morrison is prepared to undermine the national interest to prop up a prime ministership that has never been about much more than extending beyond his own self-interest.” “Australia is united in terms of our national interest, both Labor and the Coalition have exactly the same policy when it comes to China, and if there is no national interest in the prime minister seeking to undermine that.” Good afternoon everyone. The NSW government has announced a promised jobs package for workers affected by coal-fired power station closures, following the announcement this week that closure of the Eraring power station in the Lake Macquarie region will be brought forward to 2025. The treasurer, Matt Kean, says it will create 3,700 jobs in clean industries, including 2,700 associated with construction of new transmission infrastructure and 1,000 through programs designed to support a local green manufacturing industry. We’ll have a longer story on that for you shortly but Kean says he wants to see a “manufacturing renaissance” to support the state’s transition to net zero greenhouse gas emissions. My colleague Lisa Cox is going to take the reins for a while, see you again later this afternoon. Here are the Covid numbers reported so far around Australia today: ACT Deaths: 0 Cases: 355 In hospital: 40 Northern Territory Deaths: 0 Cases: 835 In hospital: 127 NSW Deaths: 12 Cases: : 7,615 In hospital: 1,297 Queensland Deaths: 10 Cases: : 4,919 In hospital: 414 South Australia Deaths: 2 Cases: 1,336 In hospital: 182 Tasmania Deaths: 1 Cases: 585 In hospital: 12 Victoria Deaths: 20 Cases: : 6,280 In hospital: 365 AAP has filed this story after the prime minister, Scott Morrison, spoke in Darwin: Prime Minister Scott Morrison has indicated Australia won’t send troops to Ukraine in the event of an invasion by Russia but will provide practical assistance to allies. US President Joe Biden believes Russia’s Vladimir Putin has made a decision to invade Ukraine and will do so within weeks or days. Mr Morrison said an invasion is “regrettably inevitable”, with intelligence showing Russian troops have not been withdrawn from the border. “The pretence has been sought for an invasion,” Mr Morrison told reporters in Darwin on Saturday. “There is no pretence for an invasion into Ukraine. There is no justification for it. There is no provocation of it.” Mr Morrison said Australia would stand by its like-minded allies and would provide “support that is necessary”. “Australia has not been asked or nor would we be providing support through troops or anything of that nature,” he said. “We work with our allies and partners in many other ways, and we will seek to do that with the practical things that we can do to assist those efforts. “We have had such discussions with the UK prime minister and others about how we proceed along that basis.” Russia has released footage it claims shows a withdrawal of its troops from the border but the US believes there has been a ramp-up to between 169,000 and 190,000 troops, from 100,000 at the end of January. Late on Friday, Ukraine’s military intelligence said Russian special forces had planted explosives at social infrastructure facilities in Donetsk, and urged residents to stay at home. Mr Morrison described Russia’s threats against Ukraine as uninvited, unprovoked and unacceptable. “They cannot use the threat of war and invasion as a way of trying to leverage and negotiate other changes that they may be seeking,” he said. “This is not how free nations, democratic nations, nations in favour of peace, should behave. We have seen this before and we cannot allow it to stand. “[We] will always be proud to stand with others like the United States and Japan and so many others around the world, the friends in Europe and United Kingdom who have been prepared to call this out.” Trade Minister Dan Tehan earlier this week said Australia would enact strong economic sanctions against Russia should it invade. Last weekend, the federal government temporarily suspended its operations at the Australian Embassy in Ukraine’s capital Kyiv and evacuated diplomatic staff. AAP is updating us on plans for a hot vax summer autumn: Residents of NSW, Victoria and the ACT have enjoyed their first night back on the dance floor as the summer Covid-19 outbreak appears to subside. Health officials in the jurisdictions say cases have plateaued, with some also scrapping most QR check-in requirements and density limits. Indoor dancefloors reopened as part of a mass easing of restrictions on Friday, with the changes coming as calls grow for consistency in Covid restrictions across Australia. AI Group chief executive Innes Willox says bringing the myriad of rules together Australia-wide should be a top priority for the next national cabinet meeting, due to be held in the second week of March. Victoria recorded 20 new virus deaths on Saturday, as well as 6,820 fresh infections, while New South Wales reported 12 deaths and 7,615 new virus cases. Tasmania recorded one additional fatality, a man in his 60s who was being treated for pneumonia and tested positive to Covid-19 the day before he died, and 585 new cases. Health minister Greg Hunt on Friday said Australia had passed 53 million Covid-19 vaccines administered and more than 60 per cent of eligible people had received a booster. But health experts are warning some restrictions may need to be reintroduced in the lead-up to winter. University of Melbourne epidemiologist Tony Blakely welcomes the eased restrictions but warns new variants of the virus could emerge in the next few months. “It’s like a tabletop mountain. We’ve gone up the curve, we’re coming down, and as we come down, that’s the time you release these restrictions,” he told the Seven Network on Friday. “There will be some little bumps on the way into winter with extra infection happening amongst those people who weren’t infected in the first wave, and also some of us whose vaccine immunity wanes.” Thirty-six deaths were reported nationally on Friday including 15 in NSW, 14 in Victoria, six in Queensland and one in the Northern Territory, as well as 24,910 new cases nationwide. Western Australia has announced it will reopen its borders from March 3, bringing to an end almost 700 days of seclusion. Interstate travellers who are fully-vaccinated - including a third dose if eligible - will be able to travel without quarantining, although unvaccinated interstate travellers will remain locked out. Wonder whether anyone is going to bring up national security? The ACT has recorded 355 new Covid-19 cases, with 40 people in hospital including two in intensive care. Tasmania has recorded its 24th Covid death of the pandemic, with the ABC reporting that a man in his 60s who was being treated for pneumonia tested positive to Covid the day before he died. There are 414 people in hospital, the state’s chief health officer, Dr John Gerrard, says. He says those who died were aged between their 50s and their 90s, and that four of the deaths were among aged care residents. There are 1,507 cases among school-aged children, Gerrard says. Please note an earlier version of this post incorrectly stated the total daily case number. Hard to quell the excitement of knowing someone, somewhere, is about to get on a flight (or could already be on one!) that will eventually lead them to being the lucky first person staying inside this brand new quarantine facility (estimated to have cost about $200m). NSW Health has released an update on the Covid situation. It says that of the 12 deaths recorded today: One person was aged in their 50s, one person was in their 60s, two people were in their 70s, four people were in their 80s and four people were in their 90s. Older age is a significant risk factor for serious illness and death for Covid-19, particularly when combined with significant underlying health conditions. Two of these people were aged under 65. One person had received two doses of a Covid-19 vaccine and the other person was not vaccinated. They both had significant underlying health conditions. Of those aged 65 and over, one person had received three doses of a Covid-19 vaccine, eight people had received two doses and one person was not vaccinated. Two people were from western NSW, one person was from south-western Sydney, one person was from western Sydney, one person was from Sydney’s inner west, one person was from southern Sydney, one person was from south-eastern Sydney, one person was from the Central Coast, one person was from the south coast, one person was from the Wollongong area, one person was from the Port Macquarie area, and one person was from the Riverina. NSW Health expresses its sincere condolences to their loved ones. This brings the total number of Covid-19 related deaths in NSW since the beginning of the pandemic to 1,813. The update also included a breakdown by local health district of the 7,615 new cases reported on Saturday. Most of the cases reported today were in Hunter New England (1,092 cases), Western Sydney (903), and South Western Sydney (876) health districts. Funding has been announced for parts of South Australia damaged in recent floods, AAP reports: Three South Australian council areas will receive a further $19m in disaster recovery to help repair and reconstruct infrastructure damaged during recent severe weather. The Eyre Peninsula jurisdictions of Kimba, Franklin Harbour and Cleve will share the money after requesting further extraordinary assistance, particularly for road repair. Some places received more than 200mm of rain within 24 hours in January, with downpours and flooding widespread. Meteorologists described the deluge as a one-in-200-year weather event. The state government says it will also increase its level of assistance to individuals from an original 75% of the total cost under guidelines, to 90%. Meanwhile, repairs have been completed across 300km of rail line between Adelaide and Tarcoola, restoring freight routes through SA into both Western Australia and the Northern Territory. The Australian Rail Track Corporation says the repairs involved 100 staff working separate shifts around the clock for 24 days to restore 18 separate breaks. An interesting comment piece on the decision to appoint Alexander Downer to review the UK’s border force: A reminder that all our news about the unfolding situation in Ukraine can be found on this blog over here: Loved this read from Peter Hannam about driving from Sydney to Melbourne in an electric vehicle (especially when he overheard one frustrated EV owner at a charging station exclaim “let’s go back and get the fossil car”). Want to catch up on Covid news in NSW? AAP have you: NSW has posted a further 12 Covid-related fatalities and 7,615 new infections. Health authorities say 1,297 virus patients remain in hospitals across the state, with 81 of them currently requiring intensive care. Of the positive tests returned in the 24 hours to Saturday evening, 4,768 were collected using rapid antigen kits and 2,847 processed in labs. Meanwhile, NSW pubs and nightclubs have put a “terrible” few months in the rear-view mirror with patrons enjoying their first Friday since 2021 without Covid-19 restrictions. Mitchell Crum, the owner of inner-Sydney hotel the Lord Gladstone, says things went viral when he posted a Facebook event on Friday to celebrate restrictions easing. Graham Cordery says the “return to normal” at his Surry Hills live music venue the Soda Factory is also cause to rejoice. “I feel that there’s a real air of positivity,” he said. “Let’s just say it’s definitely about time they put [live music venues] on an equal footing with many, many other industries that are returning to normal.” Premier Dominic Perrottet announced of a number of Covid-19 restrictions would be rolled back on Friday, including QR code check-ins and the ban on singing and dancing in hospitality venues. Mr Perrottet said it had been a “very difficult two years”. “Many people have made enormous sacrifices but the efforts that have been made ... ensured we’ve seen downward pressure on our hospital system,” he said. Singing and dancing are allowed to resume in most settings, the two-metre density limit for indoor venues has been scrapped, and QR check-ins are only required for nightclubs and music festivals with more than 1000 patrons. The requirement to wear face masks will also cease in most settings next Friday. Research released on Friday showed NSW has been able to safely return children to classrooms. The National Centre for Immunisation Research and Surveillance has been tracking coronavirus transmission in schools in conjunction with Sydney University, NSW Health and the education department. The study was led by paediatric infectious disease specialist Archana Koirala, who says there was not a dramatic increase in transmission in school settings despite high numbers of exposures in the final term of 2021. Here is a little wrap on the Covid situation in Victoria from AAP: Victoria has reported another 6,280 Covid-19 infections and a further 20 people have died with the virus, as the state welcomes new freedoms. The new cases include 4214 from rapid antigen tests and 2066 from PCRs, the health department confirmed on Saturday, bringing active cases to 48,420. There are 365 patients in hospital with Covid-19, 14 fewer than on Friday. Of these, 55 are being treated in intensive care and 13 are on ventilators. More than 54% of Victorian adults have received three doses of a vaccine. The latest figures come after Victorians spent the night dancing at nightclubs and other venues, following the easing of restrictions. Indoor dance floors reopened at 6pm on Friday, while density limits at hospitality and entertainment venues were scrapped. QR code check-in requirements are no longer in place at retail venues or schools, but will remain in hospitality and entertainment settings. Premier Daniel Andrews flagged more changes, with the health minister to consider easing rules around masks and working from home. Mr Andrews said that update could come as early as next week. “We always said these measures wouldn’t be in place for a minute longer than they are needed,” he said. “With hospitalisation numbers decreasing and less pressure on our health system, now is a sensible time to make changes.” AAP reports that the body of a man who was swept out to sea while trying to rescue a fisherman has been found on a Gold Coast beach. Luqman Jubair, 35, went missing after he tried to help the fisherman who was knocked over by a wave on a beach in Miami about 6pm on Thursday. He was swept out past the breakers when he and two other men came to the aid of the man in trouble. The fisherman was safely brought back to shore, but Dr Jubair had not been seen since the rescue despite an extensive land, air and water search. On Saturday morning, Queensland Police said members of the public had found the 35-year-old man’s body in waters off Mermaid Beach overnight. Police will prepare a report for the coroner. Acting Chief Superintendent Rhys Wildman on Friday said police have been in contact with Dr Jubair’s family in Queensland and interstate. He said the two other men involved in the rescue and the fisherman are still coming to terms with the situation. “At the time they were focused very much on recovering the initial male, who was in some difficulty,” he said. “Whilst that person was recovered, obviously as the situation unfolded, the full realisation is now coming to light. “Obviously our thoughts are with them as well.” Liberal MP Andrew Hastie, the assistant minister for defence, claims Labor is worried about political attacks regarding national security because they know Anthony Albanese is the party’s most leftwing leader since Gough Whitlam. In his weekly email sent to his WA electorate late yesterday, Hastie, a former member of the elite SAS, referred to the increasing threat posed by China and Russia, and said: Australia is one of the oldest living experiments in ordered liberty. It has endured, despite many challenges over the past century. But only because the generations who went before us defended our way of life and preserved the institutions that make us a free people. Now it’s up to us ... This past week has seen a vigorous public debate on China policy. There have been a lot of words thrown around but what really matters in public life is what we do. The Morrison government has a strong record of defending our sovereignty and protecting Australia ... Labor can’t be trusted. They are weak on national security. Albo was part of the cabinet that cut Defence spending to its lowest level since 1938. I remember this clearly while I was serving with the 2nd Cavalry Regiment and SASR. That’s why they cry foul when we debate issues like our approach to China: they have a record that doesn’t stand up to scrutiny. They know Anthony Albanese is their most left-wing Labor leader since Gough Whitlam. We can’t risk his weak instincts and leadership with so many looming challenges to our liberty. As we have pointed out in a number of pieces in the past week or so, Labor has largely been aligned with the Coalition on issues regarding national security during this term of government, and experts believe attempts to divide the country along these lines could cause more harm than good. In this, the year of elections (federal, South Australia, Victoria), the Greens have made a somewhat interesting announcement regarding the state seat of Richmond, an inner city electorate the party thinks it can win. Richmond has been held since 1999 by Labor’s Richard Wynne, but he is retiring. The Greens have announced Gabrielle de Vietri, a former local mayor and current councillor, as their candidate: The NSW treasurer and energy minister, Matt Kean, is expected to make an announcement in about 40 minutes regarding “clean energy jobs and investment in response to Origin Energy’s announcement of the closure of Eraring Power Station”, according to his media alert. We have covered the closure extensively, including in this weekend feature I pointed you to earlier, but here’s one of our most recent pieces: In Victoria over the past week, this is how Covid hospitalisation and ICU numbers have tracked, starting with today’s figures and working backwards: 365 (55 in ICU); 451 (64), 401 (78), 397 (68), 441 (67), 465 (66), 465 (62). So in NSW over the past seven days, this is how hospitalisation and ICU numbers have tracked, starting with today’s figures and working backwards: 1297 (81 in ICU); 1381 (92); 1447 (92); 1478 (92); 1583 (96); 1649 (100) and 1614 (93). So basically there’s more than 300 fewer people in hospital and almost 20 fewer in ICU than at the worse time over the past week. The state now has more than 94% of people aged over 16 double-dosed. Victorian health authorities have reported 20 new deaths and 6,280 new Covid cases today. Researchers at DNA Zoo Australia have mapped the genome of the numbat for the first time. The milestone is notable in its own right, motivated by a desire to improve conservation efforts for the endangered termite-eating marsupial, which is now found only in small pockets of Western Australia. But in announcing the development last week, scientists also had a more extraordinary suggestion: that the numbat’s DNA could be used as a blueprint to bring its extinct cousin, the thylacine, back from the dead. The last known Tasmanian tiger died in 1936, but the apex predator – which once also roamed the Australian mainland and Kangaroo Island – continues to beguile and obsess even in extinction. You can read more on that story here: If you want to be primed for the impending South Australian election then feast upon this short preview from AAP: South Australia’s election campaign is about to officially get underway with the issuing of the writs for the March 19 poll. Premier Steven Marshall is expected to visit Government House on Saturday to kick off the election countdown which also puts his administration into caretaker mode. Candidate nominations will then open on Monday, while the last day for voters to ensure they’re on the electoral roll is February 25. Early voting will start on March 7. The South Australian Electoral Commission is expecting a significant rise in postal and pre-poll votes this year, partly due to issues surrounding the Covid-19 pandemic. But it has also assured voters that going to a polling booth will be safe with masks mandatory, along with social distancing and other hygiene measures. The commission recently released plans for those people who contract the virus or are forced into isolation immediately before polling day. They will be directed to collect a voting pack from designated virus testing sites or a site where rapid antigen tests are distributed. Those packs can then be returned by post. People forced into isolation between March 7 and March 17, will be able to apply for a postal vote in the usual way. Mr Marshall’s Liberal government is seeking to win a second term in office after a first term dominated by the pandemic. It currently holds 22 seats in the 47-seat House of Assembly to Labor’s 19. The remaining six are held by independents, although three of those were originally voted in as Liberals before leaving the party. How those independents fare and who they potentially support to form a government could be crucial to the result. The outcome of this year’s election is also clouded by a recent redistribution that has prompted a number of sitting MPs to switch seats after a significant change in boundaries. I have been following the murder trial of NT police officer Zachary Rolfe for the past two weeks and pulled this together about the key elements so far: This is a great feature from Lisa Cox about how the closure of coal-fired power stations impacts workers and the towns they live in. Here’s a few bits and pieces on politics around the site that are worth your attention. There’s Katharine Murphy’s weekend column; this piece from Christopher Knaus on the UAP candidate pictured in military uniform; Josh Butler detailing the Facebook spend from the Liberals on ads attacking Labor on national security; and Michael McGowan digging into the Liberals’ preselection spat. Good morning. Happy weekend! I’m Nino Bucci and it’s 19 February 2022. It has been a week for announcements about easing Covid restrictions, with the Western Australian premier, Mark McGowan, saying late on Friday that the state’s hard border will come down on 3 March, allowing the long-awaited resumption of quarantine-free travel. McGowan, who is due to fly to Sydney next Thursday to prepare to give evidence in the federal court defamation action launched against him by Clive Palmer, said he will spend a week in hotel quarantine upon returning to WA to avoid perceptions he will personally benefit from the timing of the border reopening. He is expected to appear in court between 26-28 February, meaning his quarantine period upon returning to WA will coincide with the border coming down. “It is a coincidence that, when I return, the border will come down a couple of days later. It’s a coincidence I am unable to avoid,” he told reporters. “But I’ll be doing seven days of quarantine. I’ll be working from a hotel room, doing the full seven days, just so there can be no argument that somehow this was put in place to benefit myself.” The ACT is also stepping back its Covid measures from last night and a return to offices is possible within weeks in New South Wales and Victoria. South Australia’s election campaign is about to officially get underway with the issuing of the writs for the 19 March poll. The premier, Steven Marshall, is expected to visit Government House today to kick off the election countdown which also puts his administration into caretaker mode. Candidate nominations will then open on Monday, while the last day for voters to ensure they are on the electoral roll is 25 February. All eyes will be on Ukraine, with Australian prime minister Scott Morrison saying on Friday he feared “the worst” after Russian artillery strikes were reported in a clear escalation in the conflict. And, after a fairly unedifying start to the year in Canberra, what developments can we expect in federal politics over the weekend? Let’s see if we can find some news shall we?Pay growth is picking up, official figures showed this week, but for key workers on the pandemic frontline the champagne is firmly on ice. The detail behind annual pay growth of 4.9% in December revealed the gulf between the size of awards being handed to public sector workers, and those in the private sector, boosted in part by swelling banker bonuses. At the headline level, private sector wage growth including bonuses picked up to 5.4% in December, more than double the 2.5% growth rate in the public sector, according to the Office for National Statistics. With inflation running at 5.4% in the same month – and expected to rise to more than 7% by April – the squeeze on incomes is already a reality for many of those keeping public services running in the most challenging conditions. Workers in the finance and insurance sector enjoyed annual wage growth, including bonuses, of 21.6% in December – quadruple the rate of inflation. Fuelled by a bumper bonus season in the City, the figure represents the biggest jump since January 2011. Excluding one-off awards, finance and insurance pay still rose at an inflation-beating 7%. Meanwhile, wage growth in real estate soared by more than 14%. In contrast, pay growth for health and social workers was below the rate of inflation at 4.5%. Progress on pay was worse still in public administration, at 2.1%, and was just 0.3% in the education sector. Pay in the arts, entertainment and recreation fell by 6.9% before inflation is even taken into account. “The good times may be back for the City. But it’s a different story for everyone else,” said Frances O’Grady, the general secretary of the TUC. “While banking executives coin it in, millions of families are suffering the worst squeeze on real wages in more than 200 years. At a time when ordinary people are being told to tighten their belts and not ask for a decent pay rise, there is no justification for these kind of bumper payouts.” NatWest was the first big UK bank to report its annual bonus pool on Friday, increasing it by 44% for 2021 to nearly £300m after returning to profit. Chief executive Alison Rose said the bank had shown “significant restraint” but had to pay fairly in a competitive market. London’s big four banks – HSBC, Barclays, Lloyds Banking Group and NatWest – are expected to pay bonuses totalling more than £4bn for 2021, and make profits of more than £34bn – the most since 2007 in the boom before the financial crisis. Official figures show that average weekly pay was still £1 below the 2008 peak in December 2020. Disposable incomes are expected to fall at the fastest rate this year since at least the early 1990s, while a study by the Institute for Fiscal Studies suggests the average UK worker will be about £13,000 a year worse off by the middle of the 2020s than if wages had grown at pre-2008 financial crisis rates. The figures come after the Bank of England governor, Andrew Bailey, called for workers to show restraint in the annual wage-setting process to prevent higher rates of inflation from becoming embedded. His comments drew a furious response from unions, as well as a rebuke from No 10 and the chairman of Tesco. Some economists question whether workers have the bargaining power to demand higher pay despite low levels of unemployment after lockdown, highlighting a sharp fall in trade union power in recent decades. Others say pay conditions are stronger than at any time for at least a decade. With tighter restrictions on workplace organisation and changes to the structure of the British economy, trade union membership has fallen sharply from a peak of about 13.2 million in 1979 to about 6.6 million, representing about a quarter of the workforce. “The idea of [inflation] getting embedded is for the birds,” said Danny Blanchflower, a former member of the Bank’s rate-setting monetary policy committee, who is critical of its current position. “The reason in the 1970s that it got embedded after oil prices rose was a huge rise in unionisation rates. The 70s were unique in that unionisation rates rose by 10 points around the world. What makes you think suddenly that’s the case now?” Some sectors with the worst staff shortages are recording higher rates of pay growth, according to economists at the jobs website Indeed, including for lorry drivers, chefs and construction workers. However, this pressure is not widespread. In one example of weaker than average pay growth, the supermarket chain Asda last week announced a sub-inflation deal to raise pay by 3.25% to £9.66 an hour, or £10.83 for employees in London. Asda said it would go further to £10.06 in April 2023 – a deal it argued “in the current environment provides reassurance for colleagues”. However, the supermarket could be forced into a rethink. Forecasts from the Low Pay Commission, which advises the government on the national living wage, suggest the legal pay floor could rise to £10.18 from 2023. The current rate of £8.91 is set to rise to £9.50 from April this year – a jump of 6.6% which had been expected to be inflation-busting until recently. Nadine Houghton, a national officer at the trade union GMB, said a lack of proper union recognition meant the firm could force staff to accept a pay deal below the industry average. Asda has an agreement with the Usdaw shop workers union for staff in Northern Ireland but does not allow for negotiations on pay with GMB in Great Britain. “Where workers have [unionisation] there is an opportunity to improve wages and everything else. Where they don’t – which is the case for pay and conditions at Asda – the cost of living is going to dramatically outstrip wages,” she said. Asda said it was the only supermarket to offer a bonus worth several hundred pounds a year on average, as part of a comprehensive benefits package. The lacklustre pay figures for the public sector come as unions push for an inflation-busting wage deal for the NHS to halt a rise in staff departing the health service after more than a decade of real-terms cuts for many employees. Christina McAnea, the general secretary of the Unison trade union, said a key lesson from the Covid-19 pandemic was that well-resourced, properly staffed services were essential. “It’s depressing, but not surprising, that City wages are way ahead of public sector pay in the race against rising prices,” she said. “Companies struggling to recruit are paying a wage premium to keep and attract staff. The government must find the cash so health, care, council, police and school employers can do the same.”A Guardian investigation into nickel mining and the electric vehicle industry has found evidence that a source of drinking water close to one of Indonesia’s largest nickel mines is contaminated with unsafe levels of hexavalent chromium (Cr6), the cancer-causing chemical more widely known for its role in the Erin Brockovich story and film. The investigation also found evidence suggesting elevated levels of lung infections among people living close to the mine. Recent years have seen a race between mining companies to gain control of the world’s largest nickel reserves in Indonesia. Nickel, an essential component in electric vehicle (EV) batteries, could bring transformational wealth to a country where Covid has pushed the number of people in poverty up to 10.19%. Yet people living on the remote Obi Island, which has recently become home to one of Indonesia’s largest nickel mines, just want clean and safe water. Unlike other minerals used to power EVs such as cobalt and lithium – which have been linked to environmental damage and human rights abuses –nickel’s supply chain has so far gone largely unscrutinised. The mining companies operational on Obi Island say their works pose no threat to local communities. Yet in the village of Kawasi, people are scared. One villager, Richard*, says that since the mine arrived the water has become dangerous to drink. “In the past, before there was a company, even though we lived without electricity, we were safe. Now we are afraid,” says Richard*. Water samples taken by the Guardian near Kawasi and tested at government-certified laboratories suggest high levels of contamination from hexavalent chromium (Cr6), a cancer-causing chemical. The villagers also claim that since the mine arrived, people have been falling sick. The Guardian was told by the village midwife clinic of more than 900 cases of potentially deadly acute respiratory infections (ARI) among the approximately 4,000 residents of Kawasi in 2020. More than half of the cases were reported to be in newborns or toddlers aged four and under. According to Indonesian health officials, the ARI prevalence in Kawasi was just under 20% in 2020, compared with a national average of 9%. Aside from the midwife clinic there was no active local health centre in the village when the Guardian visited. “The difference [since the mining started] is enormous. The beach was still clean, the sea was not muddy like this and not red yet. People still fished in front of their houses,” says a nurse who has lived in the village since 2009, before the mine started operating. “The trend of [higher] ARI cases began at the same time as [mining] exploration also began,” adds the nurse. “I keep thinking: is there any future for the children?” says Maria*, who grew up in the village. * * * Given its extreme remoteness, it is unsurprising few activists or journalists have visited Obi Island to talk to residents until now. From the capital, Jakarta, it takes a three-and-half hour flight, an overnight boat and another two hours at sea to reach Kawasi’s port. The plywood buildings and sporadic streets lights in Kawasi couldn’t feel more distant from glitzy city showrooms acclaiming fossil fuel-free travel. As you disembark you can hear the constant creak and crash of cranes as they distribute their loads around the busy mining operations. The $1bn site, owned by the Indonesia-based Harita Group and China’s Lygend Mining, digs and processes nickel for use in EV batteries. The Chinese battery component producer GEM has signed an agreement to purchase nickel from the company, PT Halmahera Persada Lygend. GEM supplies battery components to many of the world’s leading EV battery manufacturers, including Chinese-owned CATL, which controls about 30% of the global battery market. The ultimate beneficiaries are likely to be many of the most well-known EV brands, with nickel from these mines used to produce batteries that could end up in cars sold by Mercedes-Benz and Volkswagen (VW). Booming nickel prices and a “battery arms race” have seen a rush to develop mines but there are fears that regulatory oversight has failed to keep up with the pace of development. “They [the Indonesian government] are trying to remove red tape to make the industry more attractive for investment, but without proper environmental assessments, it could be risky given the way the industry is heading,” says Indonesian nickel mining expert Steven Brown. Holding mining companies and the supply chain to account for pollution is difficult, says Matthew Baird, an environmental lawyer based in south-east Asia, especially when there could be multiple sources for the contamination. “These big mining operations are very much in areas that are very inaccessible and where they are operating as a de facto local government ‘company town’,” he says. “Mining companies may blame other problems and that all may be correct, but because they are there, there is a likelihood they are contributing to the problem.” * * * Near the village of Kawasi, water samples collected by the Guardian from a fountain less than 200 metres from the mining site and tested at government-certified laboratories suggest high levels of contamination from carcinogenic Cr6: 60 parts per billion (ppb). The maximum contaminant level allowed by law in Indonesia is 50 ppb. Cr6 can cause liver damage, reproductive problems and developmental harm when ingested or inhaled. Long-term exposure through drinking water has also been linked to stomach cancer. Evidence has shown that Cr6 in drinking water can be a result of industrial processes. The fountain the Guardian’s samples were taken from comes out of rocks above Kawasi; villagers claim it is their only source of water for drinking, bathing and washing fruit and vegetables. “The impacts of this [type of] mining are persistent, long term and in some ways subtle. It’s not like a large catastrophic failure. These are Erin Brockovich long-term, persistent and subtle impacts that the regulatory system is not necessarily equipped to deal with,” says Baird. In response to questions from the Guardian, Halmahera Persada Lygend said ARI was common in developing countries, especially in tropical regions. It said the solution included adequate nutrition for children from the time they are in the womb, proper hygiene within homes and improved awareness through education. In response to the allegations of unsafe levels of Cr6, the company said tests it had conducted on Kawasi’s spring water from 2013 to 2021 showed that it met the water quality standards set by the government, with results of Cr6 content in the range of 5 to 40 ppb. It said its tests had showed there was no Cr6 discharge from its system or impact on the water quality of the Kawasi springs. Brown says mines in Indonesia are only required to check for chromium (Cr6 and Cr6+) once a month and are probably not yet fully aware of the risks. Halmahera Persada Lygend said that the positive and negative impacts of its projects had been assessed in an environmental impact analysis, which has been reviewed and approved by the government. It also said provincial and district environmental offices regularly conducted site inspections to review company operations and take samples for analysis if needed. Mercedes-Benz said it took the allegations seriously and was immediately contacting its direct supplier to clarify the issues raised, even though it does not buy nickel directly. VW was contacted for comment. * Names have been changed to protect identity Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:Questions 1 Who was Lord Alvanley’s fat friend? 2 In bony fish, what is the organ of buoyancy control? 3 What reached 29mph in the Rainhill Trials? 4 Where is the Skeleton Coast? 5 What dish was co-devised in 1953 by Constance Spry? 6 Who were the first non-Latin football team to win the European Cup? 7 Which jazz musician claimed to come from Saturn? 8 What is the world’s oldest writing system? What links: 9 Edward Woodward; Denzel Washington; Queen Latifah? 10 King of Spain; Figthing Irish; Platinum Jubbly? 11 Breslau; Danzig; Stettin; Königsberg; Memel? 12 In the Loge; The Tea; The Child’s Bath; Little Girl in a Blue Armchair? 13 Little; great white; cattle? 14 Clippy; Duke; Snoo; Tux; Wumpus? 15 Oliver Cromwell; Leo Amery; David Davis? Answers 1 Prince Regent (according to Beau Brummell’s insult). 2 Swim bladder (air/gas bladder). 3 Stephenson’s Rocket. 4 Atlantic coast of Namibia and Angola. 5 Coronation chicken. 6 Celtic FC (1967). 7 Sun Ra. 8 Cuneiform. 9 Played the Equalizer on film and TV. 10 Misspelt merchandise: Ashley Giles mug; Notre Dame stadium cup; Platinum Jubilee plate. 11 Former German cities: Wrocław, Gdańsk and Szczecin, Poland; Kaliningrad, Russia; Klaipėda, Lithuania. 12 Paintings by Mary Cassatt. 13 Egrets in Britain. 14 Technology mascots: Microsoft; Java; Reddit; Linux; Discord. 15 All said “In the name of God, go” in the Commons: to Rump parliament; to Neville Chamberlain; to Boris Johnson.The Duke of York’s legal battle with his accuser Virginia Giuffre, which he settled out of court this week, was characterised by a years-long series of damaging and unnecessary PR blunders, experts have said. His disastrous Newsnight interview, his ducking and diving to frustrate the serving of legal papers, and claims from “friends” that the infamous photograph of him with his arm around Giuffre’s waist was faked, all served to inflict further public opprobrium on the Queen’s second son, it was claimed. The aggressive way Andrew fought the case, casting aspersions on Giuffre’s character, also attracted harsh censure from victims’ groups in the era of #MeToo, leading to a “volte face” when, in a joint statement issued this week, he said he had “never intended to malign” her. Twelve years after he was photographed with the sex offender financier Jeffrey Epstein in New York’s Central Park, Andrew has been stripped of his patronages and titles. And though he has made no admission of liability and has repeatedly denied Guiffre’s allegations he had sex with her on three occasions when she was 17 and had been trafficked by Epstein, he has agreed to pay her an undisclosed sum, reportedly as high as £12m. “The Emily Maitlis Newsnight interview was like being in a comedy clown car with a lit cigarette driving into a fireworks factory,” said the PR agent Mark Borkowski. “I don’t believe anyone in the profession that I know would have advised him to do the Maitlis interview. “But he thought he could roll with it. He thought he had the charisma. And he thought that he had his own story. It’s an archetypal psychopathic reaction to the fact you are not accepting [the situation].” Andrew’s claims in the 2019 interview – that he was at a Pizza Express in Woking and that he had a condition that prevented him from sweating – were absolute gifts to social media, spawning hundreds of memes. His denial that he had thrown a birthday party for Epstein’s then girlfriend, and now also a convicted sex offender, Ghislaine Maxwell, insisting it was just a “straightforward shooting weekend”, showed how wide the chasm was between him and the public he was attempting to persuade. “He gave so many soundbites,” said Borkowski. Andrew should have looked to his mother for PR advice. The Queen’s statement that “recollections may vary” in response to claims made by Harry and Meghan in their Oprah interview was a masterclass “in what it said by saying so little”, said Borkowski. “And that is the art of dealing with a crisis.” Missing from Andrew’s Newsnight interview, and immediately seized on by commentators, was any acknowledgment of Epstein’s victims. It took the joint statement, made earlier this week, for him redress this by accepting that Giuffre had suffered “as an established victim of abuse”. Missing, too, was any expression of regret over his decades-long friendship with Epstein, who at the time the two were photographed had served 13 months for soliciting and procuring a minor for prostitution. Again, it took this week’s statement for Andrew to promise to “demonstrate his regret for his association with Epstein by supporting the fight against the evils of sex trafficking”. He did apologise in the interview, not for his relationship with Epstein but for its impact on the royal family. “We try to uphold the highest standards and practice,” he said, “and I let the side down, simple as that.” If he was guilty of anything, added the duke, it was of being “too honourable” in choosing to visit Epstein to break off their friendship in person. PR experts would hope in such crisis interviews their client would answer questions and address the facts put to them in a way that persuades viewers to interpret those facts in the way you want. A declaration that it’s “just not true” is not enough. “You have to be very certain about how the audience will look at your reactions to a negative comment. And I think another blunder he made was underestimating, not just the media, but … the actual public and … the power of social media,” said Borkowski. Given the out-of-court settlement agreed in principle, which has spared Andrew the ordeal of cross-examination on his private life before a jury, Maitlis said this week her interview “may be the only testimony” we will ever get directly from the duke. She is far from alone in now finding it difficult to marry his three words to her – “it didn’t happen” – with his decision to pay millions to a woman he has said he had no recollection of meeting. There are questions, too, over the aggressive tactics used by Andrew, especially in the #MeToo era. His apparent attempt to frustrate the serving of Giuffre’s legal papers did not play well. “It was unedifying, it looked ridiculous. But, more than a PR disaster, he was annoying the court,” Nick Goldstone, a lawyer at the disputes resolution firm Ince, said. Andrew’s defence document was “ludicrous in parts”, saying he was unable to answer questions such whether he had been habitually photographed at social events with Maxwell for lack of sufficient information, Goldstone added. Suggestions from “friends” of Andrew that the photograph of him with his arm around Giuffre’s waist was faked were “high risk”, especially as he did not have the original photograph. His claim of an inability to sweat, and the Pizza Express alibi, were ridiculed. Photographs were published allegedly showing him sweating on other occasions. His security team should have records of any Pizza Express visit – “so, produce those at the time you make the allegation”, Goldstone said. Andrew’s US legal team “could only play with the cards they were dealt” and on the instructions they received from their client, he said. And, by the time they took on the case, options for the prince were diminishing. The attacks on Giuffre’s character, accusing her of seeking a “payday” from Andrew, and attempts to introduce in to evidence a US tabloid story describing her as a “money-hungry sex kitten” who recruited young women for Epstein, have also been criticised. “He took an enormous decision to actually be aggressive. It’s different now, particularly when you are so behind the eight ball you’re snookered. And you come out fighting in the wrong way. His team did all the wrong things really really well,” said Borkowski. It backfired, and Andrew then had to say he did not intend to “malign” Giuffre. “A volte face,” said Goldstone. But perhaps the biggest blunder was not settling earlier, and only agreeing to after his attempts to have the case struck out failed, Goldstone said. Pinning hopes on Giuffre’s 2009 $500,000 secret settlement with Epstein was “going to be the trump card”. “But in my view, that didn’t have a hope of getting him out of this case.” Borkowski said: “The bottom line is, if you are representing somebody, or in particular if you are running a crisis campaign, you can give as much good advice as a PR person, but it’s whether the client, whether the person at the centre of the whirlwind, actually accepts it. And I think through all of this, this has been heavily laden with hubris. “I think I would have gone for the route of settlement, the route of arbitration. That was needed all the way down the line. There needed to be more jaw jaw, less war war.”Privacy laws that make it harder for the media to name individuals under criminal investigation could be rolled back as part of ministers’ plans to replace the Human Rights Act, government sources have suggested. The claim follows concerns raised by media outlets over this week’s landmark Bloomberg v ZXC supreme court ruling. Judges concluded that Bloomberg News was wrong to name a businessman facing a criminal investigation relating to his work activities because he had a reasonable expectation of privacy. The verdict makes it more difficult for the media to report that individuals are under criminal investigation if they have not been charged with any offence. John Micklethwait, the editor-in-chief of Bloomberg News, said the ruling meant Britain was “stumbling toward a system in which tabloids can still peek into celebrities’ bedrooms but serious journalists cannot report on potential wrongdoing at public companies by powerful people”. He said the ruling would benefit those able to afford enormous legal bills, rather than ordinary members of the public, adding: “The courts have now presented the powerful with a path to keep their names out of print for years … This right to privacy is only for those who can afford it; strangely enough, these often tend to be those who have the most to hide.” Ministers are reluctant to directly criticise judges but a government spokesperson said they were looking at the ruling. “A free press is one of the cornerstones of any democracy. The government recognises the vital role the media plays in holding people to account and shining a light on the issues which matter most. We will study the implications of the judgment carefully,” they said. Ministry of Justice sources pointed towards an ongoing consultation on replacing the existing Human Rights Act. The existing law, which was introduced by Tony Blair’s Labour government in 2000, is based on the European convention on human rights. Ministers want to replace it with a new British Bill of Rights as part of their post-Brexit policies – a move that has been criticised by many in the legal profession. A consultation document published at the end of last year states that ministers want to prioritise freedom of expression and “that courts should only grant relief impinging on it where there are exceptional reasons”. The document also stated it should not be left to judges to develop privacy law through case-by-case rulings and “there should be a presumption in favour of upholding the right to freedom of expression, subject to exceptional countervailing grounds, clearly spelt out by parliament”. As part of the Bloomberg case, the judges concluded that the businessman had a reasonable expectation that the details of the British regulator’s criminal investigation into him would not be made public unless he was charged. The Bloomberg verdict follows a similar ruling in a 2018 case involving the BBC and Cliff Richard, where the singer won substantial damages from the national broadcaster for invasion of privacy. The BBC had reported Richard was the subject of a police investigation into historical allegations that ultimately proved to be baseless and did not result in any criminal charge. Meghan, Duchess of Sussex, also won a privacy victory against the Mail on Sunday after it published a private letter she had sent her father. Micklethwait said his outlet had paid the price for such “tabloidish excesses” and warned serious investigations were being undermined by judges increasingly prioritising the right to privacy.Can I skip breakfast? “I think everyone should consider skipping breakfast as an experiment,” says Professor Tim Spector, author of the recently reissued Spoon-Fed: Why Almost Everything We’ve Been Told About Food Is Wrong. The question of whether breakfast is or isn’t good for us has been around for years – with the waters thoroughly muddied by research funded by breakfast cereal brands like Kellogg’s and Quakers. (You can guess what they concluded.) “We’ve been told, culturally – and via marketing – that we have to have it,” says Spector. But a 2020 US study from the National Institute of Aging suggests that intermittent fasting – which can mean skipping or postponing breakfast – may have health benefits. After spending time with a hunter-gatherer group in Tanzania, the Hadza, Spector is unconvinced about the need for breakfast: “I never saw anyone eating before about 10.30am, although they’d been up since dawn. They didn’t have a word for breakfast.” Spector’s advice? “Try skipping breakfast once or twice, just to see how you feel at lunchtime. Some people might lose energy, others might feel better. It is individual, but there are advantages: you’re getting a long overnight fast, which in the new science of restricted-time eating has been shown to be good for metabolism and probably for gut microbes as well.” Are oats good or bad? Despite the popularity of porridge oats, and their ability to tackle blood cholesterol, in recent years there has been concern from wellness bloggers about the phytic acid in oats and its apparent ability to bind with other nutrients and prevent us absorbing them. The theory is that you don’t get all of the calcium from the milk in your porridge, say, or the phosphorus in the oats themselves. But don’t expect a backlash anytime soon, says Guardian food writer Felicity Cloake. Oats have been a northern hemisphere staple for millennia and as Cloake says: “I think we would have noticed by now if everyone was dying of nutritional deficiencies.” For Spector, this is another example of our reductionist tendencies when it comes to foods – which we never consume in isolation: “Phytates do reduce absorption of nutrients, but the question is, do they do that enough to make it an unhealthy food? Are there other things in that food that are beneficial? If you only ate oats, it might be a problem. If you have a diverse, balanced diet, aiming to eat 30 plants and vegetables a week – not a problem.” He does think there are other issues with oats, though; chiefly that for him, and others who metabolise like him, oats can cause blood glucose spikes, unless he eats the unprocessed kind which have to be cooked for hours. “The other thing is that they have very high pesticide levels, because they’re sprayed much more than other crops.” Is it OK to drink coffee on an empty stomach? Spector’s research didn’t find anything harmful about having coffee or tea on an empty stomach. A 2020 study at the University of Bath suggested that ideally we’d drink coffee after breakfast, as it seems to have a negative effect on metabolic blood sugar control – meaning you get a spike from whatever you eat after drinking it, especially if you’ve had a bad night’s sleep. While a 2021 study by the University of Granada showed that about two coffees’ worth of caffeine may help us burn more fat when we exercise, an effect which is strongest in the morning. What about starting the day with warm water with lemon to cleanse our systems? “If you enjoy it, then have it, but water and lemon is not evidence-backed,” says registered dietitian Dr Sammie Gill. “It’s linked with words like ‘cleansing’ and ‘detoxifying’, but our liver and kidneys already do a very good job of removing anything the body doesn’t need or want.” Will I live for ever if I put kale in a blender every morning? Homemade smoothies can be a good way to up your plant intake, but they have downsides. Studies show that blending can speed up how the body absorbs naturally occurring sugars, causing the same metabolically unhelpful rises and falls as sugary drinks; they’re not great for tooth enamel; and when drunk at speed, won’t help us feel sated. What’s better for you – bacon or cereal? “Traditional breakfast cereals are ultra processed, however healthy they look on the packet,” says Spector, who is not a fan. “There’s so little to commend them: a combination of sugar and disassociated grains that have been melted, then pressurised and reshaped, with all the goodness taken out, and low-quality vitamins put back. It’s also true for things we regard as healthier, like muesli and granola.” Bacon, meanwhile, contains three times the amount of protein, but much more salt. The evidence is pretty incontrovertible that meats processed with nitrites – chemicals used to keep bacon, ham and salami pink, as well as to speed up the curing process – are carcinogenic, but they are still widely used. In theory, nitro-chemicals prevent botulism, but many pork producers now opt out of using them, including every single maker of Parma ham for the last 25 years, without an increase in botulism. For meat eaters, bacon will always win over bran flakes, so if you’re craving a butty, do your damnedest to find nitrite-free bacon. If you’ve got a fussy eater, is cereal better than nothing at all? For a lot of parents, cereal is the only thing their kids will eat in the morning. But, says Gill, “the type of breakfast cereal you choose matters – for growing children, it’s important that healthy habits are developed from a young age, and once they are introduced to high sugar cereals, it’s often difficult to get them to accept lower sugar options. Choosing a cereal for children can be really challenging – what you think looks like a healthy option may not be.” Oats, wheat biscuits, shredded wholewheat cereals or muesli (go for no added sugar or salt varieties) are good options, and adding chopped fruit, nuts, seeds and plain yoghurt will help create a more balanced breakfast. Ketchup, HP or no sauce at all? The best person to answer this is Cloake, whose next book is called Red Sauce, Brown Sauce: A British Breakfast Odyssey (out in June). “Almost everyone I spoke to in the UK had an opinion,” she says. “It felt as though brown sauce was more northern and ketchup was a bit of a newcomer, more southern and possibly more middle class. If I had to join a camp then I’d say brown sauce, with its spices, is the connoisseur’s choice. Ketchup just makes everything taste of ketchup. “But – and I feel like a bad British person for saying this – I much prefer English mustard in a bacon sandwich. And marmalade.” Sorry, what? “Think about it – ham is often glazed with mustard and honey. A friend introduced me to it, and it feels like Damascene moment every time I eat one.” Can I ‘go to work on an egg’? This was the idea of the 1950s Egg Marketing Board, and as such can’t be considered unbiased nutritional advice. They aren’t a bad idea, though. “Eggs are a source of protein, iron, vitamin A, vitamin B12 and iodine,” says Gill. In the battle of the milks/mylks/m*lks, what’s the best option? Milk is a minefield – there’s no clear answer. Cow’s milk produces at least three times as much greenhouse gas as any non-dairy milk; almond requires lots of water and is bad for bees; rice is water-intense and low in nutrients; coconut may contribute to deforestation, mono-culturisation and worker exploitation; and although soy seems better for health than previously thought, it is only sustainable if it’s not grown on land cleared from rainforests. Better options are oat, which is a cool-climate product and shouldn’t require massive land-use changes if demand increases (huge quantities of oats are already used in animal feed) – though it’s relatively low in protein. Hemp and pea, which grow in the northern hemisphere and are naturally rich in certain nutrients, or potato milk – the very new kid on the block – are good. A new potato milk, called Dug, is being launched in Waitrose this month, and claims to need 56 times less water than almond, as well as using half the land required to grow oats. The barista version works well in coffee, is creamy, doesn’t split and isn’t – unlike many plant milks – overpoweringly sweet. On its own (though maybe this is just me) it does have a very slight potato note, but you wouldn’t notice in something like porridge. Almost all big-brand plant-based milks contain acidity regulators, emulsifiers or stabilisers, consumption of which some scientists are beginning to link with poorer gut health. Whether you actually like any of the above in your morning brew, though, is an entirely different matter … Which countries do breakfast better than the British? Unlike our sweet, beige breakfasts, in many other countries the first meal of the day is as flavourful or spicy as any other, like Indian dal, roti and pickles. (There’s even some early evidence that adding more capsaicin via chillies to our diets might be good for gut health and help fight obesity, so perhaps we really should spice things up.) “We’ve got into a rut in this country, and it’s a very high-carbohydrate rut,” says Spector, whose favourite breakfasts are those served in Korean and Japanese hotels, featuring things like miso soup, beans, kimchi, rice or noodles, meat or fish and vegetable sides. “Many people – though not everybody – would be better off with meats, cheeses and egg, or fermented foods. Breakfast used to be just the leftovers from the evening meal the night before.” He would like to see us embrace variety to find our own nutritional sweet spots. “We should be a bit more experimental and see what suits us.” Can I just have toast every morning? You can, but it’s worth considering what sort of bread you toast, and what you put on it. “Some breads are better than others – sourdoughs and rye breads will give you much less sugar and are high in fibre,” says Spector. The world won’t end if you have jam on it, but it is “a massive sugar hit, so maybe have it with cheese instead,” he advises.Out-of-date IT systems are causing “chaos” inside the Foreign Office (FCDO) and undermining the government response to the Ukraine crisis, insiders have warned. Problems in the running of the department, which were laid out by a whistleblower in the aftermath of the Afghanistan withdrawal, were still causing “major issues” as the Ukraine crisis deepens, officials told the Guardian. They complained of delays and confusion caused by colleagues being on two separate security systems, meaning important emails were often missed and people were being forced to work on out-of-date briefings. Despite it being more than 500 days since the Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO) merged with the Department for International Development (DfID), the integration of staff from both teams was said to be “a mess”. A Whitehall source told the Guardian: “Numerous crises have been worsened because of it.” After the Taliban takeover of Afghanistan last August, the Foreign Office came under intense criticism for the way it handled the crisis, including from a former desk officer. Raphael Marshall alleged there was a litany of problems and said civil servants from DfID had been “appalled” by the “chaotic system” they inherited, with staff unable to use live documents together or shared inboxes. Civil servants told the Guardian that those from DfID and the FCO are still working on different types of computers with separate security systems, meaning they are often not compatible with each another. The tech issues were said to affect emails, video calls and the way teams could work on crucial briefings together. Staff complained that emails exchanged between those who previously worked for DfID and the FCO were routinely flagged as spam or not delivered. When virtual meetings were held, insiders said that if the invite came from someone who had worked in the FCO then those from DfID were not able to participate properly. The DfID staff could not join calls without being approved, and crucially often were unable to access files stored on their FCO counterparts’ system, leading to delays and confusion. The tech problems were said to be seriously hampering officials’ ability to work quickly during crises, like the feared invasion of Ukraine by Russian forces. “It’s so much effort to try and track people’s comments in briefing… It’s basically making an hour long job two hours, which is not the kind of time you have in these situations,” one FCDO insider said. Another told the Guardian that “colleagues routinely miss emails and feel that they’ve been overlooked”, which “causes chaos, especially in crisis points”. They were reluctant to divulge specific details about what operational impact on the Ukraine response the problems had had given security concerns, but spoke out due to their frustration that more than 530 days on from the departments’ merger, the issues were “still not fixed”. The officials also said FCO and DFID staff still use different human resources systems, meaning line managers who have staff from a department different from the one they came from struggle to sign off annual leave, complete reviews or approve overtime. Terms and conditions also have yet to be standardised, so there are still substantial pay disparities between people working at the same level who came from different departments. The recent ministerial reshuffle conducted by Boris Johnson had also caused problems in the Foreign Office, insiders claimed. They said the department felt short of a minister, with three ministers’ briefs beefed up and foreign secretary Liz Truss now responsible for the overall work of the Foreign Office, Brexit negotiations and the added responsibility of women and equalities. With much of Truss’s attention on Ukraine, one official lamented other urgent priorities were being “cast aside” and that there could be a Foreign Office “backlog, like the health one”. An FCDO spokesperson said: “The UK has helped lead the diplomatic and deterrence effort in response to the situation in Ukraine and this work remains a top priority for the department. All current staff are able to work on a shared FCDO Microsoft Teams platform.”NS&amp;I has doubled the rate of interest it pays on its Green Savings Bond – but the returns still lag the market-leading deals and leave savers’ cash being eroded by inflation. The latest issue of the three-year account from the government-backed savings provider will pay a rate of 1.3%, up from the 0.65% on offer at its launch, which was described by experts at the time as “paltry”. The account, which is available to anyone over 16, invests in projects to fight climate change, including efforts to make transport greener and increase renewable energy use. Savers can deposit from £100 to £100,000 and are not allowed to withdraw their money after the 30-day initial cooling-off period. Announcing the new rate, the economic secretary to the Treasury, John Glen, said it “reflects upward movement across the wider fixed-term market”. However, experts said the initial deal fell well short of what was on offer elsewhere and was unlikely to attract all but the keenest green savers. The new rate is not the best on the market but it does mean that you do not have to sacrifice too much interest to support environmental projects. If higher returns are your priority, elsewhere you can earn 1.85% on a three-year savings bond from several providers, including Tandem, an app-based account provider that also claims to have environmental credentials. Locking in for only one-year, which may be preferable at a time of rising interest rates, could also be more lucrative, said Anna Bowes of the website Savings Champion. Al Rayan Bank is advertising a return of 1.45% over 12 months – it is an “expected rate” but if the bank adjusts it down you can withdraw your money without penalty. The minimum deposit is £5,000. Across the market the interest on offer is running way below the current rate of inflation. On Wednesday the Office for National Statistics said consumer prices had increased by 5.5% in the year to January. Although the Bank of England base rate has gone up twice in recent months as a result, most savers have not felt the benefit. Bowes said that by this week, banks and building societies had increased rates on fewer than a quarter of accounts, and that in most case this was by less than the 0.4 percentage points of the Bank’s base rate rise. “There are a lot of providers who have made minimal moves to help their customers since the first rate rise in December,” she said. “The high street banks seem to have missed the memo. “It’s a lost cause for savers in terms of keeping up with inflation.” However, rather than sticking with an instant access account that could be paying 0.1%, moving to a fixed-rate bond will at least offset some of the damage being done by rising prices.A statue depicting the angry spirit of a Belgian officer beheaded during an uprising in Congo in 1931 is at the centre of a tug of war between a US museum and a Congolese gallery at the site of the rebellion. The statue of Maximilien Balot, a colonial administrator, has travelled to Europe but the Virginia Museum of Fine Arts is accused of stonewalling requests for a loan to the White Cube gallery in Lusanga in the Democratic Republic of the Congo The row has developed into a legal dispute after the White Cube sought to raise funds by selling digital images of the Balot statue – known as non-fungible tokens or NFTs – resulting in accusations from the VMFA of a breach of copyright. A spokesman for the VMFA in Richmond, Virginia, said the “image was lifted directly from the museum’s website without permission, which “violates our open access policy and is unacceptable and unprofessional”. Renzo Martens, a Dutch artist and director at the White Cube, said: “We have downloaded the image from the internet, as there is no other material made available by the VMFA. We do not have copyright for the image, we use it under the doctrine of fair use.” It was during a revolt against the rape of the wives of men who had refused to work at a palm nut plantation in Lusanga that Balot was hacked to death. The brutal Belgian retaliation that followed led to the revolt of the Pende people, one of the last significant rebellions against colonial rule before independence was secured three decades later. A statue was carved of Balot’s angry spirit in an effort to control it, experts say. The statue was purchased in 1972 by Herbert Weiss, an emeritus professor at City University of New York while he was on a field trip near Lusanga, formerly known as Leverville after William Lever, the founder of Unilever. Weiss donated it to the VMFA. The row highlights the tensions between western institutions displaying artefacts dating from the colonial era and the countries from where artistic and cultural works were taken. The VMFA has 300 employees and an annual revenue of $21.3m (£15.6m), while the White Cube was established by former plantation workers and is supported by fund raising by a cooperative of artists known as Congolese Plantation Workers Art League (CATPC). Cedart Tamasala and Matthieu Kasama, two representatives of the CATPC, visited the VMFA in February 2020 where they first asked for a loan of the statue. A documentary-maker travelling with the two men caught the response from their guide, Prof Richard Woodward, a former curator of African art. He told them: “That would be a very interesting possibility to explore to be able to share the work back. As a museum that cares for the preservation of these objects we go through certain formalities about an agreement and shopping and display. You know, conditions of security and things like that.” In subsequent correspondence, assurances were given over the White Cube facility and insurance plans but the VMFA said it was initially unable to positively respond as the statue was already out on loan. According to the chain correspondence, the museum then said in October 2021 that it was too early to make decisions about a loan for 2023. A spokesperson for the VMFA added in a statement that decisions over loaning the sculpture had not been possible last year as the White Cube building, inaugurated in 2017, “was not complete”. Tamasala said bringing back the statue even if only for a loan was an important way for locals to reconnect with their past. He said: “The lost item, the Balot sculpture, was made for the main purpose, to control the spirit of dead Balot, which could wander and harm the Pende or their surroundings. Currently, what role does she play? “It is objectified and classified or imprisoned – a sterile museum with so many objects looted in Africa, with no other purpose than to make money or educate their own population. “We have the strong impression that they are not ready to lend it to us; it can be lent to a museum in Switzerland or elsewhere, but not to a museum in the plantation for the resistance against which, among other things, it was designed and sculpted.”Molly Oldfield hosts Everything Under the Sun, a weekly podcast answering children’s questions, out now as a book. Does your child have a question? Submit one hereGeorge Santayana’s aphorism “Those who cannot remember the past are condemned to repeat it” doesn’t make an appearance in this book. But it could well serve as the subtitle. For if ever a field should heed the lessons of history it is the making of policy on alcohol and other drugs, and their associated addictions. Carl Erik Fisher takes the reader on a vivid tour over several thousand years of multiple cycles of science, medicine and literature, woven together by the thread of the author’s own alcohol and amphetamine addiction and treatment. It is made even more emphatic and moving because he is also a psychiatrist who treats such patients. At the end of 2021, the British government set out a “once in a lifetime” policy for tackling drug crime and drug use. It was a remarkable document not least because it contained no references to any previous research in this field – as if the last two millennia had taught us nothing. The authors of that report should now read this book and realise how wrong most of their ideas are, how their new vision will probably repeat a relentless cycle of failed policy approaches. Given that they are unlikely to do so, I will try to summarise the key messages from Fisher’s book. Those are, first: don’t conflate drug use with addiction or even with harm – heed the research by Lee Robins on Vietnam vets, for example, which showed that most of those who used heroin in that war stopped once they returned to a normal life. Punitively extending the tentacles of drug-testing is harmful, because many will fail at some point, become marginalised and be driven from legal work into crime. Second, abstinence isn’t the only – or even necessarily the safest – goal of treatment. We know this because of the major contribution of methadone and, more recently, buprenorphine to opioid addiction treatment, though neither of them are yet fully utilised. Third, do not “wage war” on drugs, because that instantly becomes a war on drug users, with poor, non-white and disadvantaged people the most likely victims. Of course, none of these insights will be a surprise to experts in this field – they are established facts. But this book is not a polemic, and one of its pleasures is the succession of historical nuggets it serves up, many of which were unknown to me. For example, the word “addiction” was used for the first time in reference to chocolate. I was also unaware of the deliberate use of cheap alcohol to undermine Native American communities by the early white settlers. This led to the Code of Handsome Lake, the first mutual support group explicitly focused on addiction recovery in America, predating Alcoholics Anonymous by almost 150 years, and surviving to this day. Though I was familiar with the presumed role of cannabis and ephedra in the origins of Hinduism, I had not realised that gambling addiction appeared so early in literature, in the Rig Veda: hearing the sound of dice, the gambler rushes to them “like a girl with her lover”. He “goes to the hall of play asking himself, ‘Will I win?’ puffing himself up with ‘I will win!’” The book is rich with similarly potent quotations, among them two that capture the different faces of alcoholism. This one from Edgar Allan Poe, who died very young from the effects of drinking, sums up the paradox of self-destructiveness: “the unfathomable longing of the soul to vex itself, to offer violence to its own nature, to do wrong for the wrong’s sake”. Whereas Caroline Knapp describes how “liquor occupies the role of a lover or constant companion”. William Burroughs recounts that “heroin is momentary freedom from the claims of the ageing, cautious, nagging, frightened flesh”. Which of us hasn’t had similar longings to escape? And then there’s Fisher’s own remarkablestory, which includes an amphetamine-induced manic episode during which he was Tasered by the police before being forcibly taken into detox. Months later, on his first weekend leave from rehab, he describes walking back into his lonely apartment and finding the Taser wires “tangled on the floor, like a loose, copper bird’s nest”. The child of two alcohol and smoking addicts, he explores the reasons for both their and his vulnerability, though he cautions that “it is rarely useful to attempt to arrive at one major ‘cause’ of anyone’s addiction”. His mother, he writes, learned from her stressed immigrant father that “alcohol was a way to cope with a difficult world”. Even when she is dying from lung cancer she still drinks, though it messes with her treatments, and has an expert doctor as a son trying to stop her. His parents’ denial of their addictions translated into his own failure to recognise when his drinking had become out of control. Fisher is now working as an addiction psychiatrist and medical ethicist, but still undergoes regular alcohol and drug testing that he feels helps keep him clean – though it hasn’t been as successful among other medical professionals in his treatment group. If testing often fails among these people, what hope has it with those who have little or no incentive? Fisher argues that non-judgmental encouragement and understanding is the right approach. The book is thorough and revealing. It is largely US-centric, but, given the overwhelming influence that country has had in driving global drug policies, the narrative is still internationally relevant. Fisher’s personal saga, together with case studies of his patients, lend it an additional human depth. Pulling it all together is this final reflection, a mature view of the topic from someone with immense experience of it. “Addiction is profoundly ordinary: a way of being with the pleasures and pains of life, and just one manifestation of the central human task of working with suffering. If addiction is part of humanity, then, it is not a problem to solve. We will not end addiction, but we must find ways of working with it: ways that are sometimes gentle, and sometimes vigorous, but never warlike, because it is futile to wage a war on our own nature.” One can only hope the British government – and others like it around the world – is listening. • David Nutt is professor of neuropsychopharmacology at Imperial College London and the former chair of the UK’s Advisory Council on the Misuse of Drugs. To buy a copy of The Urge for £14.78 go to guardianbookshop.comSeparatist leaders in eastern Ukraine have ordered a full military mobilisation, further escalating tensions in the region after Washington said Moscow would invade within days, and Ukraine’s president headed to Europe to drum up support. As the Kremlin said that Vladimir Putin will oversee major military drills along Ukraine’s borders on Saturday, the head of the pro-Russian separatist government in the Donetsk region, Denis Pushilin, released a statement announcing a war footing and urging reservists to show up at military enlistment offices. Shortly after the announcement on Saturday morning, a second separatist leader, Leonid Pasechnik of the self-proclaimed Luhansk People’s Republic (LNR), signed a decree calling for a full military mobilisation, according to Reuters. The statements added to the febrile situation in eastern Ukraine, where the rebels have ordered mass evacuations in the face of alleged shelling and mortar attacks by the Ukrainian army. The US president, Joe Biden, renewed his warnings on Friday night that a Russian invasion of its neighbour could happen at any time, and said that claims by pro-Moscow separatists in eastern Ukraine that they were under attack by Ukrainian government forces were “fabricated”. Monitors from the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe said on Saturday they had seen a significant rise in the number of attacks along the front line, particularly in the separatist areas of Donetsk and Lugansk, fuelling western fears that Moscow could use it as a pretext for an invasion. The Pentagon also said that 40% of Russia’s estimated 150,000-strong forces on the border were in “attack position”. US officials think that the total number of troops is 190,000 when Ukrainian pro-Moscow rebels are included in the figure. Compounding western concern about Russia’s military buildup, Russia’s defence ministry announced that Putin would personally oversee drills on Saturday that will involve multiple practice missile launches. The Kremlin denies it has any plans to attack Ukraine and added to the war of words on Saturday morning by rejecting US allegations that it was responsible for cyber-attacks on Ukrainian banking and government websites earlier in the week. “We categorically reject these baseless statements of the administration and note that Russia has nothing to do with the mentioned events and in principle has never conducted and does not conduct any ‘malicious’ operations in cyberspace,” the Russian embassy in the US said on Twitter. The US deputy national security adviser, Anne Neuberger, said on Friday that Russian military intelligence was behind the recent spate of distributed denial of service (DDoS) attacks that briefly knocked Ukrainian banking and government websites offline. Speaking in Washington on Friday night, Biden said that the invasion would come in the next week or days and that his Russian counterpart Putin had “made the decision” to invade. But Biden left the door open for a diplomatic resolution. “Russia has a choice between war and all the suffering it will bring or diplomacy that will make a future for everyone,” Biden said at the White House. “[Putin’s] focused on trying to convince the world he has the ability to change the dynamics in Europe in a way that he cannot,” Bided added. The Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, was due to travel to Germany on Saturday to meet western leaders at the Munich security conference, including the US vice-president, Kamala Harris, the German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, and the British foreign secretary, Liz Truss. But Biden questioned whether it was a “wise choice” for Ukraine’s leader to leave his country as war fears reached a fever pitch. There were growing fears that a spark, which Washington warns could be a deliberate “false flag” incident orchestrated by Moscow, could set off the largest military confrontation in Europe since the second world war. The Nato chief, Jens Stoltenberg, who will also be at the Munich security conference, warned the size of the assembled Russian force far exceeded that needed for military drills, and that Russia had the capacity to invade without warning. France and Germany have urged Russia to use its influence on rebels in Ukraine’s disputed east to “encourage restraint and contribute to de-escalation”. An Agence France-Presse reporter near the front between Ukrainian government forces and pro-Russian separatists in the Lugansk region heard explosions and saw damaged civilian buildings on Kyiv’s side of the line. Officials told local media that 25,000 people had left Lugansk and more than 6,000 had left Donetsk for Russia. There were reports of long car queues at checkpoints in Donetsk. Seeking to reverse the aggressor narrative, Moscow-backed leaders have accused Kyiv of planning an offensive to retake the eastern territories. The evacuations of civilians there were said to be in response to worries about a government attack. Russian news agencies quoted officials in Lugansk saying there had been two explosions within an hour on a gas pipeline but the fires were under control. But the US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, who will meet his Russian counterpart for talks on Thursday, according to Biden, accused the Kremlin of mounting a propaganda campaign to create an excuse for war. Biden again ruled out sending US troops into Ukraine, but his administration reiterated that it would hit Moscow with costly sanctions that would transform Russia into “a pariah to the international community”.‘How are you? You’re named after Ernest Hemingway’s first wife,” Margaret Atwood announces by way of a greeting when we meet on a hotel’s heated patio near her home in Toronto. Atwood, 82, has often been described as a prophet, thanks to her uncanny ability to foresee the future in her books. When Trump supporters stormed the Capitol in January 2021, it looked, terrifyingly, like a scene out of The Handmaid’s Tale, when the government is overthrown and the dystopian land of Gilead is founded. She seemingly predicted the 2008 financial crash in her nonfiction book Payback: Debt and the Shadow Side of Wealth, published that year. Atwood has always scoffed at any suggestion of telepathy, pointing out that every atrocity in The Handmaid’s Tale had been carried out by totalitarian regimes in real life, and she “predicted” the crash by noticing the number of adverts offering to help people with their personal debt. But as she stands in front of me, snowflakes glittering around her like stars, the flames of the hotel’s gas heaters leaping on either side of her, dressed all in black save for her little red hat, correctly guessing who I’m named after, she certainly seems to have a touch of magic about her. How did she know about the Hemingway connection? “Because I’m deep into Martha Gellhorn,” she says, launching into a long discussion about the celebrated war correspondent and Hemingway’s third wife. Atwood isn’t writing a book about Gellhorn (yet), but she found a letter from her to the father of her late partner, Graeme Gibson, who died in 2019, and is now a Gellhornologist. After six or so minutes, I wonder if we’ll ever talk about anything else, but Atwood has a regal quality that makes interruption unthinkable. It does not, as I later learn, render argument impossible. Proceedings begin peacefully enough. Atwood and I are meeting because this month she will publish her latest collection of essays, Burning Questions, a 500-page doorstopper that gathers together her nonfiction output from the past two decades. During this period she also published five novels, one novella and Payback. Atwood is arguably the most famous living literary novelist in the world and unarguably one of the most prolific: in her half century of writing, she has published, on average, a book a year. She has won the Booker twice – in 2000 for The Blind Assassin and in 2019 for The Testaments, controversially sharing the prize with Bernardine Evaristo for Girl, Woman, Other. Atwood shrugs off that literary hoo-ha – “So fun! Bernardine’s a great gal” – and adds that she is “a veteran of not winning the Booker”. Of course, being a veteran of not winning means being a veteran of being shortlisted, which in Atwood’s case is four times on top of her wins. So when she describes herself to me as a “grade-A procrastinator and goof-off”, I say that seems unlikely, given how much she writes, and she looks abashed. “I know – it’s horrible, isn’t it?” she says. When I ask how she managed to whittle her essays down to a mere 500 pages, she cringes again at her own productivity. “Horrible!” But adds, “If writing wasn’t a pleasure, I wouldn’t do it.” And Atwood’s writing is – unfailingly – a pleasure to read. She is one of the all-time great storytellers, a truth sometimes obscured by her highbrow reputation. Whole days of my life have been lost to her novels, including Alias Grace, Cat’s Eye, The Robber Bride and The Blind Assassin. When it comes to making you want to know what happens next, Atwood is up there with Stephen King and JK Rowling. She has written in every literary genre, from poetry to sci-fi to mystery. But there is one connecting thread: many of her novels are told using a retrospective narrative, with a character looking back on their former life while trying to make sense of their current one. It is a device that winks at Atwood’s love of Victorian literature, but it’s also how she thinks, always looking forward, but also looking back. When she writes her books, she types up yesterday’s handwritten pages and handwrites the pages for tomorrow. “The rolling barrage!” she laughs. When we talk about modern social movements, she refers back to the French Revolution; when we talk about the rollback of abortion rights in the US, she cites Nicolae Ceaușescu, the notoriously anti-abortion dictator of Romania from 1974 to 1989. “As you may have noticed, I like to do my research,” Atwood smiles, after we’ve segued into long discussions of Stalin, or Mao, or Robespierre. It’s all fascinating, and evidence of her tirelessly curious mind. But it can also feel as though she is building a wall of words to protect herself from prying questions. At one point, when she pauses in the middle of such a digression, I ask if her research into Gellhorn has been a way to stay close to Gibson. “Of course. No-brainer. Next question.” She picks up the menu. “Shall we split the ubiquitous avocado toast?” *** Atwood always has a book on the go, so even though she has only just received the finished proofs of Burning Questions, she is already deep into her next project: her 10th collection of short stories. When it comes to work, she is indefatigable: “This has sometimes been resented by friends and family. But I come from a hard-working background and a hard-working generation. I always knew I should be able to support myself.” She has “no time routine, but a space routine: a certain number of pages or words. No cork-lined Proustian writer’s haven. For me, it’s roll up sleeves and get it done.” Yet it’s a mystery how she does get it done, considering how deeply involved she is with the world around her, as Burning Questions proves, with its clear-eyed essays about the climate, feminism and the future. By now, Atwood has more than earned the right to lock herself away in an ivory tower, but she keeps jumping into the mud. She has been involved in multiple controversies, due partly, but by no means solely, to her fearlessness in addressing hot-button issues in her writing. During the Trump era, her name became a byword for the feminist fightback against the creep of misogynistic legislation that sparked many comparisons to Gilead; Handmaid’s Tale costumes became a staple of pro-choice protests. Both that book and Alias Grace were turned into TV series, propelling her into a stratosphere of celebrity unknown to most authors. When The Testaments, her keenly awaited sequel to The Handmaid’s Tale, was published in 2019, bookshops stayed open until midnight so fans could get copies as soon as they arrived, a privilege usually granted only to titles such as new Harry Potter books. Her fearlessness has not worked against her commercially. “Not fearless,” she corrects me. “I am afraid of thunderstorms, bears, certain kinds of heights, also totalitarian forms of government, the behaviour of mobs when they get going. What passes for fearlessness is sometimes just naivety. I am not suspicious or cautious when others might be. Also, I don’t have a job, so I can’t be fired.” I don’t like to favouritise my books. The others would be out to get you: ‘How could you? I spent all this time with you!’ This may partly explain her fondness for signing politically charged open letters, such as, in 2020, the so-called Harper’s letter about cancel culture, which denounced “an intolerance of opposing views” on the left, and, three months later, another one expressing support for non-binary and trans people, written as a critical response to an essay by Rowling explaining her views on gender. Atwood’s involvement made those letters headline news. Given that the two ostensibly contradicted one another – and we’ll get back to this – she arguably annoyed everyone. “People want you to be on their side, which to them means you have to be their puppet. Not a good fit for me,” she says. She is also a regular tweeter, addressing controversial subjects – politics, gender – most well-known people steer clear of. The week before our interview, Atwood spent almost an hour on Twitter, arguing with strangers about the environmental cost of building more housing in Toronto. When one anonymous tweeter bluntly informed her she wouldn’t be able to control what happened to the land after she died, Atwood wrote back “I … wouldn’t … be … too … sure … of that! I … may … retuuurn … (creaky door sound)” and added a spooky ghost emoji. Does she ever think: maybe I should make life easy and not comment on this or that controversial issue, but instead focus on my novel? “Oh, I always think that,” she says. So why quarrel about green spaces on Twitter? “I know – why aren’t I sensible? It’s an interesting question. I don’t belong to a political party, I don’t have any purist ideological positions. So the key questions are, as they always have been for me, is it true and is it fair? And once you are interested, you get sucked in.” Because she feels she has to fight for them? “Because you notice people deflecting to some other question, which is not the one you’re asking.” *** A young man comes up to our table to pay his respects, and he tells her they grew up in the same area. At first, Atwood is interested and asks questions. But after five minutes she’s done. “OK, shoo! Shoo! Bye-bye!” she says, turning back to her avocado toast so suddenly that the man is left dazed, mid-sentence. I’d heard from others who have met her that Atwood can be “a bit fearsome” and it’s true she exudes a cerebral grandeur that means you don’t want to displease her. In her obituary of Doris Lessing in Burning Questions, she writes: “If you don’t think of yourself as an august personage, you don’t have to behave yourself.” Does she think of herself as an august personage? “Of course not! I’m Canadian, you’re not allowed to think that,” she laughs. I suspect she does a bit – and she should, because she is – and when I later ask what’s the best thing about being in her 80s, she replies: “I get to be condescending towards young people.” But it’s also true that she’s not scared of kicking over people’s expectations. In her books, the female characters can be just as cruel as the men: there are the aunts and wives in The Handmaid’s Tale and The Testaments who torment the handmaids, and also the girls who viciously bully one another in Cat’s Eye. “My fundamental position is that women are human beings, with the full range of saintly and demonic behaviour this entails, including criminal ones,” she writes in one of the most interesting essays in Burning Questions, which was born out of a classic Atwood controversy. In 2016 she, with several other Canadian authors, signed an open letter criticising the University of British Columbia for publicly suspending the author and then tenured associate professor Steven Galloway due to allegations of sexual misconduct, thereby denying him due process. After an investigation conducted on behalf of the university, a judge cleared him of sexual assault and Galloway apologised for having had an affair with a student. UBC decided not to rehire him and later paid compensation for damage to his reputation and violating his privacy. The authors who signed the open letter were criticised for what some saw as privileging Galloway’s side over his female accuser, and a number of them removed their names from the letter. Atwood’s response was different: in 2018 she wrote an essay defending her position and questioned the social shifts that contributed to Galloway’s downfall. “The #MeToo movement is a symptom of a broken legal system. All too frequently, women and other sexual-abuse complainants couldn’t get a fair hearing through institutions, so they used a new tool: the internet … [But] if the legal system is bypassed because it is seen as ineffectual, what will take its place? In times of extremes, extremists win,” she wrote, and titled her essay Am I a Bad Feminist? The essay caused shock among some of her fans, with one college newspaper headline describing her as a “problematic fave”. Atwood sounds pretty cross when writing about the “Good Feminists” who now think of her as a “misogynistic, rape-enabling Bad Feminist”. Did it hurt her to be criticised by those who had once idolised her? “I’m too old! I feel bad for the ‘Good Feminists’ who got misled. This kind of thing does no good to feminism. All it does is provide ammunition to the people who say the whole thing is a crock of shit,” she says now. The criticism hasn’t diminished her interest in Galloway, whose case she still follows keenly. “Oh, let me catch you up!” she says, and later sends me links to articles and a Substack to follow. What fascinates her is not the disproven allegation, but how UBC reacted: in their rush to do the right thing, they did the wrong thing, by treating him as though his guilt were a given. It’s a subject that reverberates through her fiction – in books such as The Robber Bride – and an example of her refusal to bow to ideological purity. Her clear-eyed focus on what’s fair and true over any kind of ideology, with little concern about public criticism, is part of what has made her personally so inspiring and her work so enduring. *** The tenderest pieces in Burning Questions are the personal ones, such as those recalling her childhood in the woods in Ontario and Quebec, scrabbling around in the trees looking for infestations of beetles and caterpillars with her father, a research entomologist. “We’d be driving along and suddenly we would pull over. ‘An infestation!’ we would cry. Other families stopped for ice-cream cones. Ours stopped for infestations,” she writes in Trees of Life, Trees of Death. Atwood didn’t go into full-time education until she was 12, and she suggests one reason she is not cautious about jumping into the fray is that she lacks the wariness children tend to learn when they grow up among other social groups. A lot of her own upbringing features in Cat’s Eye, with adult Elaine recalling her woodland childhood very wistfully, and describing how much of an outsider she felt at school. Does Atwood feel especially close to that novel? “I don’t like to favouritise my books, because the other ones would get annoyed,” she says, and laughs. “Then you have all these vengeful books out to get you: ‘How could you? I spent all this time with you! No gratitude!’” And there are, of course, also essays about Gibson, who she was with from the early 1970s and with whom she has a daughter. Gibson, a writer and conservationist, was so supportive of his wife that she famously gave him a T-shirt with the slogan: “Every woman writer should be married to Graeme Gibson”, a quote from a journalist. His books included The Bedside Book of Birds, but towards the end of his life, due to the progress of his vascular dementia, he could no longer identify the birds in their garden. Nonetheless, Atwood recalls in her 2020 foreword to The Bedside Book of Birds, which is included in Burning Questions, he still liked to watch them. “‘I no longer know their names,’ he told a friend. ‘But then, they don’t know my name either,’” she writes. Gibson died in the UK, with Atwood on her book tour for The Testaments. She continued the tour. “Given the choice between hotel rooms and events and people on the one hand, and an empty house and vacant chair on the other, which would you have chosen, Dear Reader? Of course, the empty house and vacant chair were simply postponed. They came my way later, as such things do,” she writes in the prologue to the collection. What was it about Gibson that made him so supportive? “He wasn’t an egotist, so he wasn’t threatened by anything I was doing. He said to our daughter towards the end of his life, ‘Your mum would still have been a writer if she hadn’t met me, but she wouldn’t have had as much fun,’” and she nods, as if agreeing with something clever he just said while sitting next to her. She has also included in Burning Questions the 2020 introduction she wrote for his novels Perpetual Motion and Gentleman Death. Was writing those introductions a way of saying goodbye to him or celebrating him? “Celebrating him. You don’t actually say goodbye to the dead when you’re my age. They don’t leave.” I start to ask another question about Gibson but she waves her hand, saying: “It’s in the book, it’s in the book.” *** Lockdown was not as brutal as it could have been for Atwood, because her daughter and her family went to stay with her. Also, she adds, it’s not like this was mankind’s first pandemic, and she’s on to talking about how illnesses tore through previous generations: “Young people say, ‘This is the worst!’ But it’s not! We’ve been here before.” Research sates Atwood’s curiosity and helps to keep her balanced rather than getting caught up in the madness of the day, by locating it instead within the ebb and flow of history. “I’m in favour of holding the centre in so far as it’s possible. But I’m going to be dead soon, so good luck with it all,” she says. She looks – and talks – like she’ll outlive us all, I tell her, which is the truth. We’ve been talking for two hours, in fairly brutal temperatures, despite the heaters, but her chattiness never fades, her bright eyes never dim. “Come on, look at the numbers! Here’s the hourglass, here’s how much sand is left.” Well, she doesn’t seem as if she’s running out of sand. “I know,” she says. “It’s a good act.” I ask if she’s as combative in real life as in her writings. “Not at all. I’m very willing to listen to other people’s points of view, but I am not willing to be scammed.” XY and XX are not the only chromosomal combinations possible. Look it up. This has been in flux for a very long time And this is when things go momentarily pear-shaped. One burning question I am especially keen to discuss with Atwood is the fraught modern debate over gender identity. Gender theorists argue that gender identity – how a person defines themselves – is as important as biological sex. Gender-critical people argue that gender identity is irrelevant because women are oppressed due to their biological sex. This debate, which has threatened to fracture feminism at times, with younger feminists subscribing more to the former argument and older ones cleaving to the latter, does not feature in Burning Questions, but Atwood has tweeted and spoken about it multiple times. Given that she wrote the ultimate novel about the sexual exploitation of women, The Handmaid’s Tale, it would be easy to assume her views veer towards the gender-critical end of the spectrum. But she is no purist. After all, she signed the Harper’s letter, which many saw as an argument against, in part, the left’s objection to gender-critical views; then, three months later, the letter obliquely criticising Rowling. She has posted articles on Twitter that support gender ideology and videos that criticise Rowling. Yet she also posted an article asking whether the word “woman” was being erased out of concern for trans women’s feelings – a gender-critical view – followed by a post reassuring her followers that the writer “is not a terf”, a derogatory term for gender-critical women meaning trans-exclusionary radical feminist. It has not been easy to tell where her feelings lie on this issue. So I ask about a recent comment of hers, in which she said biological sex is not either/or – “Rejoice in nature’s infinite variety!” In other words, it’s too simplistic to say people are either male or female. “Everything in nature is on a bell curve. We have this two-box thinking [about gender] because it’s biblical, so wool over here, linen over there,” she says. If biological sex is not binary, how do people know who to make a handmaiden or who is given FGM? “OK, let me say this again,” she says more sharply. “This is going to take a while to settle down, but XY and XX are not the only chromosomal combinations possible. Look it up, OK? This has been in flux for a very long time and in the Bible, a male wearing female clothes would be – ” and she makes a slicing gesture across her neck. “You want to do that? No.” Gender-critical people would argue that those are different issues, I say. “What is a gender-critical person?” she asks It’s someone who believes that all living creatures are either male or female and that rare chromosomal variations don’t disprove that. “I’m not going to argue about this. That’s not what my book is about and that’s not what we’re here to discuss,” she says. Given how discursive our interview has been, this objection surprises me, but I return to the book. In one essay, Literature and the Environment, she writes: “[People] are very ready to tell the writer what a bad person he or she is because he or she has not produced the sort of book or essay the preacher feels he or she ought to have produced.” Does that not contradict her oblique criticisms of Rowling’s essay as anti-trans? “Open question. We’re not even sure what anti-trans is, and the trans community will take a while to sort this through. It is not true that there are no trans people, so then a lot of questions come into that, and we’re not going to get into those, although they seem to be your obsession of the day.” But Margaret, I say, you write so brilliantly about women’s rights. Of course women want to know what you think about this subject, given how much it pertains to women’s rights. “I’m not informed enough,” she says briskly. “But there doesn’t seem to be much fuss about trans men. Why is that?” Why does she think? “I don’t know.” Because men aren’t physically threatened by them? “They’re not physically threatened by trans men,” she agrees, then corrects herself. “They do not feel physically threatened by trans men, although it is possible a trans man could murder one of them.” A little later, she mentions how dangerous it is for people to make generalisations about one another, so I give it one last go and ask why, then, did she use the sweeping term “terf” on Twitter? “I think you’re making too much of this!” she says, sounding thoroughly fed up now. The subject is closed; the interview moves on. Our conversation continues peacefully enough, but after we say our goodbyes my overwhelming feeling is one of frustration. I give her credit for not storming out of the interview, but I feel no closer to understanding her views and assume I never will, given how reluctant she seemed to be to discuss them. But then – as she has done so often in her books – Atwood surprises me with a plot twist. Just an hour or so later, she sends me several emails, some about the Galloway case, others elaborating on her thoughts about gender. This becomes an ongoing back and forth, in which she lays out her views, patiently and thoughtfully. Most of it is off the record, but I think she won’t mind me saying that, ultimately, we both want the same thing, which is truth and fairness. The more we email, the more I realise we are not arguing about this the way I’m used to arguing about it, ie the social media way, which is just shouting at one another and not listening to the other’s point of view. We are genuinely curious to understand one another and send each other links we think the other will find interesting. After several days of this, I become self-conscious about how much of her time I am taking up, time she should be spending on her new book of short stories, and I apologise for being so stubbornly argumentative. She writes straight back: “Don’t worry, Hadley. Some people won’t really discuss things with me because they are intimidated. I agree with Orwell: the truth does matter.” • Burning Questions by Margaret Atwood is published by Vintage on 1 March at £20. To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.There was a craze in my youth for green moisturisers and foundation, notionally designed not to treat the causes of skin redness, but to colour-correct the ensuing ruddiness. The craze died off – mostly, I imagine, because it made most people look poisoned. I hadn’t tried one in years until I tested positive for Omicron, which gave me just enough itchy redness to put new, rebooted camouflage creams to the test. L’Oréal Paris C’est Magique CC Cream (£10.99) is an effective option at a terrific price. It’s essentially a green moisturiser containing tiny spheres of colour-adaptive foundation that sort of pop as you blend the fluid into your face with fingers or brush. The green cancels redness, the foundation provides a healthier tint, and the whole thing works very well on moderate cases. IT Cosmetics specialises in colour correction, and makes a good green-tinted day cream called Bye Bye Redness (£40). But I’d say the hero product in its lineup is the Your Skin But Better CC+ Cream SPF50 (£32.50), since I can think of nothing more instantly de-reddening, inclusive and indispensable to the many men and women who flush. This is a cream that camouflages all sorts of redness, including birthmarks and scars, offering full coverage while being easy to apply. It’s available in 14 shades, with no green – you just match your tone using the helpful gallery of real faces online. Buff on with a brush (or fingers) in place of foundation, then wear whatever you like on top. This keeps skin comfortable and moist (there’s a version for oily skins) and stays smoothly in place all day. Dr Jart+ Cicapair Tiger Grass Color Correcting Treatment (from £15) is the final step in the brand’s solid anti-redness skincare lineup. It’s a mostly cosmetic solution: a balm that, although it looks mint green in the pot, turns beige when a small amount is warmed between the fingertips. (This step is crucial, as I discovered after my first attempt, which made me look like a waxwork.) When warmed and blended – very easily – over any red areas, it works well in unifying tone on fair to olive skins, making a fast and visible difference and readily accepting other types of makeup on top. I can certainly see why this product has been so hugely popular on TikTok. My only guidance would be that you should not attempt to use this as your moisturiser, since you’ll end up absorbing too much – and it’s very easy to go full broad bean.The primordial deep, it turns out, is a very chatty place. In a new study published in the journal Ichthyology &amp; Herpetology, Cornell University researchers reveal that fish rely on acoustic communication far more than previously thought. People have long known that fish make sounds; in his History of Animals, Aristotle describes the “noises and squeaks” fish produce, sometimes by grinding their own bones against each other in a mechanism called stridulation. Yet for decades, a lack of adequate underwater microphones and recording technology has kept scientists in the dark about just how many species of fish make noises, and whether those noises are the incidental rumblings of speechless creatures, or actually constitute communication. Now, researchers have learned that sounds are “a major mode of communication among fish, rather than just limited to a few oddballs”, says lead author Aaron Rice, a researcher at the K Lisa Yang Center for Conservation Bioacoustics at the Cornell Lab of Ornithology. Not only is acoustic communication widespread among fish, but Rice and his team’s analysis of sound-producing physical characteristics (like certain swim bladder musculature) across species suggests that ancient sturgeons first started chatting aloud 155m years ago, right around the same time some tetrapods, like birds and mammals, began speaking up, too. Moreover, the study found that acoustic communication among different fish species has independently evolved at least 33 different times, probably due to the diversity of their habitats. This pattern suggests to researchers that more soniferous fish species and families exist and are yet to be recorded, and highlights the important role that acoustic communication has played in the history of vertebrates. What are fish talking about? Mainly sex and food, it seems. “We see more elaborate sounds being produced in reproductive contexts,” says Rice. How these noises actually sound to humans varies widely; scientists use a variety of onomatopoeic descriptors like “boops”, “honks” and “hoots” to convey what they’re hearing. Some fish, like the three-spined toadfish, sound similar to croaking frogs, whereas others, like the midshipman fish, emit low, haunting, foghorn-like hums. Prior research on the noises produced by highly vocal codfish even found fish can have regional accents strong enough that others in their species may find them hard to understand. Recognizing the extent to which fish communicate using sound allows researchers to better determine the effects of noise pollution on many different aquatic species. Researchers consider noise pollution to be as harmful as overfishing, water pollution and the climate crisis, negatively affecting marine mammals and at least 21 species of fish that rely on their hearing to thrive. Cornell’s study suggests the threat posed by noise pollution is even more severe. “If you have literally millions of individual fish that are relying on communication sounds for the success of their populations, perturbing their acoustic environment may have real consequences,” says Rice. Rice hopes that capturing and cataloging fish sounds online will allow the public an opportunity to better connect with the often inscrutable creatures. Hopping on to a computer and listening to the sounds of the ocean could be a way to get people interested in and concerned for the wellbeing of fish the way we are with more familiar and charismatic animals, like birds. Andrew Bass, a behavioral and evolutionary neuroscientist and co-author of the study, hopes the research will help humans better appreciate the complexity of other animal societies overall. “There’s a reason why all these other species exist and have been successful,” he says. “A big piece of that success is social communication … [Humans] have very sophisticated language, but I think what our study shows is that the whole history of social communication using sound is very old. And that means we can learn a lot from other animals about ourselves.”The owner of a Hewlett-Packard printer has vowed to never buy another thing from the company after a “firmware update” left his £150 printer unusable because he had bought cheaper ink cartridges from another manufacturer. Dom Smith, who works in IT in the Netherlands but is originally from the UK, was left incensed after the HP OfficeJet Pro 8020 printer he bought during lockdown was rendered useless by a recent software update. He is just the latest person to complain about the problem that has dogged the owners of HP printers who have balked at the price of the company’s own-brand ink cartridges. For several years, HP has been using the firmware updates to prevent the use of “fake” ink cartridges that it claims infringe its copyright. The policy has put the firm on a collision course with buyers, and has led to a number of legal actions. In 2018, HP agreed to pay $1.5m (£1.1m) to customers in the US, and the company is facing another class action from people claiming a firmware update made their printers incompatible with other brands’ ink cartridges. Smith, who had paid more than £150 for his printer, said he was quoted a “crazy” price to buy a complete set of replacement HP ink cartridges, so had bought cheaper aftermarket ones that had worked fine until the update. “It left me unable to print anything. I’m so cross about it that I would rather scrap my perfectly good 8020, and nearly full ink cartridges, than be strong-armed by HP into buying their products,” he says. “I can’t believe that this is even legal. Surely, once I have paid for the printer it is mine to do with what I want. I would strongly urge others with HP printers to change the settings so that they no longer accept any firmware updates and stop this happening to them.” Max Freeman, a commercial director at the Crewe-based supplier Cartridgepeople.com, says most consumers are unaware that it is possible for a printer manufacturer to stop them from using third-party ink. He agrees with Smith that there is little to be gained by consumers from allowing the HP updates, assuming you have the technical skills to stop them from happening. “This has been a long-fought battle. However, I would urge users not to be put off from using third-party cartridges, and many will still work – provided they retain the original HP chip.” He says companies such as his are careful to use recycled or remanufactured cartridges that will “span” a firmware update. His firm offers a lifetime guarantee on its cartridges and promises a refund if a software update leaves a customer’s printer out of action. It encourages the recycling of original HP empties, as once remanufactured they will continue to work, post any firmware upgrades. A spokesperson for HP says: “HP includes dynamic security to protect the quality of our customer experience, protect HP’s intellectual property, as well as reduce illegal counterfeiting of HP cartridges and warranty fraud. “Refilled or remanufactured supplies that use an original HP chip will continue to function normally. Other cartridges, including those using cloned chips, or modified or non-HP circuitry, may not work today or in the future.” They said the company offers a range of options for customers, including HP Instant Ink, that can save UK customers up to 70%. However, this has not been enough to convince Smith. He says his printer had a sticker offering the 70% discount but the site would not allow him to register. He has since bought a new printer from another firm, and says he will not be buying another HP product.Outdoor fielding drills in Durham have left Mark Wood wondering whether he will land in Antigua next week with frostbite but, more broadly, England’s fastest bowler – consistently the world’s fastest on the speed gun – is hot property. Wood was the sole tourist to enhance his reputation during a chastening Ashes campaign, claiming 17 wickets, sustaining remarkable speeds, edging a duel with Marnus Labuschagne and signing off with a six-fer in Hobart. The market then spoke last Saturday with a £735,000 deal in the Indian Premier League. The auction experience took a strange turn when Wood and his wife, Sarah, were forced to watch at home like church mice while their two-year-old son, Harry, took an unplanned nap. Lucknow Super Giants won out – Andy Flower, their head coach, getting his man – but the celebrations had to be muffled. “We were about to go away for the weekend for a wedding anniversary I missed in Australia but the IPL auctioneer falling ill on stage paused everything and delayed us setting off,” says Wood, en route to his latest tune-up in chilly Chester-le-Street. “Harry was meant to sleep in the car but just conked out on the sofa before my name came up. I remember Sarah shouting – but also whispering – ‘Get back here now,’ as I was putting some dishes in the sink. After a quiet start to the bidding, suddenly it moved fast and the numbers went up. “As soon as the final amount was confirmed Sarah asked what it was in pounds – I might have to freeze all our accounts so it doesn’t disappear. But we’re delighted. It’s a weird experience. It feels like a computer game – almost not real, like transfers on Football Manager – but it’s also very real when you get signed.” Though wary of workloads and time away, Wood describes the IPL as something that, at 32, sets up his family financially; a case of striking while his stock and pace are high. For a working-class lad from Ashington, who has never shirked in the quest for 90mph-plus and repeatedly overcome a rebellious body en route, this top-up to an improved England central contract means the rewards are not coming only in the shape of wickets. After a solitary game for Chennai in 2018, Wood also wants to feel the IPL’s cricketing benefits: new teammates at a start-up franchise, the reunion with Flower, a no-nonsense coach he admires and who championed him when with England Lions, and the chance to develop his short-form game under pressure, with an eye on this year’s T20 World Cup. Thoughts are currently on England’s three-Test series against West Indies next month, however, and form brings with it responsibility now Jimmy Anderson and Stuart Broad have been dropped. “I was shocked,” says Wood, who with 25 caps is the second most experienced seamer after Chris Woakes (42). “I didn’t see it coming at all. It will be weird those two not being on tour; a first for me. Even when injured they normally stay in the group. “But I know they’ll be there on text if I need advice. And if they see something, they’d message too. They’re England fans, I know they’ve been there a long time but they still just want England to win and I’m 100% sure they’ll be back.” After Ollie Robinson (nine caps) and Craig Overton (four), come two rookies in Matthew Fisher and Saqib Mahmood. For Wood it will be a case of collaboration – Joe Root and the bowling coach, Jon Lewis, will also be involved – and perhaps the type of strategic reset that Andrew Strauss, the interim director of cricket, had in mind. Wood says: “As bowlers we’re going to have to assess and make our own decisions as we go. Woakesy, I’m sure, will step up and lead the group well. It will feel new and different. We may get compared to how [Anderson and Broad] have done things in the past, but I’m not in their class. We can’t try to bowl like them, they’re so good it’s nigh on impossible. We can just give the best account of ourselves.” It was three years ago in the Caribbean that, after years of promise but frequent injury setbacks, Wood did exactly that. The decision to lengthen and smooth out his run-up was vindicated with a searing spell in St Lucia and a maiden Test five-wicket haul, something that leaves him “gutted” the island does not play host this time. Since the start of that Test match in 2019 he has claimed 38 wickets at 22 away from home, ransacking nine in Johannesburg in early 2020 and completing the recent Ashes campaign with six for 37 via a short-ball barrage in Tasmania. But such was the nature of the final 4-0 scoreline in Australia, that any satisfaction was tempered. “You don’t feel high when you’re in a dressing room that’s getting hammered,” he says. “And especially against your biggest rivals. It was so deflating. I left Australia knowing I’d bowled my heart out but effort is a non-negotiable. I was exhausted. Ashes cricket is a different intensity, especially when you’re losing. But I managed to get the ball and a stump from that final Test match and have given it to my mam and dad [Angie and Derek] to say thanks for everything; the endless hours spent helping my career, the car journeys, the back garden cricket and the like.” Among the mistakes made by England was Wood’s absence on a flat pitch in Adelaide while the series was live. He voices no complaints, however, understanding the caution around his fitness record and the (misplaced) belief the pink ball would swing. The recent sacking of Chris Silverwood as head coach is one he felt personally. “It’s sad. Spoons was so supportive of me,” he says. “I came on leaps and bounds since he first came on board as bowling coach [in 2018]. He always made my work fun and never put pressure on me. You never want anyone to lose their job and it’s so hard as a player when management cop it for your failures. “That’s especially how I felt after the Melbourne defeat. There was a lot of heat from home, from supporters and from the media all questioning Spoons and [Joe] Root. When you don’t perform as a team, it doesn’t sit well. To see Rooty slumped in a chair after that game – or Spoons fielding tough questions – it hurts the group as a whole.” Wood proved his hardiness, playing four of the five Tests and maintaining an average speed of 89mph. Though his skiddy trajectory from a 5ft 11in frame leaves little margin for error in terms of length, Wood’s skills are growing and the CricViz analysts state with confidence he is now the quickest around. “I dunno about that,” says Wood. “I’ve faced [South Africa’s] Anrich Nortje and [New Zealand’s] Lockie Ferguson – they are rapid. And, OK, I’ve had a decent series but to be the best you have to do series after series like Jimmy and Broady. And I don’t want to be remembered as a good trier, I want to be remembered as a good cricketer. I’ve got a lot more to learn. Maybe with the wind up my back on cold day in Durham [I’m the quickest].” With that Wood heads off for his latest bracing tune-up in the north-east with the promise of warmer climes just around the corner.I wasn’t expecting to well up while watching a documentary about Kanye West. The embattled rapper has made some of the most thrilling, expansive albums in the genre and beyond, but around the time he aligned himself with Trump politically and the Kardashian set personally, the music took a turn for the turgid, while it seemed kinder to look away from the celebrity theatrics. Exhaustively scrutinising his tumultuous life and work over 20 years, the nearly five-hour Netflix project Jeen-yuhs: A Kanye Trilogy is more moving than you might think. Its directors, Coodie Simmons and Chike Ozah, have history with West, having directed his breakout videos for the singles Through the Wire and Jesus Walks, and the film benefits from their thick-and-thin perspective. Filming for Jeen-yuhs effectively started in 1998, with a plan to chronicle the then 21-year-old unknown’s rise through the circuit, from securing a record deal through to the recording of his gamechanging 2004 debut The College Dropout – his blazing creative process at the outset captured like lightning in a bottle. After a period of estrangement, they catch up with the vastly changed West in the present day, beset with mental health problems, a ruinously inflated celebrity ego and lingering grief over the death of his mother, Donda. It’s upsetting viewing, and all the more poignant for the flashes of mercurial brilliance that still glimmer through his erratic behaviour. Try as the documentary might to end on a note of hopeful closure, we sense West’s story has a few more acts to go. As it is, Jeen-yuhs is an essential addition to the ranks of hip-hop cinema: would that most titans of the genre had been so thoroughly documented at all stages of their career. For devoted thoroughness, it can be filed alongside Michael Rapaport’s Beats, Rhymes and Life: The Travels of A Tribe Called Quest (2011; Mubi/Amazon Prime), a lively, semi-scholarly portrait of the influential rap collective, though that’s a rather more plainly celebratory affair. Nas: Time is Illmatic (2014; Dogwoof on Demand) focuses particularly on the creation of a single classic album rather than a whole career, and is rich in the kind of musicological detail that larger portraits tend to leave out. Meanwhile, for a bigger picture of an entire scene’s origins, the 1983 classic Style Wars (Amazon) holds up well, immersing us in the graffiti-tagged New York City social unrest that shaped the form. Hip-hop biopics are a patchier genre, often too sanitised and streamlined to serve their subjects well. Dynamically cast and performed, the NWA story Straight Outta Compton (2015; Netflix) is one of the best, though its conventional, Oscar-chasing rags-to-riches structure still feels ill-suited to such iconoclasts. Still, they fare better than the Notorious BIG in the Madame Tussauds-esque Notorious (2009; Disney+), which is bigger on bling than grit. More interesting is the subgenre of reflective star portraits for hip-hop icons playing versions of themselves. Eminem fared very well in his textured, propulsive Detroit origin story 8 Mile (2002; Netflix), a stiff 50 Cent less so in his vainglorious, Jim Sheridan-directed effort Get Rich or Die Tryin’ (2005; also Netflix), though it’s fascinating as an exercise in 00s celebrity iconography. Sometimes, however, there’s more authenticity in pure fiction. Terrence Howard scored an Oscar nomination for his scorching breakout turn as a Memphis pimp trying to break into rap in Hustle &amp; Flow (2005; Apple TV), and the film, with its unflattering sweat and dirt and custom-written beats, hits harder than most. It’s also where women tend to get a fairer shake. A Sundance phenomenon a few years ago, Geremy Jasper’s Patti Cake$ (2017; Amazon Prime) – about a white working-class Jersey girl with big rap dreams – is too perfect an underdog story to be true, while writer-director-star Radha Blank’s delightful The 40-Year-Old Version (2020; Netflix) might be the most joyful hip-hop film ever made, with its story of a hard-up playwright fighting ageism, racism and sexism, and turning to hip-hop to find her voice. It’s a far cry from Jeen-yuhs’ sobering study of Kanye West struggling with his. Also new on streaming and DVD Kimi (Sky Cinema/Now TV) With his talk of retiring from film-making now a distant memory, Steven Soderbergh continues to bounce fizzily from one genre to the next. This tight, trim thriller is one of his most purely enjoyable recent efforts. Starring a terrific, cobalt-haired Zoë Kravitz as an agoraphobic tech worker convinced she has overheard a violent crime, it nods to vintage Hitchcock and The Conversation in its prowling sense of paranoia, but also feels firmly rooted in the present. House of Gucci (Universal) As Lady Gaga fans dry their tears over the star’s omission from the best actress Oscar race, the arrival of Ridley Scott’s luridly entertaining true crime soap on small-screen media feels just right: it was always a glossy miniseries at heart. If Scott’s steely direction feels less than fully invested in the story of the Gucci family’s bloody downfall, you can’t say the same for Gaga, Al Pacino and Jared Leto’s grand, gale-force performances. King Richard (Warner Bros) Will Smith’s all-in star turn as ultimate tennis dad Richard Williams – who pushed his daughters Venus and Serena to greatness – is so charismatic as to make you almost overlook how odd and uninquisitive it is to frame the Williams’s story as an inspirational Great Man biopic. When the sisters’ mother, Oracene (a superb Aunjanue Ellis), takes him to task for hogging all the credit, this otherwise very likable film doesn’t offer much of a corrective. Old Henry (Sky Cinema/Now TV) So often a characterful presence at the edges of American independent films, Tim Blake Nelson gets the tailored starring vehicle he deserves in this pleasingly traditional, dirt-under-the-fingernails western. As a hard-bitten farmer defending his homestead against marauding outlaws – and revealing an unexpected backstory in the process – he’s a treat, showing newly heroic shades to his craggy physicality and dry, drawling delivery.Experts have sounded the alarm over a growing trend for selling human breast milk online, warning that it can contain harmful bacteria, drugs and viruses including HIV. The concerns prompted eBay to remove listings from its platform, saying it had updated its automatic filters to stop breast milk being sold on the site in future. Dr Sarah Steele, a public health researcher at the University of Cambridge said that while human breast milk had been sold for some time on online platforms, it had normally been listed with some information about the potential risks. But in recent weeks – after reports on social media of women earning as much as £10,000 from selling their milk to bodybuilders – she had noticed a marked rise in the number of adverts. “We need to remember it’s a body fluid. Recently, I have observed, and what certainly ramped up very rapidly in the last week, is the rise of listings on auction sites and online social marketplaces with buy-it-now prices, minimal information about the seller, and no referencing to any safety advice or information whatsoever,” she said, adding there also appears to be an increase in listings offering to post the milk rather than courier it. “What’s new is this idea of remote sale from a total stranger you will never meet and therefore aren’t screening or building trust with at all. You have no idea who or what is at the other end of the transaction. It’s very unsafe,” she said. “Most of all shipping via Royal Mail is not temperature controlled and that’s when bacteria multiply. This should be obvious to people – you don’t send your mate milk via Royal Mail when they run out. Online grocery sites have had to implement a host of food safety protocols.” One advert on eBay seen by the Guardian on Thursday that was apparently posted by a 36-year-old in the UK, charged £15 for 150ml of breast milk. “My baby was born on 10 January and I have an oversupply of excess human breast milk for sale,” the seller wrote. “Milk will be posted frozen in insulated packaging with a frozen gel pack.” After being alerted to the advert by the Guardian, an eBay spokesperson said: “The sale of human breast milk is prohibited on eBay. We have removed listings of this item and updated our automatic block filters to prevent it being listed in future.” There are a number of milk banks in the UK, which provide free human breast milk to babies who need it. However these typically carry out lifestyle checks on donors for factors such as smoking or drug use, and screening of donors to check for infections including HIV, Hepatitis B and syphilis. The breast milk itself is also screened and pasteurised for safety. Steele said one risk from unscreened milk is cytomegalovirus or CMV. While the virus is generally harmless it can cause serious health problems in unborn babies and infants and adults with weakened immune systems. “While people assume the buyers are parents of newborns, actually quite a few people looking for milk online are adults, some who are looking for an alternative therapy when they have cancer or other conditions because they believe it will either offer an immune boost, or be a source of nutrition that they tolerate more,” said Steele. “A lot of the promises people read about in online forums about the miracles of breast milk for adults don’t hold up to science, and the risks of buying this online outweigh any purported benefits,” she added. Steele added research has previously found that human breast milk from online sellers can be rich in gram-negative bacteria, potentially linked to poor hygiene practices, which can be harmful. Another risk, said Steele, is that human breast milk sold online may be diluted with cow’s milk or other fluid, while the storage bags used may mean the milk could contain other substances, such as the industrial chemical BPA. • This article was amended on 21 February 2022 to remove a reference to cytomegalovirus (CMV) often being found in households with cats. Dr Sarah Steele has found milk samples that test positive for CMV and toxoplasmosis, the latter of which is a common infection that can be caught from the faeces of infected cats. While CMV doesn’t come from animals directly, it is commonly found in a test for detecting infections in pregnant women, which includes tests for both CMV and Toxoplasma gondii.When Manchester United lost 4-1 at Watford in November, a defeat that cost Ole Gunnar Solskjær his job, things were that bad I thought it could only get better for the club. Since then not much has changed at Old Trafford. The squad available to Ralf Rangnick should be finishing in the top four of the Premier League. They are fourth but could relinquish that position to teams who have games in hand. If they fail to qualify for the Champions League there will be a lot of blame to go round, not just for those in the dugout or on the pitch, but in the boardroom, too. Manchester City are not only above United in the table but have also overtaken them off the pitch. City have eclipsed United in terms of revenue accrued, making almost £75m more than their arch-rivals in the 2020-21 season. I am studying business, and when that side of things is not going perfectly, it does filter down on to the pitch. United have made some bad business decisions; a number of managers have come and gone since Sir Alex Ferguson left nine years ago, none of whom have come close to replicating that level of success, and many signings have failed to make an impact. There were no signings in January to improve a squad with flaws in defence and midfield. United have an interim manager, so entrusting Rangnick with a budget to invest in players his replacement might not want could be seen as a risk not worth taking. There are obvious issues, such as in central midfield where United are very weak, but they will not be dealt with until the end of the season. It is difficult to make an impact on the squad as an interim. The defensive structure is better and they are pressing slightly differently, but nothing has made me sit up and take notice. Rangnick has managed Cristiano Ronaldo differently to the way Solskjær did, leaving him out when he sees fit and substituting him when required. Ronaldo may not appreciate it but he is 37 and it does not matter how fit he is, he cannot be at his best throughout a long season if he is playing 90 minutes twice a week from August to May. United need him to be thriving. He has 15 goals in 27 appearances, seven more than the club’s second-highest scorer. Without Ronaldo, United would be further down the table and out of the Champions League. As he showed against Brighton he can score an incredible goal out of the blue. Ronaldo might not be happy he is not playing every minute but Rangnick may be doing both Ronaldo and the team a huge favour. Leaks are seemingly coming out of the dressing room about the coaching staff and training. If the stories are accurate, you have to wonder who is leaking them and what they have to gain. It is not a good look. Some players will think they can get away with not adapting to Rangnick’s methods because he will not be there too long and they can wait for the next manager. I remember hearing United players of the Ferguson era saying that what happened in the dressing room stayed there. They would go away with England and not discuss things happening at Old Trafford to make sure nothing got further than those who needed to know, not even international teammates. Secrecy was sacred under Ferguson during their most successful spell as a club and he would not have stood for this. When things are being leaked, it does not bode well. The aura United had during the Ferguson era is long gone. Teams would arrive at Old Trafford and feel in the warm-up they were 1-0 down. Now they feel they can win and there is no sense of fear. United have won seven of 13 home league games this season, which is not good enough for a team aiming to finish in the top four. It gives incentive to opponents. Even though United are not the scalp they used to be, winning at Old Trafford is huge for an opposition player. The team are different but the kits and stadium are the same, so it will be a euphoric experience to take points off United. Rangnick has lost only one league match but has drawn four of those 11 games and he has been knocked out of the FA Cup by the Championship side Middlesbrough at home. In many of those fixtures United have taken the lead but failed to build on it. In times gone by, United would go on to hit three or four to be out of sight long before the final whistle. The reason they are not doing that is the defence and midfield are fragile. Players are putting in the effort for the manager but they are not going to throw caution to the wind – they are being protective of their lead. Missing out on the Champions League would be a huge failure for a club with United’s stature and a good enough playing squad. They need to be at Europe’s top table to give their new manager the best chance to take the club back to where fans want – but there is plenty to do if United are to compete with Manchester City and Liverpool again.Katie Tannenbaum was the only athlete heading to the Winter Olympics this year from the US Virgin Islands, and the first they had sent since 2014. She had been fighting to reach the Winter Olympics for some time. In 2018, despite having reached the qualifying standard, the US Virgin Islands were not given a place in the Pyeongchang skeleton competition. An appeal to the court of arbitration for sport failed. Having finally secured a place for the 2022 Games, once she was in Beijing, 36-year-old Tannenbaum tested positive for Covid and had to go into isolation. Her dream of being flagbearer for the group of Caribbean islands with a population of around 87,000 was over. With their only athlete absent, and their opening ceremony uniforms failing to arrive on time, the US Virgin Islands National Olympic Committee decided they would not attend the opening ceremony at all. “I had remained tough through the news that I had Covid,” Tannenbaum told the Guardian via email, “but the thought of the Virgin Islands having no representation at the opening ceremonies made me emotional. I insisted that if I couldn’t be there someone had to be.” So the team improvised uniforms, and got a volunteer to carry the flag. And then just before they entered the arena, in a moment captured for social media, they video-called Tannenbaum so that she could be a part of it. “I was watching excitedly on TV from my isolation room when they called me just as they were about to walk out. My coach told me that this moment was for me, that we wouldn’t be at the Games without me, and thanked me for getting us here. I was in tears.” Tannenbaum, who started her sliding career in 2011, was freed from Covid isolation in time to compete – but barely had an opportunity to train on the unfamiliar track at the Yanqing National Sliding Centre before race day. “It all happened so fast,” she said. “I was in isolation for over a week, then the next thing I knew I was on the start line at the Olympic Games. While I was elated to have been able to race, it was also devastating to be competing in the biggest race of my career, with the world watching, less prepared than I had ever been. When race day came I had exactly two options … I could race unprepared or I could not race at all.” Tannenbaum decided to race, and was eliminated after the third heat, placed last, with a combined time a massive 12.69 seconds off the lead of the eventual gold medal winner Hannah Neise of Germany. “When I consider how close I came to not having any option, to not being able to even be a part of the race, it makes it easier to accept and to choose to be grateful,” she reflects. Despite her last place, Tannenbaum was all smiles at the end of the run, proudly displaying the US Virgin Islands flag. In any other Olympics there would be a happy ending, and freed from Covid isolation Tannenbaum would at least get her chance to wave the US Virgin Islands flag at the Closing Ceremony on the final day of Beijing. But this isn’t an ordinary Olympics. “Due to the Beijing Organizing Committee’s Covid-19 policies, athletes have to leave the Games within 48 hours after they finish competing, so I won’t be able to attend the closing ceremonies,” she explains. The US Virgin Islands haven’t had much luck in recent years at the Winter Olympics. They sent one competitor in 2014, but their only athlete at the 2006 Turin Games was due to compete for the sixth consecutive time in the luge and break her own record as the oldest woman to compete at a Winter Olympics. Instead the 52-year-old Anne Abernathy broke her wrist in a practice run and could not take part. Is this Tannenbaum’s one and only Olympic experience? Might we see her at Milano Cortina 2026? Would she want to emulate Abernathy? That remains to be seen. “I haven’t put a ton of thought into what my skeleton career will look like four years from now,” she says. “First I am going to enjoy some downtime with friends and family and then make that decision in due time.”The read-outs from this week’s Cobra meetings held to discuss the Russia-Ukraine crisis do not reveal what, if any, refreshments were available for participants, but it seems unlikely they were asked to bring their own booze. These are work meetings. There are serious things to discuss. Anyone given security clearance to attend will not find much party spirit in evidence. But what about the other “work-related events” that have taken place in Downing Street over the past two years and that are now, finally, being investigated by the police? Was this work or play, a bit of both, or some new hybrid and uncategorisable form of activity? Boris Johnson seems likely to defend his perilous position in myriad ways. That, as allies claim, he thought he was attending work events (raising the question of why he did not halt proceedings when he realised they weren’t). That his (brief, perhaps reluctant) attendance at some of these gatherings was all just part of the job. Of course he had to drop in on morale-boosting parties and leaving dos, to say hello and thank his colleagues. Why, he didn’t even realise these were parties. Such was his commitment to the task of being prime minister that he failed to register that alcohol was being drunk, games were being played and that all of this ran counter to the restrictions he kept announcing in media briefings from his prime ministerial lectern. All work and no play makes Boris Johnson a dull boy. And we should acknowledge that any useful definition of work must allow for the variety of forms that work can take. In the past we might simply have described work as “the completing of tasks”. Work is about getting stuff done. In this simple framing, you are either working or you are not. Productivity has to do with output, and quantifying what you have done. In the context of manufacturing and parts of the service sector, you aim to hit targets and deliver goods and services on time and preferably in full. But clearly the nature of quite a lot of work has changed. The management writer Peter Drucker first started talking about “knowledge workers” 60 years ago. What does knowledge work look like? It might involve creative people chewing their pencils and staring out of the window. It might even mean going to the pub. All this could be part of work and lead to the successful completion of tasks. This may partly explain why measuring productivity accurately can be difficult. Is work going on or not? And in an increasingly digital economy, what constitutes meaningful output? When does work stop, if it ever does? The push for a “right to disconnect” and moves to introduce a four-day week are both responses to the risk of non-stop permawork. Work can carry on in unexpected ways. When lawyers and other professionals charge you for their services, they may talk in term of “billable hours”. This refers to the time during which they were working for you. And if your star legal adviser was thinking hard about your case and making a breakthrough while lying in the bath, then that was a billable bath. It was work. Does this mean that the prime minister is in the clear, and that everything he did at the various parties the police want to investigate in fact constituted work? Not so fast. For one thing, several of these gatherings seem to have been entirely social in nature. This was downtime. It was not work. Indeed, Johnson has already admitted that at least one of the gatherings should not have taken place at all. And then we have to ask: what sort of work does Johnson get up to as prime minister? There are the meetings we don’t see – although some witnesses suggest getting him to focus can be difficult. There are a lot of photo-opportunities in hi-vis jackets, a lot of knockabout speeches that prove more or less successful, and there is quite a lot of phrase-making for pooled news clips. It is quite a performance. He seems to be enjoying himself at least some of the time. But as the American writer and mystic Joseph Campbell said: “Work begins when you don’t like what you’re doing.” Is our prime minister really working? It doesn’t always look like it. For any journalist, this is pot calling the kettle black territory. And perhaps it lies behind the irritation (and worse) that Johnson provokes in his critics. He seems to be getting away with the sort of bad behaviour some journalists might also want to get away with, on expenses, and with a country house to relax in at the weekends. He is world king for now, and the fact that he enjoys it delights his remaining fans and is hard for his enemies to bear. Now the Metropolitan police have some work to do. Sue Gray will hand in a complete report in due course. When their work is done, Johnson’s time at No 10 may be done, too. His time in office will not exactly have been a non-stop party. But there has still been too much partying going on by far. “Follow your bliss,” the mystic Campbell also urged. Follow your bliss … but don’t take the piss. Stefan Stern is co-author of Myths of Management and the former director of the High Pay CentreBefore Pankaj Mishra and Kamila Shamsie settle down to earnest conversation, they spar about Mishra’s recent renunciation of cricket, both as a player and as a spectator; Shamsie, a die-hard fan who has interviewed some of the sport’s greatest players, is mock-horrified to hear that Mishra, 53, now prefers tennis. Ten minutes on court, he contends, feels more rewarding than a whole day at the crease. “This is the real migration that has happened in Pankaj’s life!” laughs Shamsie. “It’s dramatic – he’s exiled himself.” Sporting differences aside, the pair are united by a deep commitment to the power of fiction, a subject they interrogate during a wide-ranging conversation on a cold day in London. Shamsie, 48, is the author of seven novels, including Burnt Shadows and Home Fire, a contemporary retelling of the myth of Antigone that won the Women’s prize for fiction in 2018. Her new novel Best of Friends will be published in September. Mishra’s second novel, Run and Hide, is published this week, 20 years after his debut, The Romantics; in between, he has written several highly acclaimed works of nonfiction, including Temptations of the West, Age of Anger and Bland Fanatics, as well as numerous essays and pieces of long-form journalism. Run and Hide centres on a group of friends who meet at the Indian Institute of Technology and come to occupy a dominant position in global technology and finance. KS: I’m interested in your return to fiction. Having read you through the years, there’s so much in your novel that you’ve been writing about in nonfiction. I wonder whether it’s a question of fiction doing something that nonfiction couldn’t, or was it just that you’ve been waiting for a long time to write a novel and the moment seemed right? PM: In a way, I turned to nonfiction because after 9/11, there was a demand for accounts of Pakistan or Afghanistan, and I suddenly found myself meeting that demand. So it was partly a professional decision and partly drift – this is how you end up in most places, you just arrive there, you’re not quite sure how, and then two decades go by. I’ve done a lot of nonfiction, I’ve done a lot of books. And yet, I’m sort of haunted by the feeling that this work that I’m doing is just not good enough, in the sense that it’s not really capturing what is going on in the moral and emotional lives of these people that I’m talking about. Returning to fiction was just so liberating. I was suddenly able to set aside all the formulas of magazine writing, periodical writing, op-ed commentary, and find myself in this realm where I can do anything. I realised this is how life is; people have ideas, but they also have deep inner doubts about those ideas, and their behaviour never quite conforms to how they project themselves to other people. KS: I wonder whether, around the time you started writing the novel, the need for a form which allows those contradictions became more pertinent? PM: Definitely. There are several events, obviously, that went into this particular decision, but one of them was certainly this question of identity. When you spend a lot of time in the west and you write in a particular way, pushing back against all kinds of crude prejudices and ideas about the part of the world that I come from, you’re given a certain kind of identity. It’s projected upon you that you are speaking up for people who have been misrepresented. You’re called a polemicist; that’s a word that’s often trailed me. And you realise that actually, your real engagement is what is happening in the part of the world that you spend most of your life in, which for me is India, the massive political changes there. And seven years ago, a person accused of mass murder [Narendra Modi] became prime minister. That was a traumatic event for many of us. And it’s difficult to process. How did a country that was one of the few democracies in Asia suddenly make this catastrophic decision? That was a question I felt I could not answer in my nonfiction. Then, of course, suddenly you saw that situation everywhere: in Pakistan, a populist coming to power, Brexit here, Trump, so then it became a kind of global situation affecting all our lives. You obviously felt the same in some ways? KS: Yes. And fiction is a very useful place if you have questions rather than answers. PM: That’s well put. KS: You don’t have to have a point of view or an argument you want to build up, you can have the mess of finding yourself holding contradictory thoughts or having sympathies for people in opposing places or finding someone has made a choice you really disagree with, but there’s something you understand about how that choice got made. PM: I think in both our cases, we’re also trying to hold a conversation between these two different worlds we inhabit. One is the place that we’ve grown up in. And the other is where we now live, where we have different identities, or we’re seen differently. And yet, those experiences often seem to be disconnected. One of the reasons I was motivated to write this book is that in the last four or five years, alongside the explosion of Trumpism and Boris Johnsonism, we’ve also had this other discourse, a lot of it extremely welcome, which is focused on the victims of history and historical injustices. But I think this discourse ought to be complicated by the issue of class, which is important in both our writings. Here you are in the UK and being upheld as a representative of darker-skinned peoples or a representative of Asian literature and religion, any number of things. But the fact is that we belong to privileged classes and caste groups. And that is not evident to people here. But we know that we are products of particular systems of injustices back home. KS: I think what can happen here is there’s a curious flattening when people talk about people who are not white, or are minorities, as though these class differences don’t exist, and as though some of us don’t step into London with huge privilege, which makes it possible to move through the city in ways that other people can’t. PM: In a way all these problems of representation, which is what essentially we’re talking about … fiction doesn’t exactly give direct answers to these problems, but it complicates them further. I mean, just to give you an example: I was looking at Vanity Fair, and there’s this famous Indian film star called Priyanka Chopra on the cover. And that struck me as actually a rather chilling example of how representation has worked here, which is that we’re supposed to celebrate the fact that a south Asian, a dark-skinned woman, has appeared on the cover of a magazine that has mostly featured either white people or people born in this part of the world. But what that fact hides is that this person who’s on the cover of Vanity Fair and has tweeted in support of Black Lives Matter is also a friend and supporter of Mr Modi, that she has posed for selfies with him, and that her position within the politics and society and culture of India is a deeply contested one. So it’s a question of breaking down these very simplistic ideas about race, class and gender people have in their heads. And fiction can do that. KS: One of the fascinating things about taking Antigone as a source text for Home Fire was looking at ways in which the play had been interpreted. And you realise in the 20th century, a lot of these rewrites were being written in situations of dictatorship and particularly in the face of civil disobedience to dictatorship. And then you get the 21st century: my Antigone is in Britain today, and Anne Carson when she wrote Antigonick [in 2012] very much referred to Guantánamo and George Bush. This figure of resistance to the unjust ruler is actually beginning to have more of a place in these western liberal democracies. And it was quite striking to me that it’s no longer writing against the junta in Argentina or apartheid in South Africa. Now it is Britain and America that are seen as the countries where there are laws that are inhuman. PM: Culture has been the enabling factor in much toxic populism around the world. The drumbeat of stories about Muslims by the rightwing media in this country has created a really toxic atmosphere, in which the apotheosis of people like Johnson becomes possible. Politics really cannot be disconnected from literary cultures, intellectual cultures, or popular cultures. KS: I became a UK citizen in 2013, and moved here a few years prior to that. I was having this conversation with a friend a couple of weeks ago, who said: “When you became a citizen here, you couldn’t have predicted what a bleak country this would become.” And I thought, no one who was Muslim in this country in the early 21st century would make a statement like that. I remember 9/11, 7/7, the grotesqueness and the horror of those times. And I thought: actually, it felt much worse then; back then I would enter a room and be told things like, but you’re not really Muslim, and asked in this very thoughtful, sad way: “What is it about Islam?” It was the kind of Islamophobia that was an assault, really. I’m not saying it’s gone away, but the temperature has lowered. It felt horrific to be in Britain as a Muslim back then. It’s only now that I realise the extent to which, if you weren’t Muslim, or living very close to someone who was, you probably really weren’t aware of just how suffocating and depressing it was. And there’s a clear line from the destruction of civil liberties that became acceptable then to the removal of citizenship that’s happening now. PM: The culture war globally is the reflex of people who feel besieged right now, who feel deeply challenged. Essentially, it’s people who feel that their moral order or their intellectual order is fading, and that they need to resurrect somehow the certainties that made them so unchallengeable for so long. I see the same reflex at work among people in my upper-caste group in India, who have cuddled up to a demagogue in order to feel protected from what they see as a mob of woke leftists and liberals. KS: Do you remember that Martin Amis interview [in the Times in 2006]? PM: Yes, absolutely. KS: It was such a punch in the stomach to read him basically saying that if Muslims won’t get their house in order, then maybe we need to make them suffer enough to do it. So perhaps they should be banned from travelling. And then, a year later, Amis says: “Oh, that was a thought experiment and I’ve decided, no, that’s probably not the way to go.” People now who complain about cancel culture probably would think those are the good old days when a writer says things like that in print. PM: One way of looking at it is to concede that cancel culture, if you want to use this unfortunate phrase, has always been with us. People in power have always stifled the free expression of things that they don’t want to hear. Without being melodramatic, from the beginning of my writing career in the west, I’ve confronted one form of cancellation or another. When Afghanistan was being invaded in 2001, I had such a hard time persuading my editors in the UK and the US to publish even something saying that war is a really, really bad idea, or something basic like, maybe the Taliban do have a stake in the country? It was such an atmosphere at that point, such a macho rush to war and to vengeful violence, it was very difficult to go against the consensus. KS: You’ve talked a lot about the things that you can do in fiction, but here’s my question to you. Isn’t it more fun than writing nonfiction? PM: Oh, my God. Oh, absolutely. No question. It’s exhilarating, it really is. I mean, you know, going back to your desk every morning, and starting with a scene that you have to describe, or a physical description, all just such stimulating challenges, as opposed to writing yet another piece about Johnson the liar or Joe Biden’s failures. You cannot imagine how demoralising it is, you know, to do it week after week. Here you can escape, even if you’re talking about dark things, there are still moments of beauty you can recover. • Run and Hide by Pankaj Mishra is published by Hutchinson Heinemann (£16.99). To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply • Pankaj Mishra will discuss Run and Hide with Guardian columnist Aditya Chakrabortty in a Guardian Live online event on Thursday 17 March. Book tickets hereNico Porteous has dropped the curtain on New Zealand’s greatest Winter Games, overcoming the elements and a field of established champions to win the Olympic freeski halfpipe title. The 20-year-old from the South Island resort town of Wanaka soared and spun to New Zealand’s second gold medal at a Winter Olympics on Saturday, two weeks to the day after Zoi Sadowski-Synnott’s history-making first. Remarkably, only 12 of the 91 nations competing here have managed to win more golds than two athletes from a small lakeside town. “We both come from a town of ten thousand people and skiing and snowboarding is our passion,” Porteous said. “We just absolutely love it. When Zoi won her gold in slopestyle it was such a motivational moment for myself. I really, really, really wanted it, and that just made me put my head down and really work hard.” Porteous did not win halfpipe’s most prestigious contest so much as survive it. On a blustery morning in the mountain village of Taizicheng, contestants were strewn across the course after crashes and many were left wondering if the competition should have been postponed. Had it not been the final event at the Genting Snow Park, it might have been. Unlike four years ago in Pyeongchang when he won a surprise bronze as a teenage outsider, Porteous went off as the hot favourite in the final. Twelve entrants made three trips each down the 200m-long course known as the Secret Garden with the best score counting towards their finishing position. The reigning world and X Games champion immediately made good on advance billing, setting the target with a score of 93.00 that none of his rivals could approach. Porteous then more or less held on for dear life amid whipping gusts and a bitterly cold wind chill that dropped to -32C (-26F) and at times made a mockery of the competition. David Wise, the two-time defending Olympic champion from the US, settled for the silver with a best score of 90.75 on his opening run, denied in his bid to join speed skater Bonnie Blair as the only Americans to win three straight golds in the same Winter Games event. Another American, Alex Ferreira, was four points adrift of Wise and added bronze to his Pyeongchang silver, completing a repeat of the podium from four years ago with the order reshuffled. “I’m so, so happy. I still can’t really believe it,” Porteous said. “The weather conditions were tough. It was very slow and it was quite challenging. But I stomped what I knew and tried my best and left everything out there.” On Porteous’s winning run on his first descent he launched high above the seven-metre walls on back-to-back double cork 1620s – the consecutive four-and-a-half-revolution manoeuvres only he has landed in competition – capped by an alley-oop 900 for a score of 93.00. It was more than enough to overtake Wise, the early frontrunner who recorded the only other score above 90 on the day with an opening run capped by back-to-back double cork 1240s. With half of the 36 runs completed without a fall, the swirling winds made it practically impossible for the field to mount scoreboard pressure on the leader. No one in the field, including Porteous, managed a higher score on their final two attempts than Canada’s Noah Bowman, whose 84.75 on his second trip earned him fourth place on the day, two points out of the medals. “I had so much prepared,” Wise said . “It’s like I cooked a meal for everybody and I didn’t get to share it.” Not even the champion-elect was spared from the carnage. Porteous failed to complete his final two runs, emerging with blood trickling from his right ear after hitting his head while attempting a double-cork 1440 on his final try. Gus Kenworthy, the US-born freestyler who earned a silver medal in slopestyle for the US eight years ago but represented Great Britain at these Olympics after switching affiliations, was among several skiers who declared the punishing conditions a difference-maker. “The wind was the deciding factor for everyone,” said Kenworthy, who finished eighth. “Even the guys who are on top, they put down incredible runs – it was awesome to see – but they have all scaled back from what I think they were hoping to do. I certainly scaled back from what I was hoping to do.” Four years ago, Porteous and Sadowski-Synnott arrived in the Taebaek Mountains as fresh-faced upstarts looking to make their mark on the world stage. Sadowski-Synnott’s bronze in the big air, only 12 days before her 17th birthday, ended her country’s 26-year medal drought. It also made her New Zealand’s youngest Olympic medallist, a record that proved short-lived when Porteous, then 16, took halfpipe bronze less than two hours later.Boris Johnson has completed and returned the questionnaire he was sent by Scotland Yard, in which he was expected to defend his attendance at alleged parties under investigation. The prime minister was asked by police to fill in the form on Friday 11 February, as part of the “Operation Hillman” investigation into social gatherings in breach of Covid rules between 20 May 2020 and 16 April 2021. No 10 confirmed the prime minister has complied with a Metropolitan police request for his answers to be submitted within a week of receiving the form last Friday. Downing Street has previously said his responses will not be made public. Officers involved with Operation Hillman, which is examining whether Covid restrictions were broken in Downing Street and across Whitehall, sent formal questionnaires to about 50 people as they look into the details of alleged Covid rule-breaking. It comes as a union representing civil servants said it had pushed for officials involved in the investigation to be able to consult notes on the evidence they gave to the Sue Gray inquiry to help inform their Met Q&amp;A. Gray carried out an inquiry into claims of lockdown breaches at the top of government but has only published an interim report while she waits for the police investigation to be completed. Out of 16 events Gray reviewed, police are investigating 12 of them, including as many as six that the prime minister is reported to have attended. Dave Penman, the general secretary of the Association of First Division Civil Servants (FDA), said the decision to allow the notes to be viewed followed an effort by the union, which represents senior and middle management public servants. “To be clear, this has been agreed after a request from us, the FDA, their trade union,” he tweeted. “They will only be able to see what they said in their own interview, to assist them in completing the questionnaires from the Metropolitan police, who have raised no objection to this.” It is understood the Met had no objection. Gray said it was not “standard practice in internal investigations such as this” to share notes with interviewees, but said in a letter seen by the Guardian that she had decided “as an exceptional measure” that they would get “limited access”.Alex Preston’s fourth novel is an intelligent historical fiction reflecting modern sensibilities concerning gender and race, though the setting is 18th-century Kent. Goody, the protagonist, is as comfortable wearing men’s attire as she is in a dress; her foster brother, Francis, has escaped slavery. “Winchelsea’s first dark-skinned resident”, he is largely welcomed by the community as a helper in the smuggling operations that bring both riches and terrors. Goody and Francis must confront the terrible wrongs done to their foster father and mother by a vicious gang of smugglers. Preston bases his narrative on historical fact: Arthur Gray, a real-life leader of the Hawkhurst Gang, is rendered here in beautifully sinister terms. He wears gorgeous clothes and holds orgies in his grand house; his followers, who have names like Poison, terrorise the villages, raping, murdering and pillaging unchecked. Fear is woven into the very fabric of the buildings, locked and shuttered at the sight of any strange rider. Goody decides to take her revenge. Her foster father, however, was a Jacobite in close contact with Bonnie Prince Charlie, and first she must take part in the rebellion, under the name William Stuart. The horrors of the battle of Culloden are rendered vividly and excitingly. When Goody/William returns, she finds her home under siege, and faces up to her real father, a man as murderous as she has become; and to a family whom she must accept, and who must accept her as she is. Preston is also a nature writer, and his prose is keenly alive to the highways and holloways of Kent, while the atmosphere is salt-tanged and ale-tinged. There is strong visual imagery tending towards the filmic: a pregnant Goody seeking her foster brother in the county taverns is particularly poignant. Battles are thrilling; there are last-minute escapes, and the final standoff between the doughty Kentish folk and the Hawkhurst Gang will have you on the edge of your seat. Winchelsea is a well-wrought, satisfyingly solid romp that, at the same time, asks us to consider how deeply violence has scarred our past, and the ways in which society’s structures – small and large – can be reformed. • Winchelsea by Alex Preston is published by Canongate at £14.99. To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.When the former British deputy prime minister Nick Clegg joined Facebook in 2018, the company was immersed in a number of scandals. Cambridge Analytica had been harvesting personal data from Facebook profiles. UN human rights experts said the platform had played a role in facilitating the ethnic cleansing of the Rohingya in Myanmar. Its policies during the 2016 US presidential election had come under fire. Now Clegg has taken a top role as the company’s president of global affairs. Will he be able to tackle the seemingly endless problems with the way that Facebook – which recently rebranded as Meta – works? For better or worse, Meta and Google have become the infrastructure of the digital public sphere. On Facebook, people access the news, social movements grow, human rights abuses are documented and politicians engage with constituents. Herein lies the problem. No single company should hold this much power over the global public sphere. Meta’s business model is built on pervasive surveillance, which is fundamentally incompatible with human rights. Tracking and profiling users intrudes on their privacy and feeds algorithms that promote and amplify divisive, sensationalist content. Studies show that such content earns more engagement and in turn reaps greater profits. The harms and risks that Facebook poses are unevenly distributed: online harassment can happen to anyone, but research shows that it disproportionately affects people who are marginalised because of their gender, race, ethnicity, religion or identity. And while disinformation is a global phenomenon, the effects are particularly severe in fragile democracies. Despite his new title, Clegg alone won’t be able to fix these problems. But there are several things he should do to protect the human rights of its users. To begin with, he should listen to human rights activists. For years, they have recommended that Facebook conduct human rights due diligence before expanding into new countries, introducing new products or making changes to its services. They have also recommended the company invest more in moderating content to effectively respond to human rights risks wherever people use its platforms. The likelihood of online speech causing harm, as it did in Myanmar, is inextricably linked to the inequality and discrimination that exists in a society. Meta needs to invest significantly in local expertise that can shed light on these problems. Over the past decade, Facebook has rushed to capture markets without fully understanding the societies and political environments in which it operates. It has targeted countries in Africa, Asia and Latin America, promoting a Facebook-centric version of the internet. It has entered into partnerships with telecommunications companies to provide free access to Facebook and a limited number of approved websites. It has bought up competitors such as WhatsApp and Instagram. This strategy has had devastating consequences, allowing Facebook to become the dominant player in information ecosystems. It’s also essential for Meta to be more consistent, transparent and accountable in how it moderates content. Here, there is precedent: the Santa Clara principles on transparency and accountability in content moderation, developed by civil society and endorsed (though not implemented) by Facebook, lay out standards to guide these efforts. Among other things, they call for understandable rules and policies, which should be accessible to people around the world in the languages they speak, giving them the ability to meaningfully appeal decisions to remove or leave up content. Meta should also be more transparent about the algorithms that shape what people see on its sites. The company must address the role that algorithms play in directing users toward harmful misinformation, and give users more agency to shape their online experiences. Facebook’s Xcheck system has exempted celebrities, politicians and other high-profile users from the rules that apply to normal users. Instead of making different rules for powerful actors, social media platforms should prioritise the rights of ordinary people – particularly the most vulnerable among us. As Meta is trying to become the “metaverse”, these problems will only become more apparent. Digital environments that rely on extended reality (XR) technologies, such as virtual and augmented reality, are still at an early stage of development. But already there are signs that many of the same issues will apply in the metaverse. Virtual reality glasses can collect and harvest user data, and some VR users have already reported a prevalence of online harassment and abuse in these settings. So far, Meta hasn’t put its users’ rights at the centre of its business model. To do so would mean reckoning with its surveillance methods and radically increasing the resources it puts towards respecting the rights of its users globally. Rather than rebranding and pivoting to XR, where the potential for harm stands to grow exponentially, Meta should press pause and redirect its attention to tackling the very tangible problems it is creating in our present reality. The time to address this is now. Frederike Kaltheuner is the technology and human rights director of Human Rights WatchThe likely duel involving Manchester United’s Bruno Fernandes and Robin Koch is likely to form a key sub-plot as Marcelo Bielsa aims to atone for his side’s 5-1 defeat at Old Trafford back in August. Manchester United have changed managers since then but Fernandes, the scorer of a hat-trick in that dissection of Bielsa’s defence, remains and is likely to operate as the advanced playmaker in a 4-2-3-1 visiting formation. With Kalvin Phillips still sidelined by injury Koch is likely to anchor the Leeds midfield, with his principle task being to stop Fernandes. Given that the visitors are desperate to secure a Champions League place and Bielsa knows his side are too close to the relegation zone for comfort, much is at stake. Louise Taylor Sunday 2pm Sky Sports Premier League Venue Elland Road Last season Leeds 0 Manchester United 0 Referee Paul Tierney This season G18 Y72 R1 4.05 cards/game Odds H 3-1 A Evens D 3-1 LEEDS Subs from Klaesson, Shackleton, Bate, Gelhardt, Roberts, Firpo, Summerville, Kenneh Doubtful Dallas (knock), Firpo (thigh) Injured Phillips (hamstring, Mar), Cooper (hamstring, Mar), Hjelde (knee, unknown), Bamford (foot/ankle, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y62 R1 Form LWWLDL Leading scorer Raphinha 8 MANCHESTER UNITED Subs from Henderson, Shoretire, Mata, Hannibal, Mengi, Lingard, Elanga, Jones, Wan-Bissaka, Telles, Lindelöf, Bailly, Fred, Matic Doubtful None Injured Cavani (groin, Mar), Heaton (knock, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y53 R2 Form DWWDDW Leading scorer Ronaldo 9For at least a couple of weeks after it happened, Bob Odenkirk couldn’t remember he’d had a heart attack. He would wake up, feeling pretty good, and think about heading to work. “And everyone would say: ‘Calm down, you had a heart attack,’” he recalls. There is an absurdity to this daily revelation of bad news that I think Odenkirk – a connoisseur of the absurd – might enjoy. “Here, let me show you this,” he says. “This is something my daughter made for me because every day was the same thing of not remembering.” He gets out his phone and finds a picture he took of a whiteboard with a timeline of the events of that week or so in July last year – collapsing on the set of his TV drama Better Call Saul, hospital, his family arriving – so that Odenkirk would know what had happened. He holds it up to the screen. On day one, she has written “die” (the quote marks are hers). Was it a shock to read that every day? “Yeah it was. This might sound gross, but the thought I had was … ” Odenkirk pauses a lot as he speaks, and laughs pretty much all the time. “Some people make their way through an experience like that and think: ‘I have to change my life, I have to stop whatever.’ And my thought was: ‘I have to keep going. This is great.’” The heart attack came shortly after Odenkirk finished his memoir, tracing his career from alternative comedy to high-end drama, so at least he could say the timing was good. It was not a total surprise: he had seen two cardiologists in 2018 and been told he had the beginnings of coronary heart disease. One told him to start medication straight away; the other – who did more extensive tests – said he didn’t need it. Odenkirk listened to the second. “I’ve got nothing against medicine, I’m fully vaccinated. He’d done a more thorough job of testing.” He was lucky, he says: it happened on set, not in his trailer, so people were around when he collapsed. The on-set medic gave him CPR, and she had a defibrillator in her car, then he was in hospital for a week. The fact that he can’t remember anything of the day, or the first couple of weeks of his recovery, means, he says smiling, “I missed out on that existential lightning bolt. On the other hand, there’s a lingering … ” He pauses and laughs. “Is there such a thing as a lingering lightning bolt? We’ll invent that term.” Has it changed the way he looks at his life? “I think I’m still thinking about it,” he says. A short while later, he says “certain deaths affect you, and so my own death didn’t affect me as much as the recent passing of Bob Saget [the comedian and Full House star who died last month].” He didn’t know Saget well, he says, but “he was one of the nicest guys you’ll ever meet. Friendly, interested in everyone around him, supportive.” When the comedian Bill Hicks died in 1994 – Odenkirk didn’t really know him either, but they moved in the same circles – it shook him. “That made me think I’ve got to chase what I want more determinedly, because you don’t get to just linger for ever. And Saget passing made me think I could do a lot of work in being a more present and considerate person.” He smiles. “Artistically – if you want to call me an artist, and fuck you if you call me an artist – I’ve been very rewarded, and no one could ask for more. So maybe I need to shift my focus to just be a better person around other people.” Odenkirk arrives on our Zoom call without a publicist minder (rare), and is funny (obviously), as well as friendly and generous with his time and space. He takes his laptop out to the terrace of his house in Albuquerque so he can show me the mountains and volcanoes in the distance. He pulls things off the corkboard behind his table, mostly filled with family photos, to show me including an “article” about his heart attack in the Framley Examiner, a parody British local newspaper, sent to him by its writers, whom he befriended. When he moved some of his stuff to this house and was unpacking boxes of old photographs taken throughout his early comedy career, his assistant was amazed. He thought perhaps he should set down his stories of the birth of alternative comedy in LA, performing at Chicago’s influential comedy theatre Second City, being a writer on Saturday Night Live, and his own sketch work in the cult Mr Show with Bob and David (made with his longtime collaborator David Cross). “Mr Show is the core of the book, and I needed to talk about it before everyone completely forgot that it existed,” he says. Odenkirk’s mainstream fame may come from his role as the shady lawyer Saul Goodman in the hit drama Breaking Bad, and then in its spin-off prequel Better Call Saul – Odenkirk is about to finish shooting the final scenes – but his book is unapologetically for comedy geeks. It is the reason he named it Comedy Comedy Comedy Drama, he says – so as not to disappoint those who might pick it up hoping for insights into a thespian career. Odenkirk could talk comedy for hours; when we discuss why he has such anglophile tastes, he painstakingly explores why it works. (It’s the “straight line”, he explains; the specifically English idea of decorum, which is easy to distort for laughs, “whereas we don’t have that. We’re Americans.”) On the subject of a new cautiousness around comedy writers, fearful of being cancelled, he has what he calls his “wedding table theory” – that, just as you may find yourself seated at a table at an acquaintance’s wedding with a range of people who might not be open to your work, the internet has made everything available to everyone. “These things are meant to be seen in a context, at a place. But the context is gone, or it’s so easily erased or shifted. And it’s a real problem.” *** What is striking in his book is how determined Odenkirk seemed, how unwilling to compromise on his vision for his work. In his early career, he comes across as exacting and demanding and he admits he was difficult to work with. While the careers of his friends and those in his comedy orbit – including Ben Stiller, Adam Sandler, Judd Apatow – blew up, Odenkirk never seemed driven by fame or ratings or money (at one point, he almost went bankrupt). All he wanted to do was create comedy that he thought was great. The fact that not many people saw it was disappointing to him, but not disastrous. It is, of course, easy to say this from the safety of his current position: it worked out. Approaching 60, Odenkirk has a prestige TV career, a new direction as an unlikely but excellent action movie star (his film Nobody was a hit last year), and is about to start another comedy show, a mockumentary titled Guru Nation, with Cross. Mr Show is being discovered by new audiences online, and Odenkirk is a cult hero to younger performers. He also has a happy family life (his wife, Naomi, is his manager and sometime producer, and they have two grownup children); not even the small matter of a heart attack can dampen his spirits. Odenkirk, one of seven children, grew up in a small town in Illinois with a ready-made audience. He and his brother Bill (now a comedy writer) would get up from the dinner table and perform. His mother, Barbara, a devout Catholic and “strict in so many ways, would absolutely indulge this”, he says. “She was never more entertained than by kids and their behaviours, and she would encourage it.” What did he get from it? “The warmth, the laughs.” Their house, he says, had “a tension running through it because my father was struggling with existence”. His father, Walter, drank too much, would disappear regularly, and then eventually walked out on the family. His death, when Odenkirk was in his early 20s, was, he writes, “a shrugging affair”. “I don’t know what his story was,” he says. “I don’t feel like I’ve ever met anyone like him, but he was a pretty disconnected guy.” The things Walter would do – get into car accidents, lose the family’s money, disappear – were frightening, but Odenkirk didn’t become withdrawn, he became angry. He pauses, thinking about it. “One time I got to confront my father physically. It was a great feeling. And that’s kind of sad, and horrible.” There is a current of anger in Odenkirk’s work, not only in the bite of his comedy (an apoplectic Odenkirk is a glorious thing) but in his drama roles, too: Nobody was inspired by his own experience of intruders breaking into his family home, and became a place to process that anger. His experience of having Walter as a father gave him, he thinks, “trouble with authority, and a desire to look at problems and shout about them, and make fun of them”. Comedy arrived in his childhood – Odenkirk discovered Monty Python, still his greatest comedy love – and it was an escape. “There was a kick in it, there was something I connected with. They were silly as hell but that in itself, that degree of silliness, is a big ‘fuck you’ to the status quo of thinking and behaviour.” Odenkirk saved up and bought a tape recorder, and he and his brother would write and record sketches. When he was 14, a friend’s family took him to Chicago to see a show at Second City, providing the revelation that comedy could be a career. He wrote sketches at university and had a radio show, but after a chance meeting with Del Close, the influential but chaotic comedy guru, in a Chicago bookshop, Odenkirk left university to try to make it as a comic. By his mid-20s, he had joined the Saturday Night Live writing team. It was there he met Ben Stiller; later, he would go on to write on The Ben Stiller Show. Stiller remembers Odenkirk as “the grownup in the room when it came to sketch writing. I think when we’re that age we always have a weird confidence in ourselves, that only experience can drain you of, but I felt like he already had perfected the form and was interested in pushing it, too. He’s incredibly smart and he combines that with a love of really ridiculous ideas. He really likes being almost absurd but it is always set up in a construct that lets you know it’s funny – not just absurd for it’s own sake.” Saturday Night Live was a huge break, and Odenkirk stayed for three years but he wasn’t happy; while many young writers would stick it out, he resigned from this dream job with a vague plan to move to LA. There, he rooted himself in its blossoming alternative comedy scene.These spores of comedy would be coming to life and spreading all around you, it was a great thing.” “There was this energy that just was starting,” he says. “ Mr Show, which ran on HBO from 1995 to 1998, was (almost) everything Odenkirk wanted, and found a passionate – but small – audience, its final season buried in a midnight slot on Mondays. “I wish it was more successful,” he says, “but it’s perfectly fine, we got to do it, that’s what mattered.” He does have some regrets, particularly about the complete absence of female writers, “especially because we had such great women around us”. These included Jill Talley and Sarah Silverman. “It was such a boys’ club,” he says. “Immature men.” He says none of the women ever submitted a sketch, “which all the guys did. That just shows you that people need to have a trailblazer. They need to believe that it’s possible.” It wasn’t like he wasn’t aware of how male-dominated it was. “We did an episode called the Mr Show Boys’ Club, and we made fun of it. But still, why didn’t we do anything about it?” He sounds incredulous. “It’s just weak. I have no excuse.” After Mr Show ended, Odenkirk flailed for the next 10 years, making some fairly awful films and other projects that never materialised, alongside small parts in great stuff such as Curb Your Enthusiasm (he missed out on the lead in the US version of The Office to Steve Carell). “When you have that much failure – and I had a long list of failed projects – you start to wonder whether you have anything left in you that is of any value,” he says. He had stopped caring so much about what he was making. “Part of that is a safety mechanism of like: ‘I just want to protect myself, because if I care too much, and it fails, I’ll feel bad.’ And part of it was a fraudulently misplaced disrespect for showbiz: ‘Oh, who cares? It’s just a movie.’ You can’t do that. I mean, I cared so much about Mr Show, and I think you’ve got to do that.” By this point, he’d also had two children and – the total opposite of his own father – he was devoted and present. Still, in terms of work, it was a hard few years, he says, until Breaking Bad came along. It was Mr Show that led to Breaking Bad – creators Vince Gilligan and Peter Gould had been fans – and strip mall lawyer Goodman, with his wisecracks and garish style, brought a levity to the show. Casting Odenkirk was inspired, but he found this shift into drama, with Saul’s fast, dense dialogue, intimidating. When he started shooting Better Call Saul, playing struggling lawyer – but good guy – Jimmy McGill who becomes the amoral Goodman, he asked Bryan Cranston (Breaking Bad’s lead) for tips on how to be a “real actor”; in the first weeks of shooting he lost his voice, which he thinks was due to stress. The show, he writes, “beat me up and left me by the side of the road, gasping for breath, but I gave it everything I had”. When we speak, they are a week away from finishing Better Call Saul. “The other day, I kind of had a little breakdown on the set, where I got pretty emotional. I couldn’t do the scene.” But he says the series ending hasn’t really hit him yet, and that’s true of the way his emotions work in general. “I don’t know what to do about it,” he says with a laugh, then a sigh. “My brain is like: ‘Fuck it. What else we got? Think about something else.’” Until Better Call Saul, Odenkirk had been in, or around, giant shows – Saturday Night Live, a role on The Larry Sanders Show, Breaking Bad – but remained on the sidelines, resolutely fringe. It suited him. He was relieved, he says, to have been in his 50s when proper fame came his way. “I certainly had a feeling of: ‘Oh my God, if this happened to me when I was 24, that’ll mess you up.’ Somehow I don’t think I have to worry about being too famous now. I’m 59, I don’t have that much time left.” He laughs. “I had a fucking heart attack!” he shouts. “I mean, come on.” *** ‘Saul brought light to a doomed universe’ In this extract from his memoir, Odenkirk recalls filming Breaking Bad I was in Albuquerque, on my knees in the desert, a gun pointed to my temple and a combover/mullet combo hairpiece flapping about in the wind. It was 2am and a sandstorm was whipping particles into our eyes and mouths. The character of Saul is rattling away in Spanish while Jesse and Walt pressure him to help Badger stay out of prison. In writing Saul’s desperate plea, with its references to guys named Ignacio and Lalo, Vince Gilligan and Peter Gould were unknowingly laying the groundwork for another TV series to come, years down the line, but no one had an inkling of that. I particularly loved shooting that scene. The situation was so fantastic. A giant crane holding a brilliant artificial moon high in the sky, Bryan and Aaron and me, three grown men, waving fake guns, crouched over a shallow grave at 2am. This was showbusiness as conjured by some dreamer, staring at a poster of Chinatown (I’m talking about myself). I love it when it feels like you’re with a pack of folks getting away with something outrageous, unjustifiable, out there. Between takes, Bryan, Aaron, and I would hide out in the Winnebago to escape the sandblasted cold. Smiles all around. The life. Kids playing with costumes, emotions, and imagination. I’d say one reason I enjoyed playing Saul was that Saul enjoyed playing Saul. The audience liked him times ten. He brought light to the doomed universe of Breaking Bad, or at least until things went bad for him, too. The off stage story I had for Saul in the context of BB was of a hollow man, like my dad and his pals. After hours, Saul’s life is strip clubs, alcohol, and golf on the weekends, of course! A garbage life. A big fat zero. That was all the backstory I needed at that time. Overall, I tried not to psych myself out about the shift I’d made from sketch comedy to this world of dark drama. In comedy I was often asked to “play it bigger”. But no more. There was something Zen about the experience, losing yourself in the moment – even if the moment was fraught with tension, frustration, manipulations. The kind of writing I was suddenly getting to work with was loaded with subtext and drive – worthy of every ounce of my attention. The four years that I was involved in Breaking Bad, I was a part-timer: my character popped up here and there, and I was pretty sure Saul was going to get knocked off at any moment. He would have been the perfect character to take out: big enough to matter, not big enough to change the core story. Every time I was sent a script, I looked for Saul’s death scene. But it never came. Comedy Comedy Comedy Drama by Bob Odenkirk is published by Hodder (RRP £20) on 1 March. To buy a copy for £17.40 go to guardian bookshop.com; the final series of Better Call Saul begins 18 April on AMC in the US, and 19 April on Netflix in the UK and Stan in Australia; Odenkirk performs in conversation events in London (18 March), Manchester, Liverpool (both 20 March) and Ely (21 March)When Leicester beat Wolves on the opening day of the season it looked like Brendan Rodgers’ side were the more likely to make another tilt for the top four. But Leicester’s injury problems and Bruno Lage’s fine work have led to Wolves emerging as surprising challengers for a Champions League spot. That push will be helped by the fact that, in a rare occurrence this season, Lage has an almost fully fit squad to pick from this weekend. Leicester meanwhile, remain beset by injuries, including their entire first-choice defence. Paul Doyle Sunday 4.30pm Sky Sports Premier League Venue Molineux Last season Wolves 0 Leicester 0 Referee Craig Pawson This season G16 Y67 R1 4.25 cards/game Odds H 13-10 A 5-2 D 23-10 WOLVES Subs from Ruddy, Jonny, Hoever, Gomes, Marçal, Campbell, Trincao, Silva, Hwang, Moutinho Doubtful Moutinho (calf) Injured Mosquera (hamstring, 27 Feb), Boly (calf, Mar), Neto (knee, Mar) Suspended None Discipline Y40 R1 Form DWWWLW Leading scorer Jiménez 5 LEICESTER Subs from Ward, Jakupovic, Soumaré, Mendy, Soyuncu, Maddison, Ewing, Pérez, Daka, Pereira Doubtful Maddison (illness), Soyuncu (knee) Injured Castagne (hamstring, Mar), Fofana (ankle, Mar), Justin (hamstring, Mar), Evans (hamstring, Apr), Vardy Suspended None Discipline Y27 R1 Form LWLDLD Leading scorer Vardy 9Dramatic pictures of huge waves, fallen trees and the damaged roof of the Millennium Dome have knocked the Ukraine crisis off the front of most front pages on Saturday after Storm Eunice battered Britain. The Guardian’s lead story is “At least four dead as worst storm in decades roars in” along with a picture of wild seas crashing into the harbour wall in Porthcawl in Wales. At least 20 million people in Britain have been told to stay at home, it reports. The Mirror’s headline is “Carnage” and is laid over a photograph of huge waves and spray on the seafront at Blackpool, with the town’s famous Tower seen forlornly in the background. Several papers feature pictures of the Millennium Dome damage, with the Times calling Friday a “Day of destruction” and reporting that energy companies are under pressure to restore power to hundreds of thousands of homes cut off after the violent weather brought down electricity lines. The Telegraph also likes the Dome picture and has the accompanying headline “Chaos of Storm Eunice”. It says the bad weather is going to continue for the next week, hampering efforts to clean up the mess and reconnect homes. The Mail has the headline “Britain’s 122mph Dome-lition day”, but its lead story is “MI5 chief: UK’s ‘fight to keep our way of life’”. The Express says “Battered by killer storm” and reports that Britain could face a bill of £500m to repair the damage caused by the biggest storm for decades. The Star focuses on the sheer speed of the winds – “122mph killer” – which is what was provisionally recorded at the Needles on the Isle of Wight. If verified, it would be the highest ever recorded in England and converts to 196km/h. The previous record was 118mph at Gwennap Head in Cornwall in 1979. The i notes that “red alerts” related to weather events will become more common because of climate breakdown under the main headline “122mph storm batters Britain”. The Sun’s splash headline is “Blown apart”. The storm has brought snow and freezing weather to Scotland. The Record’s headline is “Storm troupers”, and the story of a mother thanking “heroes” who helped push an ambulance up a hill in the snow so her sick child could treated. The Press and Journal says “More misery on way after Eunice” with wild weather set to continue until Monday.The Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, is set to deliver a rallying call to the west to save his country from a Russian invasion when he plans to address a security conference in Munich on Saturday, despite US warnings that Russia might exploit his absence to topple him before he returns to Kyiv. His planned trip comes as Russian separatist forces have called for a general mobilisation in the Russia-supporting east of the country. The president’s office said he was going ahead with the trip but would return within a day. Zelenskiy wants to give world leaders a personal message about the scale of the threat and the extra support still needed to strengthen Ukraine’s defences. He is due to hold a bilateral meeting with the US vice-president, Kamala Harris, and will seek to have input into the G7 foreign ministers meeting also due to be held on Saturday. The US president, Joe Biden, said on Friday he was convinced an invasion was set to happen, including an attack on Kyiv, but that if Zelenskiy makes it to Munich, he is likely to be urged not to respond to Russian provocations in the east by holding back from a military response that will be used as a pretext to mount an invasion. The White House said it was for Zelenskiy to decide whether to fly to Munich from Kyiv at a such a sensitive time for his country. Biden said it was for Zelenskiy to decide his itinerary, but asked whether it was wise for him to leave. Biden said: “In the pursuit of a diplomatic solution it may not be … It’s his decision.” Kyiv and Munich are just over 850 miles apart. It is possible for Zelenskyi to address the conference in the afternoon as scheduled and make the return trip within a day. The US is concerned Zelenskiy would not be able to coordinate Ukraine’s military response if he happened to be out of the country the moment an attack was mounted. The US has also leaked intelligence showing Russia has plans to try to decapitate the Ukrainian leadership with targeted assassinations and arrests. Ukraine has been consistently trying to project a sense of normality, partly to minimise damage to the Ukrainian economy, but the call for calm is increasingly difficult to project given the escalation of violence in the east of the country and the transparent warnings by the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, that a genocide is under way in the Donbas region. Amid a mass of disinformation, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe’s special monitoring mission in Ukraine warned of an indisputable dramatic escalation of violence in the past 48 hours. Putin is due to inspect a Russian military exercise in Belarus. The French president, Emmanuel Macron, is due to speak on the phone with Zelenskiy on Saturday before holding a further call with Putin. Separately, the Italian prime minister, Mario Draghi, is trying to organise a bilateral meeting with Putin in Moscow early next week. Italy is highly dependent on Russian gas imports, and is urging the EU to exclude energy from its near-complete sanctions package. It also wants an EU fund to divert resources to countries dependent on Russian energy. Draghi also urged that the sanctions should be gradated according to the severity of any Russian attack. Putin has indicated he is willing to keep gas supplies running in return for Italian support. The EU needs unanimity for any sanctions package among its 27 members, and is already facing problems persuading the Hungarian prime minister, Viktor Orbán, a close ally of Putin who is facing national election in April. The US has claimed that sanctions would kick in as soon as an invasion was launched, adding that they would start at the top of the ladder. That forecast looks increasingly implausible as EU leaders’ positions begin to differ on what constitutes an invasion worthy of imposing huge sanctions. Some EU leaders fear that once sanctions are imposed, it will be an admission that diplomacy has failed leaving no route back to saving Ukraine. Nato has made it clear it will not use force to protect Ukraine since it is not a Nato member and so not subject the Nato article 5 clause committing all member states to collective self-defence. Ukraine wants more weapons and claims that under an agreement signed as part of ridding post-Soviet Ukraine of nuclear weapons, the west undertook to protect Ukraine from external attack. The Budapest memorandum was signed by three nuclear powers – Russia, the US and the UK – in December 1994, but it is claimed that the assurances imposed no legal obligation on the signatories. In a statement from the president’s office, Zelenskiy said he hoped to emerge from the conference with concrete additional financial and security pledges, adding he would meet with Harris as well as the British prime minister, Boris Johnson, the German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, and other friends of Ukraine. Zelenskiy said: “The situation on the line of contact in Donbas, in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and near the borders of Ukraine, is being analysed by special services of our state. “There is a constant analysis of intelligence and exchange of information with partners. Ukraine regularly receives additional up-to-date intelligence on the activity of Russian forces.” He added that the situation in the east of the country was completely controlled by the Ukrainian security and defence forces.When The Handmaid’s Tale first came out in 1985, the initial response was broadly that people thought such threats to women’s bodies and reproductive rights “couldn’t happen here”. By the time it aired as a TV series in 2017, just after Donald Trump was inaugurated in the US, people were no longer so sure. With every headline about gains in reproductive rights – Ireland repealing the eighth amendment in 2018, which had effectively banned abortions – there are others that underscore how fragile these rights are, wherever you live. Recent changes to abortion law in Texas, which have prohibited abortions after six weeks – one of the most restrictive rules in the nation – and Poland’s near total ban on the procedure last year make it clear just how slippery the slope still is. We have to ask: what kind of country do we want to live in? A democratic one in which every individual is free to make decisions concerning their health and body, or one in which half the population is free and the state corrals the bodies of the other half? Women who are not allowed to make their own decisions about whether or not to give birth are, in fact, owned by the state, as the state claims the right to dictate the uses to which their bodies must be put. The work of the Abortion Support Network (ASN) and the need for it in apparently progressive Europe is a stiff reminder: democratic rights don’t grow on trees. They must be struggled for and maintained. Those at risk of forced childbearing should be very grateful to have such organisations and their volunteers in their corner. – MARGARET ATWOOD *** In the evenings, after she is done with her day job in London, Ciara makes phone calls to people across Europe. Everyone she calls has contacted the ASN, a UK-based charity that helps people from European countries to access abortions. She is one of about 80 volunteers providing logistical advice, travel planning, a place to stay and solidarity to people who live in countries with restrictive abortion access. Mara Clarke, who founded ASN in 2009, says, “People think that abortion travel is an American or developing-world thing, but it isn’t.” While there has rightfully been extensive coverage of the US, given the introduction of restrictive abortion laws in Texas and the potential for the Roe v Wade ruling to be overturned this year, the evolving situation in Europe has received little attention. When she set up ASN, Clarke was told there was no demand for a European abortion helpline. “I knew that wasn’t right,” she says. “If there were women who could afford to pay to travel for an abortion, there were other women who couldn’t.” Clarke was proved right. Calls came first from the Republic of Ireland, Northern Ireland and the Isle of Man, and the charity began helping hundreds of women every year. As abortion laws became more liberal in those countries in 2018 and 2019, ASN opened their services to Poland, Malta and Gibraltar, and anyone else in Europe who needs it (just because abortion is technically legal in a country does not mean it is always straightforward to access). ASN also works with partner organisations across the continent who direct people to one another for local advice and funding. *** ‘Money is often the biggest hurdle for our callers’: Ciara, 36, helpline volunteer, London I grew up in Dublin. Abortion was something I’d talk about with my friends, but the “going to England” part it entailed was mysterious to us. There was always this concern that if one of us needed an abortion, none of us would know how to go about it. I heard about ASN when I went to a vigil at the Irish embassy in London in 2012 for Savita Halappanavar. Savita had died from a septic miscarriage at a Galway hospital after her requests for an abortion were denied. Her death underlined to me that the fight for reproductive rights is about life and death, and it drove the campaign to repeal Ireland’s eighth amendment, which effectively banned abortion. I began donating to ASN, and soon after responded to a call for volunteers. Working on the helpline was scary at first. I got training and support, but I was speaking to people in vulnerable situations. In my second week, a man called from a Northern Ireland hospital because his wife’s pregnancy was in danger. He thought they might have to travel to England to get an abortion and wanted to know what he needed to do. We work with each caller to see what they need. It can be anything from a simple question about arranging an appointment at a clinic, to figuring out the most efficient travel plan for them and assisting with money. The later the abortion, the more expensive it becomes. The cost of the procedure, which is £1,300 in England for a second trimester abortion, plus travel, childcare and time off work, can be high. Money is often the biggest hurdle for our callers. I’ve given a grant of £5 before – that was all that was preventing a woman from accessing an abortion. You need to speak to most clients several times. I fit the calls around my day job, either during lunchtime or in the evenings. When I was in the office, I’d find a meeting room where I could speak privately. It can require a mental shift to go from speaking to someone about something that is so emotionally challenging for them, to returning to my regular life. You really get the warm and fuzzies from doing this. In 2018, when the eighth amendment was put to a referendum in Ireland and repealed, an ASN colleague was approached by a woman who mentioned me by name and said I saved her life. I think about that often. *** ‘Some know what they need; others just say, “Please help me”’: Kasia, 35, adviser and helpline volunteer, London A few years ago I joined some activist groups on Facebook and saw ASN’s ad for Polish-speaking volunteers. This work combines my two favourite things: feminism and logistics. When someone calls, I can give tangible support. There are people who know what they need, and others who are completely lost and just say, “Please help me.” We have a checklist of questions to understand their circumstances. We find out how far along they are, as there are different legal limits in different countries – sometimes abortion pills can be an answer. The UK has the longest limit at 24 weeks. That, and where they live, helps us figure out the most suitable place for callers to travel to. Most people from Poland travel to the Netherlands or Spain, and most people from Ireland go to England. We get calls from other countries where the law is more liberal; in Italy, many doctors conscientiously object to abortion and in France abortion is permitted on demand only up to 14 weeks. Now we ask about passports; Brexit means people from the EU can no longer travel to the UK using only their national ID card, which affects many callers. We also find out how much money they have, to give grants. Callers are often angry, especially from Poland. They feel abandoned by the government and stigmatised by society. It can be nice to offer solidarity and say, “It’s not you, it’s the system. It shouldn’t be like this.” And to remind them that they are not alone. There’s this unspoken assumption that abortion is always a difficult choice, or there is suffering to endure, but that’s not the reality. No one wants an abortion, but there are people who don’t feel guilt. I’ve also spoken to callers who didn’t believe in abortion, but need one. The work can get stressful and busy, but there’s a feeling of solidarity. We have a few WhatsApp groups, and when something happens, the volunteers reach out and lift each other up; that support is tremendous. *** ‘The people who come from Ireland are so brave and strong to travel such a distance’: Patricia, 67, host and retired social work trainer, Liverpool My daughter works at the city’s Merseyside Clinic and told me there were women coming over from Ireland seeking abortions who had nowhere to stay. This was nine years ago and I thought, “I’ve got a spare room.” I became ASN’s first host in Liverpool. There are about seven of us now. We get emails asking if anyone can take a client on particular dates. When I say yes, I’m given their name, age and when they’re coming. It’s not a lot of background, but it’s as much as I need. Everybody I’ve hosted has come from Ireland. Even though the law has changed there, access to an abortion after 12 weeks is permitted only in limited circumstances, so the women who come now tend to be further along than they used to be. I’ll pick them up, make a meal and we’ll eat together. Some want to tell you everything about their lives and you have a laugh; others are feeling more vulnerable and don’t want to engage. I let people talk as much or as little as they want. Why they are having an abortion has nothing to do with me. Most come on their own. Many have children at home. Often they haven’t told anyone what they’re doing. I had a young woman who was a refugee in Ireland. There was also a grandmother who brought her 15-year-old granddaughter. The people who come are so brave and strong to travel such a distance. They’re having to make decisions and organise things quickly. It’s rewarding to be able to support them through that. *** ‘In Malta, we’re taught from a young age that abortion is synonymous with murder’: Hanien, 24, volunteer for a helpline in Malta, currently living in Dublin I was against abortion when I was younger because that was the only reality I knew. Malta is a Catholic country and there is anti-abortion sentiment in its institutions. We’re taught from a young age that abortion is synonymous with murder, and that a woman who seeks one is evil. Maltese law states that abortion is a criminal offence, with no exceptions. Any person who seeks or helps with one can face up to three years in prison. The penalty is higher for medical professionals. I became interested in women’s rights around 2016 when the morning-after pill became legally available. I’ve volunteered for the Family Planning Advisory Service in Malta since it started in 2020. It’s a pro-choice helpline providing information about reproductive health choices. Because of the law in Malta, we cannot help people get an abortion or give them money towards travel to get one, but we can share publicly available information, like the fact that ASN exists. The main danger in this work is the social stigma. Malta is a small country and you can be easily identified. The stigma is greater if you’re a woman and even more so if you are a person of colour. It’s framed as, “Look at this person who is foreign and bringing this evil on us.” Sometimes people are surprised that I do this. I wear a hijab and people associate being religious with being anti-choice and anti-abortion. But that is misinformation and ignorance about how Muslims view abortion. This work is my way of standing up against damaging patriarchal structures that affect me and my peers. *** ‘I hate that people are panicking about money, childcare and flights’: Pip, 26, veterinary surgeon and volunteer, Manchester My job is to make posts for ASN’s Instagram that help people understand the charity’s work and encourage people to donate. I fit it in around my day job. I became interested in abortion access when I was 17. I was at boarding school and a girl asked me for help getting an abortion. She felt alone and terrified – and this was in England where abortion is legal. I hate that people from countries where abortion isn’t legal are panicking about money, childcare and booking flights. Being an openly queer person, I’m no stranger to online abuse and harassment, which helps with the moderation side of the job. We have a coordinated response which boils down to, “Don’t feed the trolls.” So on Instagram, hateful comments get deleted immediately and people get blocked. We have a lot of evangelical Christian, American men harassing us. “Murderers” is a common insult. And there’s a lot of misogynistic harassment and insinuations that if a woman wants to have unprotected sex, then she should have to deal with the consequences. An American man was repeatedly making threatening comments on our Facebook page and one of our followers reported him to the FBI. He was recently sentenced to 20 months. You can feel powerless in the face of the wave of restrictions on people’s bodily autonomy. But it does feel powerful to know the work we’re doing changes lives. *** ‘We can’t change the law on our own, but this work gives me a sense of agency’: Aga, 27, Abortion Without Borders volunteer, Warsaw, Poland After the recent death of a 37-year-old woman who was denied an abortion in Poland, there’s been an atmosphere of grief here. It’s the third known case reported since a near-total ban came into force in January 2021. Three years ago, I moved to the Netherlands and a friend told me the Abortion Network Amsterdam (ANA) needed Polish-speaking volunteers. I did email shifts responding to people and helping them set up travel and appointments. I once accompanied someone to a clinic; my role was to translate, but there was a support element, too. ANA helps people with costs, and when their funds aren’t enough, they contact ASN. Both are part of the Abortion Without Borders network, which is made up of groups across Europe. The volume of emails increased dramatically in the run-up to the Polish abortion ban. After I returned to Poland six months ago, I had to stop helping individuals directly: I work as a translator, helping with medical records and press releases, but I no longer set up abortions myself because when you’re in Poland, you have to be far more careful. You need to find where the line lies and that’s murky; the way the laws are set up means there’s a lot of room for interpretation. We’re very careful to stick to things we can’t be prosecuted for. While we don’t have control over what happens in Polish hospitals, and we can’t change the law on our own, doing this work gives me a sense of agency in an otherwise overwhelming situation. *** ‘I cannot have this baby’: testimonies from women who have contacted the charity “I am 21 weeks and three days pregnant. I wish I could have this baby, but it has been diagnosed with severe brain defects. I need help in arranging a trip abroad. I have no idea how to go about this.” “I am eight or nine weeks pregnant. I have a very difficult family and financial situation. My husband beats me and my children, and abuses alcohol. I don’t want the same for my third child. My husband raped me and it turns out that I am pregnant.” “I am pregnant: 21 weeks. I only found out at 16 weeks. I live in Poland. I cannot have this baby. I have no money or support because the baby’s father left me as soon as he found out. I don’t have money to go abroad to a clinic, so I ordered abortion pills, but after over a month, they still haven’t arrived. I don’t know what to do.” “I am 18 weeks pregnant and the baby has a serious heart defect. The doctors told me to expect that at any moment the baby may die. I can’t bear it, I can’t function normally. All the antenatal tests so far have ruined us financially because they are not covered in Poland.” “I feel incapacitated in my country and am ashamed that I live here and have to get help from people from a foreign country. I know that after the procedure a stone will fall from my heart. Carrying such a sick child is probably every mother’s worst nightmare. I will be grateful to you till the end of my life, and I will support you as much as I can because there will be more women like me because of the stupid law in this country.” “The doctor told me the baby was very unlikely to survive in the womb, but because of our legislation I was not able to access an abortion. I wish that I lived in a country where they trusted women to make the right choices for themselves.” “I don’t want to write that our pregnancy was a matter of life and death, but it was. You gave us a chance for further life. We are still so shocked and grateful that there is still such a thing as genuine, honest kindness and selflessness in this world.”It was April 2020, the sixth week of home schooling, and eight-year-old Lara was fed up. Her father, photographer Helge Skodvin, along with his wife and two elder daughters, was stuck inside with Lara at home in Norway. The first wave of Covid had closed schools across the country, so at 9am every day, each of Skodvin’s daughters took a room in the house to join online classes; his youngest was supposed to be in the kitchen. Instead, Skodvin found Lara hiding under her bed, refusing to go back to her screen, table and lesson. He is pretty sure it was maths she ran away from. “I was walking past her bedroom and spotted her legs sticking out. I had my phone in my hand, so I just snapped the scene,” Skodvin says. “I loved the colours, the chaos, the authenticity, and there was beautiful spring light coming in through the window. There was no need for my work camera, or even any edits.” After a few minutes, Lara went back to the kitchen, and returned to school a few days later. Soon afterwards, her sisters followed suit, much to the relief of their exhausted parents. In the months that followed, the image was included in two books about lockdown, and in one of Skodvin’s exhibitions. Lara, now almost 10, loves the photo. In fact, she considers herself something of a celebrity.Soaring gas prices have been making headlines but for some households heating bills are nowhere near reaching record highs. These are the residents of Passivhaus homes. There are 1,500 Passivhaus buildings in the UK – and they have never been more popular. Each one is built – or retrofitted – to an internationally recognised “energy and comfort standard”, which typically involves very high levels of insulation, triple-glazed windows and an airtight, draught-free structure. “It’s a way of ensuring that your building or home is very energy efficient, by reducing the energy demand – particularly for heating – down to very low levels while, at the same time, making sure the building is comfortable inside and has high levels of good indoor air quality,” says Jon Bootland, the chief executive of the Passivhaus Trust. The trust is a non-profit organisation that supervises the awarding of the Passivhaus standard in the UK. Bootland says over the past 18 months the number of Passivhaus projects in the pipeline has soared. “At the last count, there were over 7,000 homes in development – some only at the planning stage, others in construction and nearly complete.” Membership of the trust has also doubled, from around 250 members in August 2020 to 500 today, suggesting there are now twice as many companies providing specialist design and construction services. To qualify as a Passivhaus in the UK, a building must meet the standards required by the trust and undergo a strict compliance process with an expert consultant who is an accredited certifier. “The certifier supervises the process from the beginning,” Bootland says. “They check the drawings, they check what’s built on site and they check the end result – and then that gets certified, at that point.” It is much more rigorous than the typical building regulations inspections that always occur during the construction of a house, he says. The owners receive a certificate and a plaque, which they can incorporate into the building. Although there are no official statistics, Bootland says that based on anecdotal evidence, he would expect a Passivhaus to sell for between 5% and 10% more than a similar property built to normal energy efficiency standards. Because of the desirability of these homes, Bootland warns anyone looking to buy a Passivhaus to be wary of unclear marketing claims. “A lot of people will say a house has ‘Passivhaus principles’, which actually has no meaning really.” A true Passivhaus will always have a certificate to prove its status and your solicitor should be sent the paperwork during the conveyancing process. Social housing Interest in Passivhaus buildings exploded, Bootland says, when local authorities started declaring climate emergencies and setting targets to become carbon neutral – or net zero – in their activities. “If you’re trying to deliver net zero, new-build social housing, one of the best ways to do that is to build a Passivhaus and then have some renewable energy provision locally, possibly on the site.” If the energy demand of a home is small, then you only need to invest in a small amount of renewables in order to balance that usage out. Last year, Camden council in London won an award for its Agar Grove development. Consisting of 216 council homes it is the largest Passivhaus scheme in the country and the council says residents have seen a reduction in their energy bills of up to 70% over their old homes. Flora Irani, 60, recently moved into one of the council homes with her husband and three children. “I love it,” she says. “It is a two-storey, four-bedroom house but we have just two radiators – one downstairs and one upstairs. And we never feel cold. It is amazing.” She has been a social-housing tenant for 15 years and used to pay £100 a week for gas and electricity but never felt warm enough. Now, she doesn’t pay anything for gas, as heating and hot water are incorporated into her rent, and pays £70 a month for her electricity. “My rent has gone up a little bit – not much – but it’s worth it,” she says. Unfortunately, inflation and the increased cost of living means spending the money she has saved on her energy bills now goes on essentials such as food. “It’s very helpful but it’s not money for saving or doing something fun with because everything else is more expensive.” Self-building As awareness of the climate emergency has grown, Passivhaus designs have become more popular with self-builders. Juraj Mikurcik built Old Holloway cottage, a three-bedroom, single-storey property in rural Herefordshire, for £135,000 in 2017 – and hasn’t had to pay a gas bill since. “We don’t have any central heating, just two towel rails in the bathrooms and a wood burning stove,” he says. Yet even in the depths of winter, his home always feels perfectly comfortable, he says. “It’s this fairly constant temperature. It doesn’t matter if it’s winter or summer, it’s very even.” He uses electricity and an air source heat pump to heat his water. In total, his electricity bills come to £65 a month and he gathers firewood to heat his stove. But he rarely needs to light it – only nine times so far this winter. “Even during the ‘beast from the east’, when we had a foot of snow on the roof, we only put the wood burner on for maybe a couple of hours a day. And we were fine,” he says. It is a far cry from the winters he and his wife used to experience in their previous home, an old stone cottage. “We used to spend £1,500 a year on heating oil just to keep barely comfortable, and another £500 on electricity,” he says. As an architect, who works for Architype, a firm that specialises in sustainable architecture, he had always dreamed of building his own Passivhaus but had only £50,000 in savings. He and his wife bought a plot of land with planning permission for £100,000, putting down a £20,000 deposit and borrowing £80,000 from Ecology building society. They used the remaining £30,000 of their savings to start the build and took out a self-build mortgage – again from Ecology – to fund the rest of the construction costs. The society currently offers builders of Passivhaus homes a discount of 1.25% off its standard rate. In total, the build cost £135,000 but Mikurcik thinks he saved at least £50,000 by managing the project and doing some of the work himself. The 100 sq metres property is now estimated to be worth just under £400,000. “We’ve got used to high levels of comfort, so going away on holidays or staying with friends at certain times of year can be a bit of a shock to the system,” Mikurcik says. “It can be quite surprising to go into a normal house and feel cold spots and draughts.” These homes are typically about 4% to 8% more expensive to build than a normal home, according to the Passivhaus Trust. This is partly because of the stringent quality assurance process builders must undergo, and partly because you are likely to spend more on insulation, ventilation and glazing. A Passivhaus is also likely to be more time-consuming and difficult to build than a normal home – but “only a tiny bit more”, Bootland says. “The building materials aren’t any more difficult, they can be the same as for other buildings. It’s the attention to detail, in terms of getting the design right, and the fact that the quality control on site is more rigorous.” He recommends using builders and architects who are on their fourth or fifth Passivhaus project. “They’ve already been through the learning curve and worked out what works and what doesn’t.” Retrofitting With the right budget, it is possible to turn an existing property into a Passivhaus via a process known as retrofitting. Harry Paticas, formerly an architect for Arboreal Architecture and the founder of Retrofit Action For Tomorrow, is currently retrofitting his 1978 mid-terrace home in London. So far, he has spent about £100,000 and cut his energy bills from £1,500 to £600 a year. “The most noticeable impacts were the loft insulation and windows. That is because they were installed in one go, so we could feel the immediate impact before and after,” he says. He estimates that he has added at least £100,000 of value to the property. This is partly because he has converted a garage, which has had the added benefit of making his home more thermally efficient while increasing the size of his living space. The house is also much quieter inside, thanks to the triple-glazed windows, and the roof is now watertight. “It’s so much warmer in the winter and so much cooler in the summer. And that, I think, is really worth a lot,” he says. Anyone thinking of retrofitting their existing home should ask a Passivhaus consultant to go through their property and develop a staged plan with them before they undertake any work. This consultation can range in cost from a few hundred pounds to a few thousand pounds, depending on where you live in the country and who you hire, but it is particularly important if you live in a period property, a listed home or a conservation area. “If you’re living in a period property, I would highly recommend getting a very experienced person to help you because of the potential risks,” Bootland says. “In some cases, going to the full Passivhaus retrofit standard might not be the best answer because of the amount of work needed and the effects on the fabric of the building or restrictions such as conservation area rules.” In Victorian terraces, for example, walls are breathable and absorb moisture. “If you put insulation on them in the wrong place, or use the wrong kind of insulation, then you can trap the moisture and it can damage the fabric of the building, particularly if you’ve got timber joists,” he says. You may still be able to improve the insulation, “but it might not be financially viable or appropriate to take a building like that to the full Passivhaus retrofit standard. So definitely get expert advice. Don’t try to do it yourself.” Mortgages If you are buying or building a Passivhaus, you may be able to fund it with a green mortgage. These mortgages reward you for owning an energy efficient home, typically by offering you discounts or cashback. Ecology building society, for example, offers owners of these homes a discount of up to 1.25% off its standard rate, and will lend on retrofit costs or for self-build, or to help you buy a new Passivhaus. The discounted rates on offer range from 2.4% to 2.9%, depending on what you are buying and whether you are renovating or building the property. Nationwide building society offers up to £500 cashback to borrowers buying an energy efficient home, while Halifax offers £250. You can also get up to £500 cashback from Halifax or Lloyds Bank when you make one of several eligible “green living” improvements to your home, such as insulating it or installing triple-glazed windows. If you install a ground or air source heat pump, you may qualify for up to £1,000 cashback. • This article was amended on 20 February 2022 because an earlier version referred to Paticas as “an architect for Arboreal Architecture “ whereas he formerly held that role.Shortly after Frenkie de Jong signed for Barcelona, he received a text message. It was Sergio Busquets welcoming him to the club and inviting him to get in touch if he had any questions or wanted any advice. Coming from the Spanish midfielder, it was not only a thoughtful gesture but, for two reasons, a remarkable one. First, although De Jong’s transfer was announced in January 2019 he was not leaving Ajax until the summer. Also, he was reported to have been bought to replace Busquets in the team – maybe not immediately but certainly at some point. The club legend could have been forgiven for feeling uncomfortable about the £65m deal. That point was underlined by a Marca headline after De Jong’s debut in a friendly against Chelsea: “Busquets has a problem called De Jong”. Busquets clearly did not see it that way. “He was like: ‘Great you’re coming and if you need something I’m always there to help,’” De Jong says. “And when I arrived in Barcelona, he recommended a restaurant and made a reservation for me and my girlfriend, Mikky. He had also informed the owner that we were coming so that everything was well arranged for us.” The anecdote symbolises the atmosphere at Barcelona, according to De Jong, where rivalry is not an issue despite the high stakes for every player. Three years later, Busquets and De Jong are regular midfielder partners in a team whose fortunes have improved under Xavi Hernández and who hope to retain their grip on fourth place before the weekend’s fixtures when they visit Valencia on Sunday. “I never got that feeling ‘a new midfielder is coming which might mean I won’t play,’” says a cheerful De Jong before training. “Everyone really wants to help you. It’s like the best are playing and you can only influence that yourself. It’s not like someone else is to blame if you’re not playing. And I get the sense everyone feels that way.” De Jong made things easier for himself by starting Spanish lessons at Ajax, allowing him to interact more easily with his new teammates on arrival. “My Spanish was not fluent, but I could make myself clear and understand the other guys,” he says. “So despite the fact I was living abroad for the first time in my life, the transition was not so big.” What may have helped, too, was that he knew his surroundings a bit. As a young boy, he spent several summer holidays with his family on a campsite near L’Escala, in Catalonia, where other guests got a first glimpse of De Jong playing football on Spanish soil. Occasional visits to the Camp Nou meant his dream destination was set. When he got the chance to join the club at the age of 21, he seized it, even though Pep Guardiola and Thomas Tuchel were keen to bring him to Manchester City and Paris Saint-Germain, respectively. After two and a half years as a regular at the Camp Nou, De Jong has a feeling of satisfaction but also of unfulfilment. “I’m very happy I’m at Barcelona: from a young age I’ve wanted to be here, so in that way it has been a dream come true. But I would have liked to win more trophies than we did in my first two years. I expected more in that sense, let’s put it that way. But other than that, I’m very happy here and hopefully for many more years.” De Jong explains that training under Xavi differs in certain elements from that under Ronald Koeman, who was sacked in late October with the team ninth, but he can see a blueprint of attacking football that is constant. “Quite a few things are the same, because at Barcelona you always play in a certain style which doesn’t depend on the manager,” he says. “But every coach has his own details.” Xavi is adding dimensions to De Jong’s game. The Netherlands international is happy to call on the advice of one of Barcelona’s greatest players. “We’re both midfielders, roughly in the same position, so in that regard he can teach me a lot. Sometimes we meet in his office and he shows me video clips of my games, where he explains how he sees it and what I can do to improve. We watch clips of how you position yourself and what you can do best in certain situations.” De Jong has played in a variety of positions for Barcelona and was even deployed by Koeman for some time as a centre-half – where he did well. But his best role is in midfield with licence to drop deep and build up the play, overcoming the first line of press and unbalancing the opponent’s formation, while connecting his team’s defence and midfield. De Jong says he enjoys any setting in which he can fully express himself. “I don’t necessarily have one position where I really want to play, but I think I’m at my best if I’m in a role where I can often touch the ball,” he says. That was exemplified in the 4-2 win over Atlético Madrid two Sundays ago that was arguably Barça’s best performance of the season. De Jong started in midfield but dropped deep to help in the buildup and to cover for the wing‑back Jordi Alba while also being involved in attacking areas. That was illustrated by his one-two with Gavi for the teenager to set up Dani Alves for the team’s fourth goal. The match against Atlético was memorable for many reasons, including the Camp Nou attendance topping 70,000 for only the third time since early March 2020. “We played for such a long time in empty stadiums that it became kind of normal,” De Jong says. “When there is less atmosphere you notice it, with the adrenaline not being at the same level.” Although the fans are back after a season without them, Barcelona are having to adjust to an altogether different absence: that of Lionel Messi. “First of all I thought it wasn’t true,” De Jong says of the moment last August when he heard the Argentinian was on his way out. “I was collecting my dad and brother from the airport. Then I got a message: ‘Messi is leaving Barcelona.’ A bit later we got indications it was really happening. At first, you just can’t believe it, even though there were rumours throughout the summer. But I never took it into serious consideration so when it happened it was a shock.” Not only was the team’s best player departing, it also exposed Barcelona’s difficult financial state. “He was the face of the club, so when he left – after everything he has done for the club – it was a heavy blow for everyone,” De Jong says. “We still miss him. If someone like him is not at the club any more, then things are suddenly very different.” Koeman has explained how Messi had made everything look glossier with his extraordinary qualities. De Jong has had to get used to Messi not being next to him on the pitch. “If you have such a player in your team, you just try to find him as much as possible – so the game is adjusted to him, which is logical,” he says. “When he leaves you have to adjust to it as a player and team.” Messi had been a key component of the group that made De Jong feel welcome from the word go. The 24-year-old explains what made Messi so special. “He is the best in pretty much all aspects of football. Whether we did finishing drills, positioning plays or other training games: he was the best. No praise about him is exaggerated. For me, he is the best ever.”On any given Saturday, Rory would spend several hours glued to a screen flickering with hundreds of football and horse racing bets placed by customers of the Irish bookmaker Paddy Power. One of multiple insiders from firms including Paddy Power Betfair, Ladbrokes and William Hill who spoke on condition of anonymity, Rory was part of an obscure corner of the gambling industry that exists to maximise profits by clamping down on successful punters. “The volume of customers they had, you could afford to get rid of anyone you thought wasn’t going to be profitable,” he said. Punters know the house usually wins, but most have no idea that bookies sharpen their edge via something called “stake factoring”, the process by which winning customers are dialled down, while losers are allowed to bet more. It works like this: when a customer opens an account, they might be given a stake factor of 1, meaning they can bet 100% of the normal maximum stake, for example £500. “As soon as people start winning or losing, that gets adjusted,” said Cameron, formerly of William Hill. “It starts with 50% and if they keep doing it [beating the bookie], it’ll keep going down. At William Hill it went down to 25% to 10% and eventually down to 1%.” Sometimes, such decisions are determined by other factors. “We’d make judgments based on what job you do, who you’re friends with on Facebook,” said Steve, who works as an odds trader at a well-known betting website. “It’s particularly true of any account with a female name,” he said, explaining this was often someone who had had their stake factor reduced on their own account and was posing as a spouse, sister or friend. A manual, handed out to employees of Paddy Power within the past six years and seen by the Guardian, offers further insight. It advises staff to restrict customers who “look like bad business” and to increase stake factors for “all customers that are regularly hitting their max [maximum bet]”. Those customers with a stake factor above 1 can wager more than 100% of the normal maximum figure. The guide also suggests traits that supposedly indicate someone is likely to be bad business, including “eastern European customers”, apparently based on concerns about locations in which past suspicious betting patterns have been identified. For the bookies, stake factoring is seen as a legitimate way of levelling the pitch against punters who they argue are resorting to unfair methods. One former trader at William Hill explained how the firm would be targeted by “latency cheats”, people who exploit the small delay between events at a match and the bookies’ TV pictures, either by accessing a faster feed or attending the event. “You see a bet come through from a brand-new account on a certain cricketer to score less than 25 runs, and they’ve put on as much as they can. You look up at the TV and he’s out that ball.” There is, too, always the risk of the stablehand or kit man with inside knowledge of a lame horse or a star striker with a tummy bug. Other areas, though, are less clear cut. Some insiders complain of “bonus abusers”: people who milk the offers that companies send out to lure in new gamblers. Much more common are the “arbers” or arbitrage gamblers, who scour gambling websites for obviously wrong odds. By identifying an event where the odds are clearly priced wrongly, arbers can place a conflicting bet with another operator and make a return regardless of the result. The practice can even be automated by using bots to place multiple small wagers, flying under the radar of systems designed to spot the practice. However, some traders fear that bookies have become trigger-happy, targeting not just cheats but canny operators, known in the trade as “warm” or “shrewd” punters, or simply as “bad business”. “It tends to happen now that everyone that beats the price gets put under the ‘arber’ banner, which is unfair,” said Fintan, who has worked at multiple operators including Ladbrokes. “I’d say it’s probably 65%-70% of punters that get factored where it’s definitely the right decision.” One ex-Paddy Power employee showed the Guardian a menu of stake factors that suggest the company was more than happy to restrict people who were simply canny. New customers were set at 1.0, the document said, unprofitable customers at 0.3, and “warm” customers at 0.1. “The people running these businesses are answering to shareholders,” said Connor, who works in the gambling industry. “The guys in the trading room didn’t want to be answering on a Monday morning why they didn’t close an account that was winning.” One gambler, Bernard Henry, shared the results of a demand sent to Coral to see what data it held on him, known as a subject access request. It showed he had won just £38 over four years but had been prevented from placing sports bets after the bookie realised he had beaten their odds 73% of the time. He was still allowed to bet on casino products where the house never loses over time. Henry believes bookmakers shared data about him with other operators, via software that companies are permitted to use which is intended to prevent fraud but might also be used to shut down a smart better. Everyone the Guardian spoke to said accounts were rarely closed completely, for good reason. According to Paddy Power’s manual, “warm” customers are “of use to us as marks”, meaning they are worth monitoring to assess if your prices are wrong. Even arbers, seen as cheats in the industry, would be set at a factor of 0.01. One former employee of Betfair believes this is about satisfying City investors, who see customer numbers as one measurement of success. “If they close all the bad customers, you go from 50,000 active users to 10,000,” he said. The flipside of factoring down winners is that losers have, over the years, been given more leeway to place ever bigger bets. The biggest stake factor Rory recalled a customer being allotted was 40. “He’s allowed to lose 40 times what anyone else was and it was astronomical what he was punting. There was no conscience to it.” In response, Paddy Power said its safer gambling checks would always override stake-factoring decisions. All of the sources who spoke to the Guardian said stake factoring was increasingly automated at the more tech-savvy companies. This, they said, meant there should be fewer arbitrary decisions made by bookies playing it safe. But Brian Chappell, founder of Justice for Punters, said he did not trust the industry to do right by its customers and feared unintended consequences. “Following intrusive, secretive profiling, only losing customers are allowed to choose how much they bet,” he said. “This is facilitating an unsafe and unfair UK sports betting market where unprofitable customers are more likely to consider the black market.” A spokesperson for Paddy Power owner Flutter said stake factoring was “common practice across the industry” but that it did not wish to restrict customers unfairly. They said the practice was “also critical in protecting the integrity of sporting events where we believe a customer placing bets has inside information”. None of the other gambling companies contacted by the Guardian returned a request for comment.Fostering guide dogs was part of Gary Lyon’s plan to never get his heart broken again. It backfired spectacularly. It all started when Lyon, a 75-year-old retired plant pathologist, had to put down his pet dog, Zac. “He was a lovely boy,” says Lyon. “But he had all sorts of health problems towards the end, and was off his feet and not happy.” Zac, a lhasa apso, always had a very responsive tail. When it was up, he was happy; when it was down, he was sad. “We noticed his tail was down all the time,” says Lyon, “and realised the end was nigh. After it was done, my wife Carol and I said we never wanted to go through that again.” It is the first of many times in our phone call that Lyon almost cries. Lyon lives near Guide Dog UK’s dog training centre in Forfar, north of Dundee, where puppies finish their training before being rehomed. “I’d seen people locally with guide dog puppies,” says Lyon, “and thought, ‘That’s a good way to go. That way, I don’t ever have to put another dog down.’” He signed up to be a trainer in 2014. For the first year of their lives, puppies live at Lyon’s home. He teaches them basic commands and more complex skills, such as how to lead people upstairs and how to stop at a curb and wait for the lights to change. “Guide dogs are some of the best-bred dogs,” says Lyon. “If there are any medical or behavioural issues, their parents are taken out of the breeding programme. They’re intelligent, inquisitive, confident.” Most are labradors, golden retrievers or German shepherds – or a mix of these breeds. One of the first dogs Lyon trained was Elvis, a labrador. Lyon taught Elvis how to identify a door. “What you do,” he says, “is say, ‘find door’, go to a door, rattle the handle, then give him a treat.” To test him, he took Elvis to a shopping centre in Dundee. “I said, ‘find door,’ and he took me to the nearest exit. We hadn’t even come in that way. I had no idea how he did it. I think he smelled the fresh air.” When he started working with Elvis, Lyon thought it would be easy to give him back. (Lyon usually gets the puppies when they are seven weeks old, and hands them back to continue their training when they are 14 months.) “When we first got Elvis,” Lyon says, “people said, ‘Won’t it be hard to give him up?’ We said, ‘Oh no, it’s not like putting a dog down.’ I had no idea. I just disintegrated when the dog went.” He chokes up again. The next dog Lyon trained was Murphy, a lab-retriever cross. “He was so cute it was unbelievable,” he says. Murphy went to Sarah Parkinson, who is 55 and lives in Newtongrange, just outside Edinburgh. “I became very depressed when my eyesight deteriorated about five years ago,” says Parkinson. “I had to give up work and felt completely confined to the house. But when I got Murphy life just started getting better. He enabled me to live a full life again. He’s changed my life completely.” Lyon, she says, is a truly remarkable person. “He’s so dedicated,” she says. “He produces such rounded dogs. They’re so loving and caring and well-trained.” Parkinson, Lyon and Carol are now friends: she comes to visit, and brings Murphy with her. Watching Murphy interact with his new owner is a bittersweet joy. Murphy looks up at Sarah with such love, Lyon tells me. He is emotional again. After Murphy, there was Rocky, a German shepherd. “God,” says Lyon, voice cracking. “He was lovely. I bonded with him big time. Floods of tears when he went.” The most recent dog was Forest. “He was the best,” says Lyon. “He was stunning. My wife bonded with him and said, ‘I can’t do it again.’” It’s a bitter irony, I point out, that a plan to avoid the heartbreak of putting down another dog has locked Lyon into a perpetual cycle of loss – only with many animals, not just one. “I am torturing myself,” he agrees. “But it’s worth it.” He says it is a privilege to train the dogs. “I’m doing something useful. You can’t always do something useful in life.” When asked about his treat from Guardian angel, Lyon is resolute: the only thing he wants are some fresh toys for his current charge, Danny, a 13-month-old labrador-retriever cross. “He loves soft toys,” Lyon explains, “but they don’t last long.” Online pet boutique Love My Human provides Danny with a box, which the puppy immediately gets to work on. “He’s shredded one of them already,” says Lyon. “It was a pig. There’s only a tail left now.” They’ve been playing tug-of-war with the remaining toys: it takes all of Lyon’s effort not to fall over. “They’re such strong dogs,” Lyon says. Watching Danny gambol and play with his new toys is a bittersweet experience for Lyon. “I’m not yet dreading him leaving,” he says. “That comes later, when they’re getting ready to go. I just want him to succeed.” Want to nominate someone for Guardian angel? Email us – with their permission – and suggest a treat at guardian.angel@theguardian.comBikepacking, Scotland Adventure leader Rosie Baxendine has quit her office job and become a full-time bikepacking guide (like backpacking, but on a bike). Many of her trips are women-only, such as the two-day explorations of Perthshire, Lothian or the Borders. Others have a theme, such as a north-east trip in search of puffins, a pedal-powered distillery tour or a west coast island adventure. All involve wild camping and are designed to introduce people to bikepacking, so no experience is needed, kit can be provided, and distances are a manageable 28 miles a day. Rosie also offers e-bikepacking tours, accessible trips on adaptive bikes and bespoke adventures. £220 for a two-day trip, next departure 23 April, rosiebaxendine.com Wild journey into Devon Active England is adding to its walking, cycling and swimming trips this year, with new nature tours around Devon. The tours are packed with outdoor yoga, seashore foraging, wild swimming, forest bathing and paddleboarding. The wildlife tours also involve walking, swimming and foraging, plus boat trips, which are focused on encounters with the local otters, beavers, seals, peregrine falcons and Dartmoor ponies. Activities aside, there is plenty of time for riverside picnics and pints at historic pubs, plus lunch at Riverford Field Kitchen, winetasting at Sharpham Estate and evenings round the campfire. Guests stay in cosy three-star hotels. Four days’ B&amp;B from £849 or six days’ from £1,049, 1 April to 31 October, activeenglandtours.com Sail around the UK coast Skipper Paul and first mate Qiao are sailing Snark, their modern Thames barge, around the UK this summer – and you’re invited aboard. The 2,000-mile, three-month voyage is being split into 10 legs of five to nine days, so people can sign up for a section that suits them. The circumnavigation starts and ends in Plymouth, calling at the four nations’ capitals and historic ports along the way. No sailing experience is required, but guests will be shown the ropes and encouraged to pitch in – while still having plenty of time for wildlife-watching, photography and a little sea swimming and rowing. There’s also a working crew discount for those with sailing experience (one per trip). From £1,231 for seven nights all-inclusive, 1 June to 13 September, snark.limited Run across Wales Experienced trail runners can challenge themselves with this 55-mile, three-day guided running tour from the Welsh border to the coast. It is led by the fell runner Tim Higginbottom and involves runs of up to five hours a day across the Cambrian mountains from Newtown to Aberystwyth. Day one is the longest at 22 miles; day two (18 miles) has the toughest terrain; and the final day is a relatively easy 15-miler along a former railway track. Luggage is transported between boutique hotels. £695 for four nights’ B&amp;B and one dinner, next trip 23 June, naturetravels.co.uk Canoe the River Severn Shrewsbury Canoe Hire has a new, seven-day self-guided expedition: paddling 125 miles of Britain’s longest river. The Severn is quieter than the neighbouring Wye and there is only one booking a day, ensuring a peaceful paddle. The trip starts at Pool Quay in Powys and ends in Gloucester, passing Shrewsbury, Bridgnorth, Worcester and Tewkesbury, plus the Ironbridge Gorge and the Wyre Forest. No experience is necessary; canoeists are given a safety briefing and the boats are tracked. The hire company recommends places to eat, drink and stay (small groups may get away with wild camping on riverside beaches). From £795 for a two-person canoe, including equipment, drop-off and pickup; first departure 2 March, bigsevernadventure.co.uk Sea kayaking and wild camping, Suffolk Nomad Sea Kayaking has launched a women-only version of its laid-back kayaking and wild camping weekends. After setting up camp on a secluded beach, the day is spent paddling along the quiet coastline to the mouth of the River Ore, then swimming and (hopefully) sunbathing back on the beach. The evening is spent around the campfire – hot drinks are provided, BYO wine. After an optional beach clean on Sunday morning, there is a second kayaking session before taking the foot ferry across the estuary to the Ferry Boat Inn for dinner. £189.99 for two days, next trip 14 May, nomadseakayaking Hike around the Hebrides This is not your average walking holiday: it is an island-hopping sailing trip, too. Walkers eat and sleep on Steady, a Dutch ketch, and sail to each day’s walking destination. The most remote is Canna, for hikes through meadows, forests and moors, and along cliffs and coasts to see puffins. Other ports of call include community-owned Eigg, rugged Rum, tiny Muck, car-free Kerrera and bustling Mull. No sailing experience is needed. Walks are guided and range from a five-mile stroll on Muck to a 12-mile coastal trek to beautiful Kilmory Bay on Rum. Wildlife sightings might include seabirds, birds of prey, five species of dolphin and three kinds of whale. From £1,415 for 10 days, including most meals, next trip 21 May, venturesailholidays.com Mountain biking in the Brecon Beacons Element runs active weekends for women in the Brecon Beacons. A new challenge for 2022 is the two-day mountain bike journey, suitable for women who have some riding experience (there is also a beginners’ weekend). The ride follows trails in lesser-known parts of the Black Mountains, with bikeable climbs and sweeping descents but no technical sections such as jumps and drops. The evening is spent in the pub across the road from the B&amp;B, within staggering distance for tired legs. Element’s other new trips include a walking weekend, fell running and yoga, and a mother-and-daughter short break in nature. £250 for two days including B&amp;B, packed lunch, two guides and luggage transportation, next trip 11 June, element-active.co.uk Surf retreat, Cornwall The Department of Wellbeing has long run Go Wild retreats at Tilton House in East Sussex, but this year it will be expanding into Devon and Cornwall. The new retreats include many of the existing activities – breathwork, yoga, sound bathing, swimming, paddleboarding, hiking – but some will have a new focus. For example, there is a five-day surfing and yoga retreatplanned in Cornwall from 8-12 September, with plant-based food and top-notch teachers. It is not yet open for bookings, but you can register an interest on the website. From £595 for an all-inclusive four-day retreat, departmentofwellbeing.co.uk Learn adventure photography, Devon Participants can learn how to best capture their travel adventures on camera on this photography weekend on Dartmoor, one of England’s wildest national parks. The trip involves dawn-to-dusk outdoor photography sessions and a fair amount of hiking over remote parts of the moor, so a reasonable level of fitness is needed. Highlights include a sunset shoot atop a tor, snapping wild ponies at sunrise and a workshop on technique and composition at an abandoned powder mill. The price includes tuition from an award-winning travel photographer, shared accommodation in a hostel in Tavistock and all meals – including a Devon cream tea. £590 for two nights, next trip 23 July, muchbetteradventures.comThe next time you have a “what to eat for dinner?” emergency, reach for a jar of shop-bought tom yum paste. It brings a distinct sweet, sour and spicy profile to anything it touches, and I’ve used it to rescue meals for the best part of my adult life. You can buy it in large supermarkets, online or at Asian food stores. Combined with stock, you can easily create a speedy take on Thai tom yum soup, or toss it with roast sweet potatoes for caramelised wedges bursting with heat and umami. 15-minute tom yum soup (pictured above) From first chop to first slurp takes a quarter of an hour. It’s flexible, too: swap the protein or veg for whatever you have to hand. The intestinal tracts of the prawns aren’t harmful, so for speed I’ve opted not to devein them, but if you have the time or inclination, go for it. Prep 5 min Cook 10 min Serves 2 100g dried rice noodles 2 eggs Fine salt and pepper 750ml water 3-5 tbsp tom yum paste (seasoned to taste) 165g raw prawns 100g shiitake mushrooms, stalks removed and sliced wafer-thin 50g beansprouts 15g picked coriander leaves, to garnish Boil the kettle and soak the noodles as per the packet instructions. Fill and boil the kettle again. Put the eggs in a saucepan and add cold water and a teaspoon of salt until the eggs are just submerged. Cover with a lid, bring to a boil, then turn down to a rolling simmer and cook for six minutes. Drain, run the eggs under cold water, then peel, cut in half and set aside. Fill another saucepan with 750ml boiling water from the kettle, add three tablespoons of the tom yum paste and stir to dissolve. Taste the broth and add more paste until you achieve your desired flavour intensity (brands differ, so the quantity of paste needed will vary). Bring the liquid to a boil, add the prawns, then immediately turn down the heat and poach gently for 30 seconds, or until pink and just cooked through. Stir in the mushrooms and take off the heat. Drain the noodles and divide them between two bowls. Pour the hot broth, prawns and mushrooms over the noodles and top with the beansprouts and egg halves. Garnish with a handful of coriander and serve immediately. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from Ocado Tom yum sweet potato wedges, or in a salad with feta, pistachios and coriander These wedges make an incredible side dish, but they can also be transformed into this salad of dreams. Prep 10 min Cook 40 min Serves 4 as a side For the wedges 2 tbsp tom yum paste 3 tbsp neutral oil, such as sunflower or rapeseed 600g sweet potatoes, unpeeled, cut into wedges Sea salt and black pepper 1 whole garlic head, cut in half horizontally For the salad (optional) 50g feta, crumbled 30 pistachios, shelled 2 spring onions, trimmed and thinly sliced 1 handful (10g) coriander leaves Heat the oven to 220C (200C fan)/425F/gas 7. Combine the tom yum paste and oil in a bowl, then add the sweet potato wedges and toss to coat. Arrange on a large baking tray in a single layer, season generously, then nestle the two halves of the garlic head in among the wedges. Bake for 40 minutes, until caramelised on the outside and cooked through, then squeeze the roast garlic flesh out of their skins, toss with the wedges and serve immediately. Alternatively, to turn the cooked wedges into a glorious salad, mix them with the feta, pistachios, spring onions and coriander, toss to combine and serve. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from Ocado • Lara Lee is the author of Coconut &amp; Sambal: Recipes from my Indonesian Kitchen, published by BloomsburyThe awkward bare ankles of a shrub or deciduous hedge are not things of beauty, but there they often are. Nature doesn’t leave this spot bare for long, though: all sorts of things make the most of this sparse space. Right now, it is spring bulbs – first snowdrops, then aconites and bluebells, wood anemones, and later perhaps some lily of the valley. I mention these, not just because they are starting to unfurl, but as it is the best time to get hold of them to plant. So, if you have a threadbare hedge base or shrub or garden tree that could do with a ruffle or drift of flowers at its feet, get ordering. All of these will come “in the green”, meaning that you will put your order in swiftly and the nurseries will lift the bulbs with their green foliage and perhaps a flower or two, wrap them in something damp, pop them in a Jiffy bag and send them to you quickly. Your job is to plant them in haste, as the quicker they get into the soil, the better they will settle in. All these bulbs establish better in the vigour of full growth, rather than as dry autumn bulbs. Bulbs sold “in the green” are available until April or early May. As these are woodlanders, they do best in soil that is rich and a little damp over the summer. The base of your hedge or shrub might be quite the opposite. So the best thing you can do to rectify this is add leaf mould as a mulch. If you don’t have this, add a good layer of peat-free compost before you plant, and mulch around the bulbs with more afterwards. If your ground is hard, then forking it over first will make a difference. You don’t have to turn the soil, as that will damage its structure, but just loosen it. This will make digging holes for the bulbs much easier. For the most naturalistic look you want to plant your bulbs in drifts. Bluebells need to be planted deep, so they can make the most of the damp below over summer – at least 10-20cm if you can get that low. You certainly need to get to the depth that they were lifted from – there will be a distinct pale line in the leaves and this is the minimum depth. Snowdrops need to be planted 5-10cm deep and will do better in a drier spot than bluebells. Wood anemones are almost surface dwellers, but again will need rich, damp soil. Lily of the valley and aconites similarly sit near the top, but aconites will grow anywhere, in pretty much any soil. Lily of the valley need a little more shade. Once the bulbs are in, water well and keep on watering, particularly if we have a dry, hot April. Don’t expect any flowers this year, and next year may be thin too, as the plants concentrate on getting their roots down, but after that your future springs are set.What do you get when you bring together some of the most revered thinkers, most progressive-minded activists and one of the most celebrated novelists writing today to discuss the immense challenges we face? A debate about the Spice Girls, of course! For the Guardian’s Saturday magazine, Margaret Atwood wanted to gather some of her favourite experts from around the globe, to ask how they see the world we live in – and what they believe is key to creating the future they want to see. The lineup included bestselling author Raj Patel, dubbed the “rock star of social justice writing”; Senator Yvonne Boyer, the first Indigenous person appointed to the Canadian senate from Ontario; Akala, a writer, musician and poet; the excellently named Merlin Sheldrake, an expert on fungi; Kate Fletcher, whose speciality is sustainable fashion; Jessie Housty, a young Indigenous activist with a focus on decolonisation and community; and Yasmeen Hassan of Equality Now, which works to combat gender discrimination. The panel, hand-picked by Atwood, reflects the many disparate subjects the author is passionate about, and she was as keen to hear from them as they were to understand her vision and ideas. Everyone was in different countries, pretty much no one knew anyone else, and the “round table” was actually on video, so it should have been a disaster, but the conversation flowed. In fact, it nearly was a disaster, because my recorder died five minutes from the end and, as Atwood said, “Everyone was saying such good stuff!” And they were. (Fortunately, my recorder recovered.) We talked about the power of music, the magic of mushrooms, and zombies. But first, the small question of how the world should be … –HADLEY FREEMAN * * * Margaret Atwood My big overarching question is, what do we want the future to look like? Yvonne Boyer Generally, I would like to see a kinder, healthier, fairer future where everybody is on an equal footing. The area I’m focusing on is Indigenous people; I’ve seen some atrocities in my life and I’d like to see them remedied, and people healthy and healing, and living the way their [Indigenous] ancestors taught them to live. We’ve seen so much destruction of the Earth and the people, and we need to start working together to solve these problems. Hadley Freeman Yasmeen, you’ve been taking lots of practical steps towards improving the future. I wondered if you could share some of those, and what further steps you think we need to be taking? Yasmeen Hassan We’ve been very focused on the equality of women and girls. I come from Pakistan, and a lot of people are deceived into thinking we have achieved gender equality, but when I grew up it was very clear to me that the world was not equal. Then I started delving into what that means for the world. I realised that most of our problems – including wars and conflicts, inequality of income and distribution, and the climate crisis, which I think is one of the biggest threats that we face – are rooted in gender inequality. Conflicts happen in societies which are unequal and treat one half of their population – women and girls, but also Indigenous people and racial minorities – differently. That commands conflict. In a nutshell, if our work is successful then we will have a better world. Raj Patel The good news is that there are lots of peasant movements around the world that are taking the kinds of things that Yasmeen is saying very seriously. There are food systems that are agroecological, which means you grow in a way that builds on the synergies in the soil – and we’ll talk about mushrooms later on, I imagine – but also think about equality as a cornerstone of how we’re going to eat better in the future. While governments have been generally rubbish at supporting this kind of agricultural transformation, the international peasant movement La Via Campesina has 200 million members who are doing practical research every day, and are calling for agroecology and gender equality. So what we eat in the future will depend on where you find yourself, but ideally will come through social relations that are post-capitalist and are grounded in gender equality. MA Woo! HF Seeing as Raj mentioned mushrooms – Merlin, are mushrooms the way of the future? Merlin Sheldrake [Laughs] Well, mushrooms are the reproductive structures of fungi, and fungi are a kingdom of life. The history of life is, in large part, the history of fungi. And given that that’s been going on for more than a billion years, far longer than a lot of plant life, I’d wager that the future would also be a story in part of fungi and fungal relationships, and in part fungal relationships with humans. HF I want to discuss how culture improves the present and the future. Akala, I know you work so much with music … Akala I was originally a musician, but a lot of the stuff I’ve done is around education and culture. I wrote a couple of books: a social history of the British empire called Natives: Race and Class in the Ruins of Empire, and a young adult novel called The Dark Lady. So a lot of my work is around getting young people to see how important school is. There can be serious consequences – particularly coming from certain types of backgrounds – of not doing well in school, in terms of future rates of incarceration, limited job prospects, limited economic prospects and even life expectancy. So it’s about trying to make education something that is cool and aspirational and interesting. MA Do you put on shows with kids? A Yeah, we put on shows and do all sorts of outreach projects. I do a lot of talks at youth clubs, prisons. So, a range of things. Arts education is the cornerstone of trying to get people who are struggling back on track in school, or for people who are doing well, to give them that extra boost. MA Sounds like a lot of work. A Yeah, it’s tough, but it’s good. HF Kate, I wonder what you see as the biggest opportunity in terms of improving the future? Kate Fletcher The biggest opportunity for fashion is recognising that the future can’t in any way be aligned to an economic growth logic. We have to recognise that we’re on a finite planet and we have to work within planetary limits. Where the work needs to happen is to try to find new ideas about what fashion can be – beyond just buying more stuff and then styling yourself on Instagram. MA In terms of new materials and fabrics? KF Ultimately it’s a question of culture, not materials and technology. Materials are never going to solve the problems we’re facing. At the moment, the fashion sector is growing at something like 6% each year, and no material, however efficient, however regenerative, however useful for soil health, will ever undo the negative effect of that sort of growth. So what we’re facing is a fashion industry that’s going to radically reduce in scale and become way more localised; and also be much more plural – so have much more diverse representation, drawing upon all of the traditions that we know of in Indigenous groups. Jessie Housty I feel blessed to do a lot of land-based healing and education work with Indigenous youths and families, and I see the biggest threat to the future as being continued disconnection. We have faced generations, since first European contact, of Indigenous peoples being regulated away from our territories, our families being broken, relationships to place and territory and resources being fractured. And to be able to participate in the work of rebuilding those connections, building kinship, a sense of cultural identity that connects people to place, so that they feel inspired to protect it and love it, that feels like such important work. I think connectivity is the antidote to all of the social and environmental problems I see my community and neighbouring communities facing. HF I wondered if each of you could tell me if there was a book, a film, or a moment that woke you up to the problems facing the future? YB The one book that really woke me up was when I became a senator and started reading the Hansards [records of Parliamentary debates], which go back to confederation. And I realised that Jean Chrétien, who was the Indian affairs minister in the 1970s, was denouncing the forced sterilisation of Indigenous women. In the 1970s. And in 2022 we still have women being sterilised? It made me see how appalling the whole history of colonisation has been. And exactly what Jessie is saying, I hope there is hope for the future because we certainly haven’t learned much from the past. HF Jessie, I’d love to hear how you got inspired into your work? JH Through oral storytelling culture. It was a privilege to grow in my community surrounded by elders and generations of knowledge-holders who led me into the work I’m doing. More broadly, if I was going to recommend one thing to lead people into a beautiful, active, revolutionary life, I would tell people to read more poetry. HF Margaret, what was it that woke you up to how you want to change the future? MA I grew up with biologist environmentalist parents at a time when that was considered rather weird – we’re talking about the 40s and 50s. So I understood from a very early age that things are connected, that we are connected to the natural world, things within the natural world are connected to one another. I would be with Jessie – oral storytelling, but of a different kind. More about beetles! HF Raj, you are known as the rock star of social writing, what led you into that? RP I’m an activist around hunger, and I write because it’s something I can do for the movement. Again, it’s certainly about storytelling. Eating meals with people can be incredibly transformative, where you didn’t know that you could eat that, you didn’t know that you could cook things this way. And the sort of conviviality and political transformation that’s possible around the table is something I’ve been lucky enough to experience a few times. And that blows my mind, to be able to be sensual in new ways that feel like they’ve been taken off the table by capitalism and modern colonial relations. To experience food, in community, as a decolonising exercise is something I’m very grateful for. HF Akala, you work with young people. What is it that you recommend to them to awaken their social conscience, to alert them to what they want to do for the future? A There’s a book called How Europe Underdeveloped Africa by Walter Rodney, who was a Guyanese historian. That was quite seminal for me. It’s not necessarily one I recommend to teenagers, just because it’s very dense, but people in their early 20s, certainly. Music was also a big eye-opener for me – I grew up on Public Enemy and things like that. That’s one of the reasons we see music being used to sell so much vacuous celebrity culture – because music is so powerful. It can be driven in either direction. And a lot of the social consciousness that was in hip-hop, in particular, has evaporated. HF So what I’m hearing is you’re not a massive Spice Girls fan? A No, I love the Spice Girls. Don’t get me wrong, I think there is a place for everything! It’s important to have fun and listen to music that does allow escape and fantasy, and explores all these other realms of human possibility. I just think within that there needs to be some music or some art that also challenges us. HF Yasmeen, you work so much with women and girls, are there certain things you recommend to them to see, in terms of thinking about their future? YH The book that really impacted me – and Margaret, shut your ears – was The Handmaid’s Tale. Growing up in Pakistan, I was like, “Ooh, this is our reality, this is how we live.” And then I went to college in the US and studied feminist movements, and saw that everything Margaret had written about was true in some part of the world. That was my wake-up call – if we don’t get this thing right, this is where we are heading, this is where we’ve been and this is where we’re heading again, because in the last five years women’s rights have gone backwards. Another important book for me was Sex and World Peace, by Valerie Hudson, which really does deep-dive studies in linking the level of gender equality in a society with the level of peacefulness of that society. And I really wanted to bring this to the UN security council, because we are working on all these ways to prevent conflicts, but none focus on, “Let’s work on equality of women and more opportunities for women in a society as a way of preventing conflict.” YB I have a question, Yasmeen. Have you delved into matriarchal societies? YH We have. This is something Gloria Steinem, who’s on our board, is very into. We found some in south India, some Native American, and life was much better. This is why I come back to: our economic model’s not the right one, because those societies did not have what is now considered the capitalist model of growth. It was not about maximisation of profit, it was maximisation of happiness and fairness. MA There’s nothing built-in that says, as a species, we have to have hierarchical societies. We have had many different models of societies throughout history and pre-history. It does not have to be dog-eat-dog all the time. There’s a book called The Dawn of Everything: A New History of Humanity, it’s by David Graeber and David Wengrow. I liked it because it suggests that we have many more possibilities to choose from than we have been traditionally told we have. YB I want to mention the Haudenosaunee society. It’s a matriarchal society, and they’re very much alive and well. I also want Jessie to comment, because she will have learned about communities where women were the anchors and made the decisions. JH I come from a matriarchal society, a matrilineal culture, and it is still very functional in my community. In our governance systems, men are permitted to wield a certain amount of political power and authority, but the moral authority rests with women and with matriarchs in the community. I certainly faced my share of barriers growing up, but my gender was never one of them. And that remains a core source of strength for youth in my community. HF Merlin, I wonder if you see the future differently now than you did 10 years ago? MS When I was younger, I tended to imagine the future as some kind of version of the present. But now I think of the future as a cloud of possibility, that is made up of a numberless quantity of past decisions. I reached this view from thinking about plants and fungi. Both plants and fungi grow from the tips of their shoots or cells, and they leave behind them these networks, like bodies, which are, if you like, maps of their past. And so they helped me to think about the present as being this place of choice-making, and the future as this place of opportunity. HF Margaret, who has contributed most to your vision of the future? MA There isn’t one future – as Merlin will tell us. So I try not to say “the future” because we have some choices about the kind of future we will end up in. Unfortunately, the further we go along the road of climate crisis, the fewer choices we have. But we still have some choices, and we really need to start making them. HF Would any of you want to live for ever to see how the future turns out? MA No. We’ve read the books about vampires and zombies, who live for a long time but end up being this heap of wreckage. Reading the myths, you don’t ask for long life unless you also ask for eternal youth. A If I was eternally fit and healthy, then sure. But without that, no. MS It’s a definite no from me. If someone told me I was going to die tomorrow, then my experience would take on a very vibrant quality. And if someone told me that I would never die, then I think the opposite might happen. MA What we would all like is not necessarily living for ever in our bodily forms, which could actually get quite boring, but the ability to pop in from time to time to see how things are coming along. HF Could you each nominate someone you think is contributing to improving the future? YB I think my daughters. My succession plan is for my two daughters to carry on the work I started, because they’re both lawyers and they’re both passionate about the work they’re doing. I’m comforted in that. MA The Greta Thunberg generation. The young people who are interested in these issues and understand these connections, those are the people who are going to carry it on. And we should be giving them help to the best of our ability. JH I work with youth every day, I see their power and resilience, I see them make tremendous change that I never would have thought possible. But rather than singling out any one of them, I really hope that we see the potential in every single one of them to make that kind of change. MA Thank you very much everyone for the informative and thoughtful conversation. Little sparks of hope are very welcome in these ominous times.When Dr Nadine Burke Harris was first appointed California surgeon general, she set out to address the toxic stress and trauma plaguing the state’s most vulnerable residents. Then the pandemic hit. Suddenly, she found herself having to guide millions through statewide shutdowns, and persuade scared, skeptical Californians to get vaccinated against Covid-19 and wear masks to prevent the virus’ spread. Burke Harris, who resigned this month, said the pandemic is “probably the greatest collective trauma of our generation,” and she, like all Californians she was sworn to serve – will have a long road ahead processing the last two years. Reflecting on her three years as surgeon general of the most populous US state, Burke Harris warned that “the health consequences of this pandemic will continue, even after the virus itself is contained.” More than 82,000 Californians have died from the virus, and during Burke Harris’ last week the state continued to tally about 200 deaths a day. The state, which was the first to enact stay-at-home orders two years ago, has seen the coronavirus overwhelm hospitals, exacerbate health inequities and disproportionately burden Black and brown Californians. When Burke Harris was named the state’s first-ever surgeon general in January 2019, she stepped into a historic role – one that California governor Gavin Newsom created just for her. Only three other states have surgeon generals. Drawing on her expertise as a pediatrician who specialized in recognizing and treating early childhood trauma, she made it a priority to screen children across the state for signs of extreme stress. By early 2020, her office had just launched an initiative to train health providers across the state to screen for childhood trauma and abuse and respond with appropriate care. When Covid-19 hit, “everyone had to put a lot of things on pause, to respond to the pandemic”, she said. Her office decided they couldn’t delay the training program. “Because we’re desperately going to need it,” she said. So far, more than 20,000 providers have been trained. Guided by Burke Harris and the surgeon general’s office, California also enacted a first-in-the-nation law requiring insurance providers to cover screenings for what pediatric health specialists call “adverse childhood experiences” – including the loss or death of a parent, abuse or neglect – which studies have correlated with a number of chronic health conditions later in life. Two years into the pandemic, an estimated 200,000 children in the US have lost parents or caregivers. Many more have seen loved ones hospitalized with prolonged illness, or crushed by the stresses of navigating a pandemic with inadequate social safety nets. All that distress, Burke Harris said, will be a heavy burden for children to process – and the state will need to continue investing in helping them do so. Burke Harris herself will be working to process the past two years. “Serving in a leading public health role during the pandemic,” she said, “is almost like a deployment.” It required a degree of unwavering focus and dedication. She wasn’t able to look away from its horrors, even for a moment. Not even when her mom ended up in the ICU and Burke Harris was unable to see her due to Covid restrictions. It helped “bring home for me what so many Californians were experiencing, having a loved one in the hospital”, she said. “And sometimes you’re standing outside. And you can’t get in, and you really want to see them – and you don’t know how it’s gonna go.” During her lowest moment, after she heard former president Donald Trump falsely declare an end to the pandemic in the spring of 2020, Burke Harris allowed herself a few minutes to cry in the restroom. “And then I came back to work,” she said. Burke Harris’ last day was 11 February , and she will use the time off to care for herself and family, she said. Stepping into her role will be the office’s chief health officer, Dr Devika Bhushan, who is also a pediatrician with expertise in childhood toxic stress. For Burke Harris, a doctor and public health expert who had dedicated her career to racial inequities in healthcare, seeing the pandemic immediately exacerbate disparities was “heartbreaking”, she said. “To look and see that some Californians are dying at dramatically higher rates than others – you can know about it, and you can study it, but when you see it and the impact on our communities,” she said. “It’s absolutely heartbreaking. And incredibly motivating.” In June 2020, as the US erupted in protest against police brutality, Burke Harris wrote in a Medium post: “I often hear the question ‘what it is about black and brown people that makes us more vulnerable to the virus? That question infuriates me.” Decades of research show that people’s experiences and environments can affect their biology, she continues. “Racist oppression ensures that black and brown children bear a disproportionate burden of dehumanizing and traumatic experiences. Science shows it is sickening them and killing them.” The work of dismantling oppressive systems, and healing the harms they cause is a “continual, ongoing effort”, Burke Harris said. After completing her undergraduate studies at University of California, Berkeley, medical school at University of California, Davis, and earning a master’s of public health from Harvard, Burke Harris founded a children’s health clinic in San Francisco’s Bayview-Hunters Point – a predominantly Black and underserved neighborhood in the city’s southeast corner. Burke Harris had set out to target health disparities in the city, but as she started seeing patients in Bayview she realized many of them needed more than routine physical exams, vaccinations, and prescriptions for inhalers. Many were showing signs of chronic stress, and their bodies were straining under the weight of poverty, societal adversity, and generational trauma. In 2012, she founded the Center for Youth Wellness, a clinic focused on identifying and treating that sort of stress in children. As surgeon general, Burke Harris made it her goal to bring the services the clinic was providing to children all over the state. One of her proudest moments, she said, was seeing Newsom approve a $4bn investment – made in consultation with her office – in behavioral health screenings and treatment for children and young adults. “California is leading the nation in our response to the effect that this pandemic has had on kids,” she said. As surgeon general, Burke Harris co-chaired the state’s Community Vaccine Advisory Committee, which worked to develop an equitable vaccine distribution plan. “One of my proudest moments when we’re looking at the data charting, and we saw the inequities being reduced when it comes to vaccine access,” she said. The disparities haven’t disappeared. Vaccinations among Black and Latino Californians continue to lag. As the governor pushes to lift mask mandates in schools across the state, vaccination rates among Black and Latino children are also lagging – fueling concerns that racial and ethnic inequities in coronavirus infections and deaths will be exacerbated in the coming weeks. “One of the challenges when it comes to addressing inequities is that people think that either you’re going to do a program, and that program should fix it. Or you’re going to do some kind of one-and-done intervention,” she said. “But it requires continual work, continual course correction, continual coordination.”Tens of thousands were still without power and travel continued to be disrupted on Saturday as the cleanup effort after record-breaking deadly Storm Eunice threatened to be hampered by more weather warnings. Friday’s storm brought record-breaking winds to the UK and Ireland, and killed at least four, leaving a trail of damage and destruction in its wake. On Saturday, there were still thousands without power. The Energy Networks Association said that although around 1.2 million people had been reconnected, about 195,000 customers still remained without power in the south, Wales and the east. Kwasi Kwarteng, the business and energy secretary, said 8,000 field staff and engineers were “working day and night to restore power”. He tweeted: “We expect most customers to have supplies restored promptly. Strong winds across southern England are impacting restoration efforts.” He added: “I would like to thank our emergency services and engineers who are working tirelessly.” Millions were advised to remain at home on Friday amid safety fears over one of the worst storms to hit the UK in a generation and transport issues meant many could not travel. On Saturday morning, National Rail said that routes across most of the UK remained affected and that disruption was expected to continue for the rest of the day. Southern, Thameslink and Great Northern rail networks issued “do not travel” notices, warning that “many parts of our network have no service”. They said the situation was changing regularly as trees and objects have been blown on to the line and that they are working to reopen as many routes as possible. South Western Railway also expected significant disruption and Great Western Railway and Greater Anglia suspended services until about 10am. Friday’s winds, which reached a high of 122mph, a record for England, created havoc on roads from flying debris and falling trees, killing four people. A woman in her 30s was killed after a tree fell on a car in Haringey, north London, a man in his 50s was killed in Netherton, Merseyside after debris hit his windscreen, a man in his 20s died in Alton, Hampshire, in a collision with a tree and a man in Co Wexford, Ireland, was killed by a falling tree. There were also reports of people suffering serious injuries after being hit by debris in Henley-on-Thames and south London. It caused damage to homes and buildings across the country, including London’s O2 Arena, which had part of its roof ripped off, and the spire of St Thomas Church in Wells, Somerset. But as clean-up efforts were due to commence on Saturday, the Met Office warned that further rain and winds could “slow down and hamper clear up operations”. Saturday saw heavy snow in parts of Yorkshire, strong winds on the south coast and forecasters warned that Sunday could bring gales of up to 70mph to some parts of England. Craig Snell, a Met Office forecaster, said that although Eunice had moved on to central Europe, the arrival of a new weather system was likely to bring spells of heavy rain and less severe but potentially problematic winds that “will make things a little bit more difficult”. A yellow warning for wind was issued for England and Wales on Sunday from midday until 3pm, and in Northern Ireland and north-west England until midnight. The same warnings have also been issued for Monday. Cumbria, Lancashire and West Yorkshire were issued a yellow warning for rain from midnight until 6pm on Sunday. On Saturday there were three flood warnings in place – in Bosham and West Itchenor and Climping in West Sussex, and Shrewsbury in Shropshire. On the roads, the M4 Prince of Wales bridge was open on Saturday, but the M48 River Severn Bridge remained closed “due to forecasts of further high winds”. Meanwhile, the Association of British Insurers warned that although it was too early to estimate the cost of the damage caused by Eunice, previous storms have led to insurers paying out more than £360m. London fire brigade said it took 1,958 calls on Friday as Eunice hit the capital – three times more than on Thursday. The fire service warned on Saturday that although the worst was over, “its effect may extend into the coming days”. They urged people to be wary of “the potential for loose structures or falling debris”.Husky-voiced soul singer James Morrison rose to fame in the mid-noughties, with his debut single, You Give Me Something, put him at the vanguard of a generation of male singer-songwriters. Raised in Rugby, Derby and Cornwall, he released his chart-topping album Undiscovered in 2006; it went on to sell 1.5m copies, and won him a Brit award. He has since released four more albums, and has two daughters with his partner, Gill. He tours his Greatest Hits album next month. This was taken in Leicester at my cool older cousin’s house. He was looking after me and my brother and sister for the day, and as well as driving us around in his Mk1 Golf, his plan was to “get sweets, crisps and watch some films”. He sat us down in front of Alien; I loved it. I was seven! My mum would never have let me watch it. That day was fun, but life was tough when I was little. My mum and dad split up when I was four, and I lived in Rugby, which was one of the worst places I’ve ever been. There are a lot of mental health, alcohol and drug issues in my family, and from a young age I thought that was what life was. We struggled to pay the bills; Mum was always going on about the mortgage not being paid, and we never had food in the fridge. I’d often miss breakfast and lunch, and just have dinner when I got home from school. A lot of kids in the 80s and 90s had that kind of upbringing – it’s not as if I had it harder than anyone else from a single-parent family, but it wasn’t easy. When I got to about 10, I remember asking Mum, “What job do I need to do to get out of poverty?” She said I should get into graphic design, because I was good at drawing. I tried it for a bit but as soon as I picked up a guitar I binned off the art. Music was more expressive and allowed me to have an outlet for all my emotional shit. I’d actually had a guitar when I was five, but I’d smashed it up because my sister told me I was crap. This was the same sister who gave me whooping cough when I was a newborn. I am grateful for it now, because it gave me my voice, but I remember when I first started singing I hated that I sounded so husky. Mum loved music and used to be in a band. She was very bohemian and would have been a hippy if my dad had been around more to help. Instead, she had to be a bit more authoritarian, and I don’t think she liked that. I was super quiet and insecure at school, and probably a bit irritating to my mum. I reminded her of the same qualities that people held against her growing up. I was forgetful and disorganised with my thoughts, a bit of a dreamer. In the end, being a dreamer was the thing that saved me. When I was starting out, reality TV would have been the easy route to become a musician. I watched an episode of Fame Academy and thought I could sing as good as some of the contestants, so I sent a tape in. A few weeks later, the producers wrote me a letter saying they weren’t interested. “Please don’t contact us,” that sort of thing. I carried on playing gigs but I could easily have given up and got trapped in my van-cleaning job. I was a good worker, but it was disgusting tidying up after builders. I used to find a lot of horrible old pasties on the floor. Eventually I met a random guy in a pub who went on to become my manager. In a few weeks he’d got me meetings with loads of record labels. When I released my first album, the only singer-songwriters around were me, James Blunt and Paolo Nutini. It was a big time for bands like Keane, Razorlight, Snow Patrol and Scissor Sisters, and mainstream pop. I signed to Polydor, a pop label, and I worried it wasn’t the right place for my music. But I thought: screw it, I’ll go with whatever is on the table. I had to sell 100,000 albums to get my next contract to make another record. I thought: if I can do that, then I’ve made it. It went on to sell over 1m, which was pretty incredible. It was life-changing to go from having no money to having lots. It allowed me to ease the pressure off for a minute, although it still took me a while to get my confidence, and I had terrible impostor syndrome. If I went into a photoshoot, I had this paranoia that everyone would be laughing about me behind my back, saying, “Who is this lad? Who gives a fuck?” I would look at all the other musicians who had more of an attitude and for a few years I worried that people thought I was too “normal”. I didn’t have to always be so friendly all the time. It took effort. I’m quite real and make sure I never get above my station. Sometimes it does my head in to see how other people in the music industry act. I was on Jools Holland once and the singer Ray LaMontagne was performing on it, too; I was a huge fan and went up to him and told him how much I loved his voice. He looked up at me, then looked away. I was gutted. Then after I performed he came up to me and said, “You nailed it, man.” I thought: why couldn’t you have acknowledged me before then? I won’t say who it was, but I once approached a singer backstage and asked for an autograph for my daughter, and her security jumped in and said, “Not now! She’s just come off stage.” I was like… so? I don’t know what’s wrong with people. They want power and fame and don’t care how they get it. I love singing, but as soon as I get anywhere near super-confident, I’m like, nah, pull it back a bit. My girlfriend Gill is really grounded, too – if I ever come home from a gig like Bobby Big Bollocks, she’s like: never mind that, take the bins out. After my dad died [in 2010, from liver disease relating to alcoholism], it changed my brain. It made me realise that life can go by really quickly. I moved to the countryside and bought a big house with a pool in the Cotswolds, and we’ve been there ever since. I just need to be outside in order to drown out all the bullshit. When I lived in London, it was there all the time: what you look like, your followers on social media. Nature makes me forget about all that and levels me out. Apparently Kate Moss, Jamie Dornan, Sade and Lily Allen live nearby, too, but I don’t ever see them, which is a relief. I always get embarrassed when I have to meet other celebrities – just because we are both on the telly, it doesn’t mean we’ll get on. It’s taken me a long time to enjoy my job and to get out of survival mode. I’ve built my strength up, so it’s impenetrable now. Before, I wanted adulation, but now I make music for the love of being able to express myself. Singing is my superpower, and if I can make music that people will still listen to in 20 years, and they remember I wasn’t a dick – then job done.Today in a nutshell: Silver for Team GB in the men’s curling and New Zealand’s second gold makes it their greatest ever Winter Olympics Next up: Women’s bobsleigh, and bronze-medal matches in women’s curling and men’s ice hockey wrap up today. Tomorrow, the final day of sport and the closing ceremony You know what they say, you wait 70 years for a gold medal at the Winter Olympics and then two come along at once. New Zealand’s Nico Porteous won the country’s second ever gold and second gold of this Games in the men’s freeski halfpipe. Conditions were intense, with the air temperature down to -22C (-7.6F). Brrrrr. The rest of the podium was filled out with the US team – defending champion David Wise took silver and Alex Ferreira took bronze, describing the conditions as “super difficult”. “Pretty gnarly,” was the verdict of Gus Kenworthy, the 2014 silver medalist, who finished eighth. Having previously competed for the US, this year he was representing Great Britain. Drawing the curtain down on his career he revealed a T-shirt saying “Openly British”. He said: “This sport has changed my life in ways I could have never imagined. I’m gay. I felt like I didn’t fit in, in sport. To be out and proud, competing at the Olympics, and all of the opportunities that have come my way since the Olympics, I couldn’t be more thankful.” He also had a swipe at the hosts and the International Olympics Committee (IOC), saying: “It was never that I thought China couldn’t put on a good Games – I absolutely knew that they could and they have. But when there are human rights atrocities happening in the country and a poor stance on LGBTQ rights, then those things need to be taken into consideration by the IOC.” Team GB’s first medal of the Games came on the penultimate day and it was a silver for Bruce Mouat and his men’s curling team. They took Sweden to an extra end, but the Swedes had the hammer and the match ended 5-4 in their favour. They go one better than their silver in Pyeongchang. Irene Schouten of the Netherlands won her third gold and fourth medal overall from Beijing in the women’s mass start as the speed skating competition drew to a close. Bart Swings justified me bigging up Belgium’s uniforms yesterday by winning gold in the men’s mass start. Things you might have missed We all missed the Alpine skiing mixed team parallel contest, which has been rescheduled until tomorrow thanks to the weather. It is unclear if all of the teams will be around to compete; some had planned to fly straight out of China tonight. The weather messed with the men’s mass start 50km as well; it was delayed by an hour and shortened to 30km. The Russian Olympic Committee (ROC) and Norway staged a shut-out of the first six places. Alexander Bolshunov won his third gold of the Games for ROC. Teammate Ivan Yakimushkin was second, Norway picked up yet another medal with Simen Hegstad Krueger’s bronze. Taiwan Premier Su Tseng-chang has ordered an investigation into a Taiwanese speed skater who posted a video of herself wearing a Chinese uniform shortly before the Games began. Huang Yu-ting put the video on her Instagram page but removed it after attracting fierce online criticism in Taiwan. Taiwan is forced to compete as “Chinese Taipei” in the Olympics due to China’s dispute over its sovereignty. You might also enjoy reading: Two kids from one small town ski New Zealand to its greatest Games Emotional rollercoaster of US Virgin Islands’ only athlete at Beijing Games How citizenship row clouded Eileen Gu’s Olympics Jackson and Meyers Taylor have made history in Beijing for Black Americans The briefing’s picture of the day Team GB are guaranteed a second medal in the women’s curling final tomorrow. But could there be a third? Brad Hall steered his four-man bobsleigh team to 0.31 seconds off Canada’s Justin Kripps’ time in the bronze medal place. Hall, Greg Cackett, Nick Gleeson and Taylor Lawrence sit in sixth position at the halfway stage, against what they say is quite an uneven playing field. “The Germans have got three sleds, three times the amount of runs to test everything and find the best way down the track, and make sure the equipment works. We’re against it, we’ve got less resources to pull upon, so we’ve just gone with what we know and we’ll see how it turns out,” Hall explained. What to look out for next Times are all in local Beijing time. For Sydney it is +3 hours, for London it is -8 hours, for New York it is -13 hours and San Francisco is -16 hours. Later today – Saturday 19 February 8pm and 9.30pm Bobsleigh – the final two runs for the 2-woman combos will decide the gold 🥇 8.05pm Curling – the women play for bronze in the evening – Sweden v Switzerland 🥉 9.10pm Ice Hockey – the bronze medal play-off for the men is Sweden v Slovakia 🥉 Tomorrow – Sunday 20 February 9.05am Curling – the women’s gold medal match: Great Britain v Japan 🥇 9.30am and 11.20am Bobsleigh – the final two runs of the four-man competition 🥇 12.10pm Ice hockey – the men’s gold-medal match, Finland v almost defending champions Russian Olympic Committee. In 2018 the competition was won by the ‘Olympic Athletes from Russia’ team, as the Russian Olympic Committee was suspended at that point due to doping violations. 🤔 2.30pm Cross-country skiing– women’s 30km mass free start 🥇 8pm Closing ceremony – Oh, that’s it. Done. Full Winter Olympics schedule | Results, sport by sport | Medal table How things stand Here’s what the emoji table looked like at 6.15pm Beijing time … 1 🇳🇴 Norway 🥇 15 🥈 8 🥉 12 total: 35 2 🇩🇪 Germany 🥇 10 🥈 7 🥉 5 total: 22 3 🇺🇸 United States 🥇 8 🥈 9 🥉 6 total: 23 4= 🇳🇱 Netherlands 🥇 8 🥈 5 🥉 4 total: 17 4= 🇸🇪 Sweden 🥇 8 🥈 5 🥉 4 total: 17 6 🇨🇳 China 🥇 8 🥈 4 🥉 2 total: 14 7 🇨🇭 Switzerland 🥇 7 🥈 2 🥉 5 total: 14 8 ◻️ Not Russia 🥇 6* 🥈 10 🥉 13 total: 29 9 🇦🇹 Austria 🥇 6 🥈 7 🥉 4 total: 17 10 🇫🇷 France 🥇 5 🥈 7 🥉 2 total: 14 Selected others 11 🇨🇦 Canada 🥇 4 🥈 8 🥉 13 total: 25 16 🇳🇿 New Zealand 🥇 2 🥈 1 🥉 0 total: 3 18 🇦🇺 Australia 🥇 1 🥈 2 🥉 1 total: 4 24= 🇬🇧 Great Britain 🥇 0 🥈 1 🥉 0 total: 1 + 🥌 to come [*this total includes the team figure skating gold, which the IOC has said will “not be sorted out during this Games”] The last word Yes, we have had some athletes that, of course, they’re going to be disappointed, they absolutely came here really hoping for that medal. But they’ll be going away now and looking at those performances. We’ve had some real promises for the future. People that came close, younger athletes that are looking to the future, that are looking to Milano Cortina, who had a good experience here” – Georgina Harland, Team GB’s chef de mission in Beijing.Spare a thought for composers, in the ricocheting tumult of musical life since early 2020. They spend months or years writing a piece for specific musicians, venue, event. Most will earn at most the kind of fee a minor celebrity takes home for a single after-dinner speech. Then the concert is cancelled. John Luther Adams, the veteran “eco” composer, has had to wait two years for the world premiere of A Brief Descent Into Deep Time, his work for Theatre of Voices, co-commissioned by Kings Place, along with the Cork international choral festival and Carnegie Hall. Originally a drummer who then worked in environmental protection in Alaska, Adams (b.1953) writes music inspired by the planet we live on. He calls it “sonic geography”. This latest slow-moving aural meditation on geological strata, intended for Kings Place’s 2020 Nature Unwrapped series, was nimbly shoehorned into this year’s Voices Unwrapped. He is not the first to take the Grand Canyon as his subject, nor will he be the last. Four singers slowly intoned rock names, music falling ever lower, from Kaibab limestone to Vishnu schist. The organist David Bendix Nielsen and percussionist George Barton provided minimal accompaniment. Only the final words, “grey, grey, dark grey, dark grey, black”, were distinguishable, the rest sounding like familiar vowels and consonants that could not quite translate into language. Not that this mattered: Adams asks you to listen to the mesmerising and extraordinary vibrations of human voices in slow oscillation. Theatre of Voices, directed by Paul Hillier, embraced its weighty intention. The sounds were exquisite but the work stopped short of intimating the magnitude of two billion years. Try Harrison Birtwistle’s Deep Time (2016), complex and melancholy, for contrast. Theatre of Voices also performed David Lang’s 2008 Pulitzer-award winning The Little Match Girl Passion. The work that best showed the group’s talent was Pelle Gudmundsen-Holmgreen’s beguiling Song (2010), based on the lute song Flow, My Tears (1596) by John Dowland, which emerges whole from a soundworld of chokes and sobs. The winning combination of Elgar, Walton, the violinist James Ehnes, the Philharmonia Orchestra and the conductor John Wilson encouraged a big, and wildly enthusiastic, turnout at the Festival Hall (broadcast live on BBC Radio 3). Ehnes, who has the silkiest tone in the business, achieves a level of perfection, full of feeling but without show, that puts him in a class of his own. He was the choice for Walton’s fiendish Violin Concerto (1939), written for the great Jascha Heifetz, similarly renowned for flawless technique and restrained manner. Ehnes gave a poetic performance, bringing out the music’s wistfulness as well as its fury and dazzle. The Royal Festival Hall’s acoustic can play tricks with sound. On this occasion the Philharmonia’s mighty brass sometimes appeared to be accompanied by the rest of the orchestra, but there was no mistaking the excitement and energy of musicians playing at full tilt for a conductor who demands all, and mostly gets it. Elgar’s Symphony No 1, the concert’s other work, presents a stately nobilmente exterior but as it unfurls, myriad tiny motifs eddy and spiral in constant, febrile motion. Without rushing, but always buoyant, Wilson propelled the music forward, so that when the hushed, slow movement melody arrived – marked in the score “expressive and sustained” – a sense of suspended animation took hold, until the trombones, gloriously noisy elsewhere but here muted, released us in the closing bars. The last movement, a summation of so much of the work to that point, romped home in urgent conclusion. Friendship may equal love or grief as a source of musical inspiration. Without his great ally, the horn player Joseph Leutgeb, butt of much scurrilous teasing, Mozart is unlikely to have written so many works for the instrument. The young German horn player Felix Klieser played two of them – the Quintet for Piano and Winds, K452 and the Quintet for Horn and Strings, K407 – with principals of the Bournemouth Symphony Orchestra and pianist Danny Driver on Wednesday (I watched it streamed live; the film is available online until 18 March). This was an excellent opportunity for these musicians to play chamber music with Klieser, their artist in residence, and with each other. The two Mozart works exude spirit and wit. Brahms’s Horn Trio (Klieser, Driver and violinist Mark Derudder), written for the valveless natural horn, is a yearning study in melancholy. Klieser, who was born without arms, plays with his left foot, his horn supported on a tripod. It might be the first thing to note about him. Once he plays, his agile musicianship prevails. The audience at Lighthouse, Poole, gave a standing ovation. Star ratings (out of five) Theatre of Voices ★★★★ Philharmonia/Wilson ★★★★★ Felix Klieser ★★★★ The Philharmonia Orchestra’s concert is on BBC Sounds Felix Klieser’s recital is online until 18 MarchThe great escape The Great British Menu (BBC) kicked off its 17th season this month. Not MasterChef: The Professionals, nor own-brand MasterChef, nor The Great British Bake Off, GBM’s USP is asking notable chefs nationwide to cook a Big Dinner at Ally Pally. New judges are in charge: chefs Tom Kerridge and Nisha Katona, and comedian Ed Gamble (from the Off Menu podcast), while Andi Oliver remains the host at the pass. Oliver’s army Oliver runs Wadadli Kitchen in east London and is the mother of Miquita Oliver – seen together in a recent exploration of the Caribbean on BBC Two. Miquita remains best known for the great snark-era Channel 4 show Popworld, which she wryly co-hosted with Simon Amstell from 2001 to 2006. Sleazenation If you have been on Instagram lately, you may have come across the sights and sounds of the @indiesleaze account, which has helped spur a reassessment of the 2000s’ indie-ish music, partying, fringes, American Apparel and unfortunately lit pre-iPhone photos. This is happening A 2000s revival is in full swing, and will turn to 11 with the release of Meet Me in the Bathroom, a forthcoming documentary about 00s New York rock based on Lizzy Goodman’s book. The British duo behind the film, Will Lovelace and Dylan Southern, made a film about LCD Soundsystem’s supposedly final concert (rent on Apple) – spoiler: it wasn’t. Earlier they captured Blur’s 2009 reunion tour. Charmless men Blur’s Damon Albarn was in hot water for ill-advised comments about Taylor Swift. However, the most egregious moment of extra-Blur life remains that photo of cheese- and bass-player Alex James standing beside then PM and future Greensill lobbyist David Cameron and then Top Gear host and future farmer Jeremy Clarkson, at the festival James hosts on his Oxfordshire farm. Then called Harvest, now the Big Feastival, combining music and food, 2016’s edition featured Tom Kerridge, Michelin star-winning chef and future judge of The Great British Menu (woo-hoo). Pairing notes Watch One-take film Boiling Point followed Stephen Graham’s hothead chef (three stars, the Bradshaw variety, not Michelin). Eat The 2006 series of Great British Menu culminated with Richard Corrigan, Bryn Williams, Nick Nairn and Marcus Wareing preparing dishes for the Queen’s 80th birthday lunch. For dessert, Wareing pulled out a custard tart with Garibaldi biscuits. Chef’s kiss!The Berlin film festival used to be an oddly contradictory affair. It was known for elaborately kitsch opening and closing ceremonies and competition films heavy on social conscience: champagne on the red carpet, kale juice on the screen. This year’s Berlin was differently strange. The February 2021 festival was online only, but offered the best crop of titles in recent memory. This year, a slightly shorter festival went live again – and if only its selections had been in the same league, it might have offset the event’s strangely desolate feel. The festival’s distribution market had gone online, meaning fewer delegates, partly because of Germany’s still tough Covid restrictions, which insisted on daily tests as a requirement for access to press screenings. All this made the unusually quiet Palast area feel like an art installation tribute to the bygone days of Checkpoint Charlie. As for the films, much of the competition selection had the glum earnestness of the old Berlinale, with little sense of fearless formal experimentation. But there was some joy to be had. You might have expected a jury chaired by M Night Shyamalan to come up with a last-minute shock twist. The twist was, they didn’t: they awarded the Golden Bear for best film to the title that deserved it, Carla Simón’s Alcarràs. A realist drama about a Catalan family facing eviction from the land where they grow peaches, it’s very political and hugely exuberant. Rich in immersive detail, the film is superbly cast with a teeming ensemble, including three children whom Simón appears to have left to their own devices, to irresistibly anarchic effect. It’s also a historical win: the third top prize in a year for female directors at European festivals, following Julia Ducournau with Titane in Cannes and Audrey Diwan’s Happening in Venice. It was a good year for France. François Ozon’s opening film, Peter von Kant, is a sly tribute to German maestro Rainer Werner Fassbinder, a gender-reversed reinvention of RWF’s 1972 classic The Bitter Tears of Petra von Kant, with the hulking Denis Ménochet as a lovesick gay auteur very much resembling Fassbinder himself. Also starring original Fassbinder star Hanna Schygulla and another 70s legend, Isabelle Adjani, Peter von Kant is a sly, polished confection of mischief, melancholy and heady melodrama. Another French star auteur, Claire Denis, was here with Both Sides of the Blade, starring Juliette Binoche as a woman caught between her partner (Vincent Lindon) and her smoothie ex. It’s odd to see a radical such as Denis working within the trad parameters of the bourgeois marital drama, but she does it with characteristically unsettling idiosyncrasy. By contrast, Mikhaël Hers’s The Passengers of the Night was a gentle, alt-feelgood drama. Set in 1980s Paris, it features Charlotte Gainsbourg on affecting form as a newly divorced woman who gets a job on a late-night radio show. Perhaps too benignly zen to gaze deep into the story’s darker areas, it’s nevertheless an immensely tender, atmospheric piece – a nostalgia trip with heart and subtlety. The boldest competition entry was Robe of Gems, a troubling, sometimes mystifying Mexican film about a wealthy family who move to a rural villa, with brutal results. Its themes are familiar in Mexican drama – violence, corruption, the gap between rich and poor – but it’s given a genuinely disturbing tremor by debut director Natalia López Gallardo. Previously known as editor to Carlos Reygadas, she has very much developed her own style of nightmare. Outside competition, fringe attractions included Andrew Dominik’s music doc This Much I Know to Be True, which intersperses sparse performances by Nick Cave and Warren Ellis with interludes in which they discuss their working methods, and an intro in which Cave unveils his utterly bizarre set of ceramics portraying the biography of the devil. Then there was Flux Gourmet, by the British arch-conceptualist Peter Strickland. It’s set in an institute where “culinary collectives” literally cook up experimental sound performances. Starring Asa Butterfield and Gwendoline Christie, it’s a little pedantic in its humour, more than somewhat redolent of Peter Greenaway, but visually striking, and it’s good to see Strickland still flying his freak flag on the conformist terrain of UK cinema. More discreetly outré, and the best fun here, was Incredible But True, by Quentin Dupieux, the japester behind Deerskin and Mandibles. His latest shaggy dog story is about a couple who discover something bizarre in the basement of their new home; not so much a thing, more a philosophical conceit that the film explores with irresistibly poker-faced comic logic. As for the festival’s most poignant film, it had to be Italian competition entry Leonora Addio. For decades, Paolo Taviani worked with brother Vittorio as one of cinema’s great sibling duos. Directing solo after Vittorio’s death, he offers a homage to him and to the great Italian writer Luigi Pirandello. Largely comprising a gorgeously shot black-and-white narrative about the return of Pirandello’s ashes to his native Sicily, it’s a blithe, rueful contemplation of art, history and mortality. As a musing on old age, it was nicely matched by Mitra Farahani’s eccentric doc See You Friday, Robinson, in which Jean-Luc Godard (91) exchanges emails with veteran Iranian director and author Ebrahim Golestan (99). Godard sends enigmatic quotes from Dashiell Hammett. Golestan, filmed in his vast, Xanadu-like English home, wryly muses that Godard may be taking the piss. We also get to see Godard ironing his shirts – one of those cinematic firsts you’re truly glad to have witnessed. The best of Berlin Golden Bear for best film Alcarràs by Carla Simón Silver Bear grand jury prize The Novelist’s Film, the 27th feature by Korea’s uncannily consistent Hong Sang-soo. As ever, a finely honed comedy of manners and misunderstanding. Silver Bear jury prize Robe of Gems by Natalia López Gallardo. Silver Bear for best director Claire Denis, Both Sides of the Blade (aka Fire). Special mention Switzerland’s Michael Koch for his imposing Alpine drama A Piece of Sky. Silver Bear for best leading performance Meltem Kaptan in Rabiye Kurnaz Vs George W Bush. German-Turkish TV regular Kaptan was boisterously characterful in this comically tinged story of a woman fighting to free her son from Guantánamo. But her crowd-pleasing win shouldn’t obscure other outstanding turns: eg Noémie Merlant and Nahuel Pérez Biscayart in One Year, One Night, about the Bataclan attack; and, above all, larger-than-life Michael Thomas in Ulrich Seidl’s Rimini, as a clapped-out cabaret singer turned part-time gigolo.Across the pages of Amy Liptrot’s new memoir, The Instant, the moon slowly follows us: in the app she has downloaded on to her phone to chart the phases of its orbit; passing through the sky, just visible from the windows of her apartment in Berlin’s Kreuzberg district; and in the subheadings she has awarded to each chapter (Thunder Moon, Hunger Moon, Strawberry Moon). It is the book’s steady presence: ancient and constant in an otherwise dislocated tale of fevered love in the digital age. Today, Liptrot, 40, stands in the kitchen of her terraced house in Yorkshire, making tea on a cold midmorning. Tall and pale and slender, she is something like a sliver of moonlight herself – if the moon wore pink cords and a violet top and spoke with a silvery Orcadian accent. Liptrot’s life these days is some way from the one she described in her 2016 debut, The Outrun. Then, she was newly returned to the family farm in Scotland after a hedonistic decade in London. As she rehabilitated from alcoholism, she found solace and sustenance in the nature of the islands. This life is different, too, from the year she documents in The Instant, in which she left Orkney and relocated to Berlin, spending her time wheeling across her new city, working in a tea-packing factory, dancing, dating, searching for raccoons, companionship, love. But for the last few years Liptrot has been settled here, with her partner and their two small children, in a house looking down over the rooftops of their close-knit town. She is, she points out, about as far as you can get from the coast – a strange feeling for someone who grew up by the sea. This calm, domestic existence is a subject she has yet to write about, and perhaps never will, having come to realise that keeping part of yourself back is crucial to the art of memoir-writing. “There’s a tendency, if you read about somebody’s life, to think that you have the entire picture, when really that’s an illusion,” she says. “Even though it’s a memoir, it’s carefully selected, and crafted, and there’s actually a lot that’s left out. I see myself as a writer, rather than somebody who has a sensational life.” And so she is nervous, she says, about being interviewed today. We sit in her living room, with its bookshelves and binoculars and small wood-burning stove. Liptrot perches on the edge of her sofa, and for much of our conversation casts her eyes down. Between us, on her coffee table, sits a book about the moon. “I’ve kind of got used to this thing with people I meet,” Liptrot says. “I can see in their eyes that they know quite a lot about me, and it bypasses a lot of small talk. They want to get into deep stuff straight away.” In her debut, Liptrot wrote of the gradual escalation of addiction: losing her job, her lover, her home; isolating herself, drinking alone; the desire for alcohol blurring her judgment and heightening risk, leaving her with few routes out. There was a cool radiance to the way she wrote, a willingness to get into that same deep stuff, that made for something remarkable. The book became a bestseller, won both the Wainwright and the PEN Ackerley prizes, and is now set to be turned into a film by the German director Nora Fingscheidt, starring Saoirse Ronan. Still, that openness brought a responsibility. It forged a fierce bond with her readers, who write to her and seek her out at readings. “They want to tell me about the parallels between their life and mine,” she says. “The most amazing thing is the people who are trying to get sober, or who are newly sober, who’ve said the book’s helped them. Or people who have addicts in their life who say that the book’s helped them to understand and have compassion for those people. That has been incredible for me and the greatest gift of my life, I would say.” This sense of connection galvanised her writing. “The fact that people will come on board with me, to keep on following down the things that I felt were interesting or worthwhile rather than what other people are writing about,” she says. “It gave me that confidence to follow my own instinct.” Liptrot thought about those readers a great deal when deciding whether to adapt The Outrun; it was the strength of that bond, their investment in her book and its subject matter, that convinced her it was a worthwhile enterprise. She worries about representing its characters and Orkney well, and plans to evolve the narrative and even the central character’s name so it feels less autobiographical. “Having your book made into a film is a huge honour and thrill,” she says, “but also comes with a lot of nerves and responsibility … The way I’m stopping myself going bonkers is by concentrating on the work that needs doing – on making a piece of art distinct from the book.” Now, on the eve of the new book, she is again fretting about letting her readership down. “I’m nervous about it,” she says. “I feel like I’m sort of pushing myself with the book, and taking a few risks both artistic and emotional with it. Now that it’s come to publication, I do have the collywobbles. I feel I’ve got quite a lot to lose.” The Instant is not a straightforward book. It is a fragmentary, episodic account of Liptrot’s time in Berlin, which took inspiration from poetry and song lyrics, from the internet-led alt-lit movement, and Jenny Offill’s novel Dept. of Speculation. “A lot of books that have been published in the last five years or so are quite fragmentary,” Liptrot says. “And I definitely think that’s a product of living on Twitter, and being distracted and how our attention spans are. But also the way that we’re sophisticated enough as readers to process different information in parallel.” It makes for a familiar rhythm for those accustomed to the perpetual scroll and swipe and tab-dance of online life. Liptrot designed each chapter as an extended metaphor: “There’s one about being in a techno club and being underwater. And there’s one that’s about online dating and looking for raccoons. And then there’s one that’s about traffic islands in Berlin and also about the love affair.” These were all interests that were happening concurrently for Liptrot. “I was doing the dating at the same time as I was getting up early to look for goshawks, and staying out late to look for the raccoons,” she says. “In my diaries, these things are mentioned in the same entry.” When she looked back through those entries from that time, she noted a theme pulling these disparate strands together. “There was a kind of searching that’s at the heart of a lot of them,” she says. “A search for love, but more broadly a search for meaning. A very broad message of the book is about finding your own meaning, and finding the things that are important to you.” She mentions her love for the work of the American author Annie Dillard, “and how she talks about giving voice to your own astonishment, which I take as this idea that whatever it might be that interests you as an artist, to really drill down into it”. There are many things that interest Liptrot: “The elements, stuff about geology, physics and astronomy, and then wildlife and birds,” she says. “And if something interests me, I’m going to put it in there, even if I don’t fully understand why. In art, not everything’s explained. It can be a little bit mysterious and magic.” Halfway through the book, and halfway through her time in Berlin, Liptrot finds a hyperfocus in the form of a short but intense love affair. It is giddy and sensuous and full of promise, and when it ends, unexpectedly, she is heartbroken. In her grief, she performs what she describes as “digital archaeology” on their relationship: examining all of their old messages and all of his social media posts for clues; buying online guides to getting your ex back; posting photographs and updates she hopes he might see; following him across the internet, like the moon. “I feel quite exposed having written about that,” she says now. “I feel it’s a bit embarrassing and it’s maybe a bit trivial. However, it was what concerned and obsessed me for a long time, and what my diaries were full of, and I thought, therefore, this must be worth writing about.” She is aware, of course, of the parallels with addiction; that her personality type may be particularly susceptible to the highs of love and the keenness of its loss. “But if I mention it to other people I often get this little gasp of recognition,” she says. “So I think it is a widespread thing that we’re trying to negotiate. I wanted to acknowledge and honour that experience, and look at the weirdnesses and the strangenesses, and the funny bits, and eventually the recovery. But not to get there too quickly, because I was stuck in it for a long time.” Sometimes she feels guilt for not writing about bigger issues. “Why am I writing about heartbreak?” she says. “Why am I not writing about climate change or the refugee crisis?” Not so long ago she told a friend that she feared her subject matter was indulgent and trivial. “And she said, ‘Well, some of those refugees are going to be heartbroken … ’” Since the success of The Outrun, many authors have attempted a similar feat – attempting to find consolation and new life through writing about nature. Liptrot is hesitant to talk about the current state of nature writing. “What can I say about that?” she wonders, and her eyes dart about the room. “I guess I see myself as a nature writer,” she says eventually. “But I want to slightly push the boundaries of what that can include.” She smiles, and her face pinkens. “A lot of nature writing is quite chaste, so I wanted to put the sex into nature writing. So humans as animals, and human instincts, and how the internet and digital technology allows us to amplify our animal instincts is of interest to me, in terms of searching for things, in terms of sexual opportunities, in terms of seasons.” For those who relished the nature-rich elements of The Outrun, there is also plenty of wildlife in The Instant. Liptrot arrives in Berlin feeling “quite lost and quite lonely” but through her exploration of urban wildlife, she finds structure and understanding of her new city, there in each sighting of goshawk and crow, each suggestion of Berlin’s unexpected raccoon population. Early on, she buys a pair of binoculars and takes them out on field trips. “I had the skills that I’d developed on Orkney, understanding the natural world around me and writing about that natural world,” she says. “And I was interested in transferring those skills from the Scottish island to the city: writing about urban wildlife, but writing about human nature as well and human relationships, because nature doesn’t exist just in rural places.” She makes no great claim to be any sort of authority on anything. “It’s not an academic polemic, or a fully researched book,” she says. “For me, it’s about the vibe, it’s about the mood, it’s about a certain place in time. It’s not me trying to fully authoritatively describe Berlin and the subculture. It’s my own experience.” She felt much the same about The Outrun: “That I’m sort of an interested novice birdwatcher,” she says. “I’m not an expert. But the reader comes along with me on my journey of learning.” Recently, Liptrot began looking for a fireproof box in which to keep her diaries – somewhere a little safer than the “big box upstairs” where they currently live. It was a moment, in many ways; an admission that she is now a writer, that this is her job. “My ambition has always been to write my diary for a living,” she says. “Which is kind of what I’m managing to do, and what I really hope I’ll continue to be doing.” I wonder if the voice she uses when writing her diary has changed as a result – whether she is aware now that it will form the basis of something more substantial. She thinks for a moment. “I try not to use it as a place just to moan,” she says. “If there’s a particular sensation or experience, I try to get loads of it down, so I can perhaps go back and use it at a different stage. But my writing process is very long and time-consuming, and the diaries are just one starting point of it.” Any piece of writing will also involve extensive note-taking, research, talking to experts. “I feel like I’ve struck on a process that works quite well but is quite laborious.” Take the moon, for example. “When I was back on Papay [Papa Westray, where much of The Outrun was set] I started getting more and more aware of the moon, and I then kept up that awareness in Berlin,” she says. “I got the app that tells me what the moon phase was, what time it’s going to rise and what direction to look in.” Sometimes, she will mark the full moon with a swim. “With the solstices and the equinox and the movements of the planets, I try to get my head around understanding what they’re actually doing. And I find it pleasing to have a combination of academic book learning and then seeing it happen in real life.” She laughs, and her eyes spring up. “And come on,” she says, “the moon! Poets have been at it for all time! I can’t claim it’s a new thing. But I like knowing it’s up there, holding on to us.” • The Instant is published by Canongate at £14.99 on 3 March. To support the Guardian and the Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply. Amy Liptrot will be interviewed on 5x15.com on 1 March.Reality TV used to be so straightforward. Chuck a few attention-seekers in a house, film everything they do, and hope they start bickering about teabags. It was television gold, and its evolution was rapid. Eventually, reality TV ballooned into a monster, hoovering up formats at speed, mining the attention-seeking prowess of people who were already famous – because there’s little risk of them not performing. Which is why Anthea Turner is on a sort-of competition with Lee Ryan from Blue attempting to do entirely invented “challenges” from a 1987 film that featured no challenges, as far as I can recall. Welcome to The Real Dirty Dancing (Monday, 9pm, E4). In recent years we have seen celebrities attempting to row boats around the British Isles, celebrities dating other celebrities and also non-celebrities, and on primetime Saturday nights, celebrities dressing up as cartoon creatures to belt out a tune using a disguised voice until Davina McCall shouts: “Take it off! Take it off!” at them. Has anyone else wondered whether celebrities might need our protection? Is it time to intervene, call a moratorium on letting famous people sign up to anything that suggests it might require a hint of a waiver? The Real Dirty Dancing falls into a celebrity reality subgenre that borrows a famous film and builds a competitive element round it. The Real Full Monty took a film about a fictional bunch of laid-off Sheffield steelworkers who turned to stripping to pay the bills and used it to get a load of celebrities to take their clothes off for charity. The Real Marigold Hotel borrowed an idea from the whimsical travel movie and sent older celebrities to India to see if they might retire there. Sadly, The Real Quiet Place is yet to be picked up, though I suspect it is only a matter of time. Keith Lemon and Ashley Roberts host this latest creation, which seems to be a cross between a historical re-enactment, a summer camp and a dance competition. The selection pack of famous people is a pitch-perfect cross-section of fame as it stands in 2022. There’s Turner, the oldest of the competitors, and by default the most famous, alongside Saffron Barker, who is a YouTuber apparently, and then a sprinkling of people from Hollyoaks and Geordie Shore and a couple of other TV shows. Bobby Seagull from University Challenge is there, as is Arg from Towie, who is excited to get on the dancefloor after his gastric band surgery, and then there is Ryan, a man single-handedly keeping the fedora alive. In the absence of much of a narrative, apart from getting to the obvious point of the Big Lift, they have to recreate less memorable scenes from the film. It’s basically Secret Cinema with Keith Lemon shouting at you and, I imagine, smaller queues. Not all of these “challenges” – and I say that loosely – involve dancing; one just involves tipping water on a waiter and trying to do an American accent. I found the concept hard to follow, but I think the two men and two women who perform best are chosen to play Baby and Johnny in the final, and then those two couples get to try the lift. As prizes go, it makes Drag Race’s RuPeter Badges look generous, but nobody really cares about who’s good or bad, only how horrifically awkward it can get when famous people are asked to bump and grind when they’ve only just met. The star, so far, is Chelsee Healey from Hollyoaks, who highlights the fact that this is all a gleeful stretch. “We got these big-arse melons banged on us,” she explains, as they carry watermelons into a club, because that’s what Baby does in the film. Healey came second on Strictly, and the spectre of that show looms large. The celebrity reality machine is such a tangled mess that some of the people on here, such as Healey, have already done it, while others would clearly like to do it, which makes this seem like both a training ground and resting home for the big daddy of twinkle-toed telly. This is no Strictly, but it isn’t trying to be. It’s a light, daft, surreal idea, stretched taut over the frame of reality TV, and it should hold, just about, until they’ve had the time of their lives.Greek rescue forces were desperately trying to extinguish fires raging for a second day on an Italian cruise liner off the coast of Corfu, as the search for 12 people believed to be missing intensified. Firefighters battled flames leaping from the ferry’s interior as state TV showed images of the Italian-flagged Euroferry Olympia engulfed in thick, acrid smoke. Efforts to bring the blaze under control were hampered by gale-force winds on Saturday, while intense heat from the ship made it impossible for rescuers to land on it, the broadcaster reported. “The fire is still burning and firefighting vessels have been trying to put it out,” Greece’s shipping minister, Ioannis Plakiotakis, told Skai television. Hundreds of passengers were saved in what Plakiotakis described as a heroic rescue operation after the boat’s Italian captain ordered people to abandon ship when the fire broke out at 4.12am on Friday. As night fell, two men – a Bulgarian and an Afghan migrant – trapped in the ship’s garage were airlifted by commandos winched down to the ship from a Super Puma helicopter. The 65-year-old Bulgarian was reported to be in critical condition in Corfu’s general hospital. Officials said an array of vessels from different arms of the navy, as well as elite forces, were participating in the rescue operation. “We are doing everything to save those who are missing,” said the Greek coastguard spokesperson, Nikolaos Alexiou, clarifying that they were all men. Asked if it was not too late, he said: “The aim is to find them.” The shipping ministry said passengers who remained unaccounted for included nationals from Bulgaria, Greece, Turkey and Lithuania. All were thought to be lorry drivers. Nine people, including two rescuers, had spent the night in hospital with most suffering from respiratory problems. Among the 280 people who had managed to flee the stricken ship were children, babies and two migrants not on the official passenger list who were described as stowaways. All had spent the night in hotels on the Ionian island. Bound for Brindisi, the 183-meter Grimaldi Lines ferry had set sail from Igoumenitsa, the largest port in western Greece, with 239 passengers and 51 crew members officially on board. The fire is believed to have started on a third level car deck, 10 miles north of Corfu, according to a statement released by the Italian shipping company. A total of 25 vehicles and 153 trucks were registered on the ship. Rescued passengers likened scenes to the Titanic, saying once it became clear the fire could not be brought under control, and flames reached the passenger deck, “panic and chaos” broke out on board. “It was so unreal, it was a bit like the Titanic, but it was real,” David Waller, a 58-year-old rescued trucker told Reuters. Another lorry driver, described as Albanian, said he thought death had “come for me”. “There was so much smoke. I thought we wouldn’t make it,” he told Greek state TV. “It took us about an hour and a half before we got into the lifeboats and about three more hours before we were picked up.” Many said they had lost everything to the blaze, listing passports, money, luggage, trucks and vehicles. An Italian finance police boat, which happened to be in the region, was credited with playing a seminal role in the rescue operation, with the country’s president, Sergio Mattarella, personally calling the finance unit’s commander to thank him. Local fishing boats also rushed to the scene to search for people who may have jumped into the water. The ferry’s captain and two mechanics appeared before a public prosecutor on Saturday as a judicial investigation was formally launched. Greek officials described the incident as the worst maritime disaster since 2014, when the Italian-owned passenger ferry Norman Atlantic caught fire in the Adriatic Sea with as many as 22 people – including migrants who had sneaked on board – losing their lives. Athens’ shipping ministry said once the fire was extinguished, the Euroferry Olympia would be tugged to a safe place so that its tanks could be emptied to avoid an environmental disaster in the area.Since Raveena Aurora first emerged in 2017, the New York-based singer-songwriter’s sound has been imbued with an entrancing soft soulfulness. Predominantly creating in the realm of R&amp;B, with nods to her Indian heritage have so far mainly been in the aesthetics – self-directed videos in which she and her peers drip in traditional gold jewellery. Her impressive debut album, 2019’s Lucid, explored family history, trauma, spirituality and relationships, largely over more standard R&amp;B and neo-soul-type instrumentation, occasionally veering into more psych-tinged, Alice Coltrane-esque celestial harps. On Asha’s Awakening, Raveena’s new album (her first on a major label), the 27-year-old’s direction feels more outward-looking, burrowing into her south Asian roots in bold, fantastical, high-concept fashion. Asha, we are told, is a space princess from ancient Punjab who is adventuring through the centuries, singing of love, loss and fate. The album plays with Bollywood film music stylings: shimmying trills of tabla rhythms, pitchy twangs of guitar, colourful smatterings of electronics, coy new age-y lyrics (“I can open up your third eye”) and Raveena occasionally singing in breathy, silky Hindi. Features from rapper Vince Staples and Asha Puthli, a cult Indian singer-songwriter experimentalist, are testament to how vast Raveena’s world can be. She has always been a pleasure to listen to, but her charm and talent on this fully formed new release are undeniable, threading past and present into her own glorious, cosmic future. • Asha’s Awakening is out now on WarnerI was given a special instrument at birth. Mum, Dad and my siblings all sang, but I understood my voice was different. By the age of eight I’d decided I’d do it professionally. But I had no idea how Beverley from Wolverhampton went from watching Top of the Pops to being on it. My parents were dedicated Christian folk. We were always at services and meetings, and music was a constant presence. It was only when I stole the radio from my parents’ bedroom I discovered a whole new world of sounds. Racism was a presence in those early years. Our constituency was the home of Enoch Powell – then his successor, who had similar views. Some people couldn’t tolerate my family and they made it no secret. When we played outside, they’d yell racial slurs. I was 16 when Prince played in Manchester – and I had to be there. I told Mum I was staying with a friend, then boarded the coach, alone, to see him. It was a reckless choice, but I’ll never regret it. Standing in the crowd looking up at him, I was certain that one day, somehow, we’d be on stage together. Prince flew me to Los Angeles to sing at his Oscars party. While we were performing, Stevie Wonder made his way through the audience to join us. The great and good of Hollywood were present. And there I was, belting out an Aretha Franklin number, as Prince stood beside me chanting my name along with those who’d gathered. When I started out, being a black woman in music meant the system didn’t celebrate me. It was demeaning. You were either hyper-sexualised or considered an angry black woman. It was assumed I could only appreciate R&amp;B and hip-hop, and I wasn’t allowed to experiment like my contemporaries. Hearing younger artists share similar experiences is devastating. Superficially, the conversation has changed, but have underlying attitudes? I never intended to speak publicly about abusive relationships in my past. There were two: one where he’d put his hands on me, followed by a man who was controlling and emotionally abusive. Years later, while working with a charity that supports survivors, I heard other women’s stories. Inadvertently, I found myself saying: “Yes, something similar happened to me.” I’ve been married going on 10 years, 15 years together. I’m seen as the powerful one in our relationship – publicly I get the attention. But behind the facade the load is shared. We’re a team and we approach life together. Standing on stage, I feel the goddess that I am; a queen looking out at her kingdom. Music has brought me joy from the age of three, and continues to as I approach 50. I’m so grateful. But there’s still more I want to do: films and TV; theatre shows and albums. And, there are a few statuettes still missing from my shelf. Mark my words: one day I’ll get them. The Drifters Girl is at the Garrick Theatre, London (thedriftersgirl.com)Stalking is abuse, not love I do not, as a rule, keep up with the Kardashians. And I try to pay as little attention as humanly possible to the erratic antics of Kim Kardashian’s ex Kanye West (who recently changed his name to Ye). But over the last couple of weeks I’ve made something of an exception to my “avoid losing braincells through exposure to Kimye drama at all costs” rule because Ye’s public behaviour has become increasingly disturbing. Even more disturbing, however, is the way his behaviour towards Kardashian is largely being treated as entertaining gossip by the media instead of being called out as harassment. While a handful of (mainly women-focused) media outlets, including Elle and Jezebel, have sounded alarm bells at the way Ye is acting, his behaviour is still being dangerously downplayed. Some background for everyone who hasn’t been following the saga: Kardashian and Ye, who have four children, are in the middle of ending their nearly seven-year marriage. The divorce proceedings, initiated last February, have not been low-key: this is no Gwyneth Paltrow-esque “conscious uncoupling”. Things got even more acrimonious when Kardashian started dating the comedian Pete Davidson late last year: Ye started veering between over-the-top displays of affection towards Kim and outbursts of anger. A small sample of his recent behaviour includes: Sending a truck filled with roses and emblazoned with the words “MY VISION IS KRYSTAL KLEAR” on its side to Kardashian’s house for Valentine’s Day. Posting what seems to be private correspondence from Davidson online. Encouraging his fans to scream “Kimye Forever” at Davidson if they see him in public. Leaking what appear to be private text messages from Kardashian on social media. He later acknowledged this “came off as harassing Kim” but then continued to rail at her online. Publicly accusing Kardashian of kidnapping their daughter Chicago after she threw her a birthday party and allegedly refused to tell him the address. He also turned up at the birthday party despite reportedly having agreed to host a separate event for Chicago. A bizarre number of media outlets have characterized what’s happening between Kardashian and Ye as a “war of words”. But that implies that there is some sort of equivalence between their behaviour. There isn’t. Ye is harassing Kardashian and she is asking him to stop. Earlier this month she released a statement decrying his constant attacks on her in interviews and on social media. “Divorce is difficult enough on our children and Kanye’s obsession with trying to control and manipulate our situation so negatively and publicly is only causing further pain for all.” Obviously I don’t have all the facts when it comes to the relationship between Kardashian and Ye. However, what’s playing out in public feels depressingly familiar: a man is refusing to take no for an answer and it’s being treated as a silly spectacle instead of serious stalking. Here’s the problem: decades of Hollywood films and popular culture have taught us that it’s romantic for a man to aggressively pursue a woman who has spurned his advances. It’s taught us that a man showering a woman with unwanted gifts is a cute gesture, not manipulative love-bombing. Men relentlessly pursuing women is such a common theme of romcoms that the website TV Tropes, which tracks frequently used narrative devices, has an entry for it called “Stalking is Love”. (Of course, it’s only love when a man does it. If a woman so much as calls her ex up she’s immediately characterized as “crazy”.) In a 2016 paper on Hollywood’s depiction of “persistent pursuit” the researcher Julia Lippman found, unsurprisingly, that exposure to this trope normalizes the behavior. “[T]he romanticized pursuit behaviors commonly featured in the media as a part of normative courtship can lead to an increase in stalking-supportive beliefs,” Lippman states. Once again, I have no idea what’s happening behind the scenes with Kardashian and Ye. But what’s happening in public should not be dismissed as entertainment; Ye’s online harassment should not be dismissed as harmless. Their divorce may be a private matter between the two of them but further normalizing the idea that persistent pursuit is romantic is harmful for everyone. The Democrats are about to give up on federal funding for abortion The Hyde Amendment, first implemented in 1977, forbids the use of federal funds for abortions except in very narrow circumstances. What does that mean in practice? Vulnerable groups (who rely on public health programs like Medicaid) have a much harder time accessing abortions. During the elections the Democrats were full of big promises about how they were going to end the Hyde Amendment but now that they are actually in power it looks like they’re about to do what they do best: nothing. Remember when Joe Biden told rich donors at a fundraiser that, if he got elected, “nothing would fundamentally change”? He sure seems to be keeping that promise. Advert for female train drivers in Saudi Arabia gets 28,000 applicants The 30 selected women will drive bullet trains between the cities of Mecca and Medina after a year of paid training. Female participation in the workforce has nearly doubled in the last five years to 33%: a fact that the Saudi crown prince loves to use as PR to distract from the kingdom’s human rights violations, its persecution of women’s rights activists and its relentless airstrikes on Yemen. We can applaud the progress that’s being made for women in Saudi Arabia but let’s make sure to put it in perspective. Two Asian American women murdered in New York City in less than a month In January Michelle Go was pushed to her death on to a subway track. On Sunday, Christina Yuna Lee was stalked and stabbed by a man who followed her into her Chinatown apartment. Neither have been official classified as a hate crime but the horrific attacks have reignited conversations about how Asian women are targets of both hyper-sexualization and racism. A disproportionate number of anti-Asian racist incidents target women. Twitter CEO’s weeks-long paternity leave hailed by fellow dads It’s great that Parag Agrawal, Twitter’s CEO, is helping to normalize men taking time off for childcare. However, it’s beyond depressing that a man taking care of his kid is still considered headline news. Gold for the ‘gayest Winter Olympic team of all time’ At least seven players on the gold-winning Canadian women’s ice hockey team are openly LGBTQ+. Adults who ignored traditional gender norms as children earn less money than those who did not New research has found that young men who exhibited more dependent behaviour as children had a 6% decline in earnings as adults. Girls who were characterized as headstrong growing up had a 10% decline in earnings. So that’s why I’m not a millionaire, eh? The week in pet-riarchy Big news in the bug world this week: London’s National History Museum has confirmed that a pet green bean stick insect called Charlie is male and female. That’s a “gynandromorph” if you’re being fancy. Charlie is apparently the “first reported gynandromorph” in that species and has now been donated to the museum for scientific research. Woke culture really has gone too far, eh? Even stick insects are coming out as non-binary. Arwa Mahdawi’s new book, Strong Female Lead, is available for orderEarlier this month, Streatham rapper Dave closed the Brit awards wielding an electric guitar that shot flames out of its neck while he thumbed a lyrical solo. Behind him, a gospel choir provided a euphoric crescendo of melodies, while to his right stood rappers Ghetts, Meekz, Fredo and Giggs, all nodding emphatically to the flow of his bars. The O2 audience was on its feet, anointing this eight minutes of music as a rock star’s homecoming, proof that only three years after his debut album release, Dave can keep an arena rapt. That debut, 2019’s Psychodrama, won the Mercury prize for its canny blend of earworming hooks and dextrous lyrical content that took aim at everything from political apathy to the stigmatisation of mental health issues, all in the form of an extended confessional from Dave to his psychotherapist. The nuances of this therapeutic self-revelation might not seem the most likely foundations for a fun live show, but it’s a niche that Dave has successfully harnessed for himself. He manages to straddle emotive lyricism with bombastic performance and, consequently, a chronology of his career highlights reads like a list of key live sets: a 2019 Glastonbury debut that went viral after he pulled a fan out of the crowd to match him word for word on Thiago Silva, his collaboration with AJ Tracey; a 2020 Brits debut where he performed the Psychodrama track Black on the piano and labelled Boris Johnson “a real racist”; and an ecstatic debut festival headline set at Manchester’s Parklife in 2021 that heralded an end to the city’s seemingly endless lockdowns. All of these performances trace Dave’s journey from sideman to headliner, sellout performer and now arena-filler. With the incendiary 2022 Brits performance acting as a teaser for his first stadium tour, he opens his run through the UK and Europe tonight in Nottingham. Just like the Brits, the first thing to note about Dave’s setup when he takes to the packed Motorpoint Arena is that here, too, there is fire. He is alone and unassumingly dressed in a blue-and-white tracksuit, pacing around the cavernous stage like a lion in a cage, while bursts of pyrotechnics punctuate his opening number, Verdansk. Where the solipsistic Psychodrama might not have seemed a fit for the arena stage, 2021’s follow-up LP, We’re All Alone in This Together, is largely targeted at getting an audience bouncing to a colossal sound system. Verdansk is a testament to that fact, prompting the largely teen audience to seamlessly spit back his Call of Duty-referencing lyrics, before smooth transitions into Top Boy soundtrack cut Professor X and 2021 single Titanium. Here are all the accompaniments of a stadium show: giant screens filled with liquid visuals, a central podium where Dave performs in the thick of the crowd, confetti cannon, a polished live band, even an outfit change (from a black to a white T-shirt). But when you take these flourishes away, Dave is playing this like it’s only a 200-capacity room, waving at audience members and taking impromptu breaks to explain the motives behind his lyrics. It’s an endearing approach that produces mixed results. On the one hand, his repeated insistence that we should “access our inner child” and strive to try new things with a youthful curiosity – as he demonstrates by getting out his guitar again to accompany a spoken-word version of In the Fire – produces a hushed reverence from the audience, caught off guard by the intimacy. On the other hand, his amateur guitar playing lacks the confidence he showed at the Brits, and it feels a little like we are willing him to succeed at a school talent contest. And yet this is perhaps where Dave’s greatness lies: in the capacity to try in front of thousands, even if he might fail; in his willingness to be vulnerable. That vulnerability is a truly remarkable feat, one that goes against every rap stereotype of machismo, and holds the audience in a space of safety, comfort and fun. “I’m trying so that I can be better,” Dave says as he rounds off his set. “Next time, I will be better and I want you all to be too.” To paraphrase the title of his latest record, we might be alone, but in moments such as these, as 10,000 people rap along to hits such as the Stormzy-featuring smash Clash, we are all smiling, we have forgotten our anxieties, and we are all alone together, watching Dave take his rightful place on an arena stage.The bestselling author Joanne Harris has turned down a US book deal after the publishers demanded she take out an “f-bomb” from the novel. The Chocolat author, who lives near Huddersfield in West Yorkshire, tweeted on Saturday: “Today I turned down a book deal in the US because they wanted to edit out my use of ‘the f-bomb’. I refused for two reasons: one, because I don’t use words accidentally. They matter. And second, because I don’t believe my use of the word ‘fuck’ harms anyone.” Harris was this week appearing at the Faversham literature festival in Kent to talk about her latest novel, A Narrow Door. She said the US deal she had been offered was for a special mail-order book club edition of A Narrow Door, a twisty psychological thriller that already has a mass-market deal there. Harris added: “I gave it some thought, and the decision was mine to take. That’s how publishing works, and I’m happy with my choice. In context it was a characterisation device, and would have sounded weak if I’d taken it out. “But if an editor had pointed out an inadvertent error in the text – or something in the tone that might be hurtful – I would have listened, and most likely changed it. Standing up for the words I meant to use doesn’t mean refusing to change those I didn’t.” Harris said that she did not feel offended by the request from the publisher, which she described as a house with a strong “cosy” branding, adding, “I understand, but that’s not me”. “I made my choice and so did they,” she said. “I don’t remotely feel as if I’ve been ‘cancelled’.” There has been a flurry of censorious action in the US against books in recent weeks, ranging from the controversial Tennessee pastor Greg Locke leading a mass book-burning of copies of Harry Potter and Twilight because of their supposed “demonic influences”, to a spate of book-bannings by schools, which some American teenagers are kicking back against. Harris said she chose to make the decision public on the back of a discussion on social media prompted by John Boyne, the author of The Boy In The Striped Pyjamas, criticising the increasing use by authors and publishers of “sensitivity readers” to ensure that they are representing certain groups correctly or to avoid causing offence. Harris was quoted in the media on her thoughts, and expanded on them on her blog, where she wrote: “I think a lot of people (some of them authors, most of them not) misunderstand the role of a sensitivity reader. That’s probably mostly because they’ve never used one, and are misled by the word ‘sensitivity’, which, in a world of toxic masculinity, is often mistaken for weakness. To these people, hiring someone to check one’s work for sensitivity purposes implies a surrendering of control, a shift in the balance of power.” Her declining of the US book deal was, she said, an example of “how these professional choices are personal to us, and how we make them every day”.Briefly raised hopes of averting a “horrendous” war in Ukraine are fading again after the US predicted an invasion in the “next several days” and British officials said they believed Vladimir Putin, Russia’s president, had decided to attack. The mood in Washington and London had shifted abruptly after Russian-backed separatists shelled Ukrainian targets in the disputed eastern Donbas region. Moscow claimed Kyiv’s forces opened fire first. Clashes are continuing. US president Joe Biden said that Russia was “engaged in a false-flag operation to have an excuse to go in” and was increasing, not reducing, troop numbers. That analysis was echoed in other Nato and EU countries, which are preparing punitive sanctions. Diplomatic efforts to halt the slide to war are not yet exhausted. Antony Blinken, the US secretary of state, is due to meet his Russian counterpart, Sergei Lavrov, in Europe this week – assuming there is no invasion. They will discuss Russia’s demands, delivered in writing last week, for a Nato withdrawal from eastern Europe and curbs on US missile deployments. Lavrov will also insist Ukraine be permanently denied Nato membership. In the documents, which are a formal response to American proposals for continued dialogue, Russia warns it will be forced to take measures of an unspecified “military-technical character” if its concerns are not addressed. Western leaders, including Boris Johnson, Kamala Harris, the US vice-president, Olaf Scholz, Germany’s chancellor, and Ukraine’s president will discuss the crisis this weekend at the annual Munich security conference. Unusually, Russia and China will not attend. Meanwhile, global stock markets reacted badly to increased fears of war, with share prices falling sharply. Gloom about the prospects for peace overwhelmed a midweek surge of optimism, sparked when predictions that Russia would invade last Wednesday proved wrong. Instead, Putin said he was pulling back some forces from Ukraine’s border. It seemed catastrophe had been averted. Yet within hours US and Nato officials were claiming the pullback was illusory. The White House flatly accused Russia of lying, saying troop numbers have swelled to around 150,000. For his part, Putin alleged, without evidence, that “genocide” against ethnic Russians was under way in the Donbas – another possible pretext for invasion. He continues to insist his troops are withdrawing and that there is no intention to attack Who and what to believe? The next few days could be a turning point. Or the stand-off could drag on inconclusively for months. The only certainty is that the future of Ukraine, and of relations between Russia and the west, hangs in the balance this weekend. Although an armed invasion has not yet happened, the 2022 “war for Ukraine” is already being waged on multiple non-military, political, diplomatic, economic, technological and covert fronts. So who’s winning so far? Vladimir Putin The question on everyone’s lips: what does Putin want? One theory is this former low-level KGB officer and part-time taxi driver has a massive chip on his shoulder. He has a small man’s visceral need to prove his (and Russia’s) superiority to the western victors of the cold war – but also to the former Soviet elites, from whose ranks he was excluded. A less complex explanation is that Putin views Ukraine as an integral part of historical Russia and Ukrainians and Russians as one people. He claims Ukraine is not a real country. For him, re-absorption into the fatherland is natural and logical, while efforts by Kyiv’s leaders to align with the west are anathema. Experts say Putin is intent on recreating the supposed glories of the Soviet era. He calls the collapse of the Soviet Union a geopolitical tragedy. Looked at this way, a conquest of Ukraine is part of a larger scheme to rebuild a Russian sphere of influence encompassing eastern Europe and central Asia. More mundanely, Putin’s actions can be explained by genuine fear that Russia’s security is threatened, his (disputed) belief that Nato broke a pledge not to expand up to Russia’s borders, and concern that it may accept Ukraine’s membership. Putin, a de facto dictator, feels threatened by a pro-western, democratic Ukraine on his doorstep. Is he winning? Putin has succeeded in forcing the west to consider his security concerns. He has intimidated Ukraine. And he has reminded a rattled Europe of its dependency on Russian gas. At the same time, he has hugely reinvigorated Nato, permanently changed western security assumptions, united the US and Europe against him, and reinforced Russia’s reputation as a rogue state that ignores international law and breaks its word. Joe Biden The US president was relatively quick out of the blocks over Ukraine. He needed to be. Last year’s chaotic US troop withdrawal from Afghanistan and the resulting damage to Nato’s credibility were laid at his door. With Covid and economic woes already hurting his domestic approval ratings, Biden could not afford a repeat foreign policy disaster. Having made promotion of democracy and human rights around the world a key foreign policy objective, Biden could also not stand back as Russia threatened a free, independent, democratic state. Biden’s approach to the crisis is influenced by two additional strategic factors. One is his aim to reboot the transatlantic alliance, undermined by his predecessor Donald Trump. The other is his desire to demonstrate to China, Russia’s ally, that the US will stoutly support its friends, be they in Ukraine or Taiwan. Biden has sent US troops to reinforce Nato’s eastern flank, assured Kyiv of non-military US support, and stiffened European backbones via an intense diplomatic offensive. In an unusual step, the US continues to disclose detailed (mostly unsubstantiated) intelligence about Russian intentions in an apparent attempt to pre-empt and forestall Putin’s next move. Biden’s tactics may have succeeded in heading off an invasion until now. There are two large caveats. One is that Washington’s attempts to find a diplomatic solution have struggled, while its tough stance may have compromised European efforts. This vacuum is dangerous. The other big reservation is that Biden controversially vowed from the start that US forces would not fight to defend non-Nato Ukraine – despite past US interventions in non-Nato Iraq, Afghanistan, Syria and elsewhere. Putin could yet take catastrophic advantage of this most un-American display of caution. Volodymyr Zelenskiy Ukraine’s president impressed world leaders in the Munich security conference this weekend with a brave and punchy speech after ignoring warnings to stay at home for fear of a Russian-inspired coup attempt. His response to the unfolding crisis has surprised some in the west. Criticising alarming claims in Washington and London about an “any day” invasion, Zelenskiy said such suggestions risked causing panic and harming his country’s economy. As Russian military pressure increased last week, the official tone in Kyiv shifted. But by and large Ukrainians appear unimpressed by frantic talk of war. A “day of unity” last Wednesday – the supposed invasion D-day – was not widely supported. As western diplomats and nationals hastily evacuate, most Ukrainians are firmly staying put. One explanation is that people have learned to live with threats from Russia. Low-intensity conflict with Russian-backed Donbas separatists has become the new normal since 2014, when Moscow annexed Crimea. Last week’s passage of a resolution in the Russian Duma (parliament) supporting independence for the breakaway Donetsk and Luhansk “people’s republics” in the Donbas was an attempt to increase Putin’s leverage. Such a unilateral move would spell the end for the so-called Minsk accords, whose terms are disputed by both sides. Ukraine’s aspiration to join Nato lies at the heart of the crisis. Zelenskiy is being pressed by European governments to drop this objective, a key Russian demand, and adopt a neutral, non-aligned status. So far at least, the Kyiv government, cast in the role of underdog, has benefited from increased international support, weapons deliveries and financial aid. It says any war would be about Europe’s future, not just Ukraine’s. True or not, Ukrainians will be the big losers if Putin resorts to force. Emmanuel Macron and Olaf Scholz Emmanuel Macron, the French president who also holds the rotating presidency of the EU council of ministers, has thrust himself into the diplomatic frontline. As the Americans and Russians haggled over Moscow’s demands for new security arrangements in Europe, Macron met Putin in Moscow and sketched possible compromises. These ideas, including recognition of Russian concerns about Nato expansion, its forward deployments in eastern Europe, and current and future US missile capabilities in Poland and Romania, may yet provide the basis for a deal. Macron also raised the possibility of Ukraine adopting neutral status, not unlike Finland during the cold war. Macron publicly supports the US-orchestrated plan to impose severe sanctions on Russia should it invade, and insists he acts in close consultation with Washington. But his Moscow talks raised eyebrows. British officials accused him of appeasement and of undermining the west’s united front. While Macron can shrug off criticism from London, he needs the backing of Germany, the biggest European player. But Olaf Scholz, its newly elected chancellor, has appeared in two minds. On the one hand he wants to salvage the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline from Russia. On the other he is under intense pressure from Biden to abandon it in support of anti-Kremlin sanctions. Yet Scholz surprised his critics last week when he met Putin in Moscow. He delivered a feisty performance, raising questions about media freedom and human rights. That may have reassured hawkish allies such as Poland and the Baltic republics, which have accused him of being “soft” on Russia. At the same time, Scholz extracted a commitment from Putin to continue dialogue in line with Macron’s approach. The EU commission has been sidelined during the crisis. But the French and German leaders have emerged with reputations enhanced. So far. Boris Johnson Beset by scandals arising from illegal lockdown parties and reportedly anxious to change the subject, Boris Johnson seized on the Ukraine crisis in late January after having previously largely ignored it. At his direction Downing St began briefing about a big, cross-departmental Whitehall push to tackle the crisis. Britain, Johnson claimed, would lead western attempts to deter Russia. But saying it does not make it so. Suggestions that this new effort to aid Ukraine was part of so-called Operation Save Big Dog to rescue his career were denied, naturally. The UK has since sent extra troops to Estonia, missiles to Ukraine, and placed Royal Navy ships on alert. It is typically iffy about accepting refugees, but has offered humanitarian aid. But Britain’s emphasis on muscular deterrence has come at the expense of diplomacy. It has contributed almost nothing to peace-making efforts. When Liz Truss, the foreign secretary, met Lavrov in Moscow, their talks ended in an icy standoff. Johnson has gratuitously undermined Macron’s Moscow initiative while Ben Wallace, the UK defence secretary, spoke disparagingly of a “whiff of Munich”. Meanwhile, the government has yet to enforce effective measures to curb Russian money-laundering in London. All else aside, the Ukraine crisis has brutally underscored Britain’s diminished international influence abroad. Separated by choice from the EU, the UK is now viewed in Russia (and much of Europe) as little more than a cheerleader and errand boy for America. When Johnson asked Biden what else the UK could do in a phone call last week, the US president replied: “We’re not going anywhere without you, pal.” That summed up Britain’s war to date. The rule of thumb for post-Brexit foreign policy: ask politely what Washington wants, then follow directions.Experts have called for continued caution in the government’s “living safely with Covid” plan in England adding that scrapping self-isolation would be “very unwise”. On Monday, Boris Johnson is expected to outline the strategy, which will include expanding freedoms to pre-pandemic levels. Among the new measures, free home-delivered lateral flow tests (LFTs) for all are likely to be scrapped and the legal requirement for anyone with Covid-19 to isolate is expected to end towards the end of the month. However, Dr David Nabarro, the World Health Organization’s special envoy on Covid-19, told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme he did not support the ending of self-isolation. “I think it’s really very unwise and I don’t understand why that’s been introduced,” he said. “I appreciate their concerns about absenteeism … but at the same time, what we know about this virus is that it is not good for people and simply just treating it as though it is a harmless virus we think – that’s myself and colleagues in the World Health Organization – we think that’s unwise.” He also warned against dropping face coverings and social distancing. “The best way to prevent other people from being infected with the virus is the combination of a well-fitting face mask and physical distancing,” he said. “And that has to continue, especially in places where there’s a lot of virus around. If it’s dropped, it is I believe, creating an unacceptable risk for people.” He called for “unequivocal” messaging, as well as world leaders to set the “example”, adding that continued caution regarding the virus was essential. “I think every society is going to have to live with Covid,” he said. “This virus is not going away anytime soon. But living with Covid doesn’t mean just accepting whatever the virus chooses to do. And so what matters is what’s going to be in this plan. I haven’t seen it so speculation is a bit tricky, but I think what I’ve been looking for is clear recognition that this is still a dangerous virus.” On the impact of the new plan, Nabarro said it could influence other countries’ measures. “I really do worry that if Britain is taking a line that is against the public health consensus that other countries, others leaders, will say, ‘If Britain’s doing it why can’t we?’ and this will create a bit of a domino effect around the world.” Meanwhile, the statistician Sir David Spiegelhalter argued that some form of the Office for National Statistics’ (ONS) coronavirus study should remain in place as part of the government’s plan. Spiegelhalter, who acknowledged his conflict of interest as a non-executive director for the ONS and chairman of the advisory board for the Covid Infection Survey, told the Today programme: “I would say it (the study) is the envy of the world – I would say that, wouldn’t I? “But I should say that the president of the Royal Statistical Society has a letter in Saturday’s Guardian arguing the incredible statistical importance of some kind of health surveillance survey – it’s expensive and funding is being considered.” He added that such a survey “does seem incredibly important as we move forward”. With regard to the ONS’s random Covid-19 survey, he said: “As a statistician, it has been absolutely so important as we have gone along. “It has been running since April 2020, and so, as I said, I do have a bias here but it is not just me – I think lots of people are saying how important it is, particularly the statistical community.”Japan has set itself on a diplomatic collision course with South Korea by applying for Unesco world heritage status for gold and silver mines on an island off its west coast which used forced labour from Korea. The row over the mines – on Sado island in the Sea of Japan – is expected to further sour relations between the countries just as the US is pressing them to present a united front against North Korea’s nuclear programme. The mines are among dozens of industrial sites that played a key role in Japan’s modernisation but relied on slave labour. An estimated 780,000 Koreans worked in mines and factories during Japan’s 1910-1945 colonial rule of the Korean peninsula, many in appalling conditions and without proper pay or holidays. Japan’s prime minister, Fumio Kishida, nominated the mines this month after pressure from conservatives in his party including former prime minister Shinzo Abe. This drew an angry response from South Korea, whose foreign ministry accused Japan of “ignoring the painful history of forced labour for Koreans”. Kishida said: “We are aware that South Korea has its own opinions. That’s why we feel we should have meaningful, rational dialogue.” In recent years, groups of former labourers and their families have attempted to win compensation from Japanese companies including powerful conglomerates such as Nippon Steel and Mitsubishi Heavy Industries. But South Korean court rulings finding for the plaintiffs have been dismissed by Japan, which maintains that compensation claims stemming from the war were settled “completely and finally” by a 1965 bilateral treaty. Companies that do not comply with the rulings risk having their assets in South Korea seized – a move observers say would harm the economies of both countries. The 400-year-old Sado mine complex, which closed in 1989, was once among the world’s biggest gold producers, but its success was partly built on the exploitation of more than 1,000 Korean labourers. In an editorial, the Korea Herald called the Unesco proposal “shameful”, adding: “Japan’s move to list the site … is a thinly veiled to attempt to whitewash the brutality that took place during its rule of Korea. For Koreans, the Sado mine is one of many sites illustrating the atrocities of Japanese colonialism amid the long-running view that Japan has yet to issue a sincere apology and offer proper compensation.”A Unesco advisory body will survey the complex and decide whether to include it in the list of heritage sites – a status that would encourage tourism and attract funds for protection and conservation. The World Heritage Committee, which includes Japan but not South Korea, will make a final decision next summer. Japan has faced charges of attempting to ignore dark episodes from its past before: more than 20 Meiji era (1868-1912) industrial sites were added to Unesco’s world cultural heritage list in 2015. Although some of these places, including a coalmine on Gunkanjima island, had used forced labour, Japan was admonished by Unesco for failing to honour a commitment to explain that their workforces had included thousands of exploited Koreans. Local government descriptions of the Sado mines do not mention their use of Korean labourers. Ties between South Korea and Japan are at their lowest level for years amid disputes over forced labour and “comfort women” – girls and women, mainly from the Korean peninsula, forced to work in Japanese military brothels before and during the war. The US has called on leaders in Seoul and Tokyo to resolve the row and focus on addressing threats posed by a more aggressive China and an unpredictable North Korea.Lindsey Pearlman, an actor known for television series including General Hospital and Chicago Justice, was found dead in Hollywood several days after going missing, authorities and her husband said. She was 43. “Today around 8.30am, Hollywood area officers responded to a radio call for a death investigation at Franklin Avenue and North Sierra Bonita Avenue,” Los Angeles police said on Friday. “The LA county coroner’s office has since confirmed the individual to be Lindsey Erin Pearlman. The cause of death will be determined by the coroner.” Her husband, Vance Smith, said on Instagram: “The police found Lindsey. She’s gone. I’m broken. I will share more later, but I wanted to thank you to everyone for their love and efforts and ask you to respect the privacy of her family at this time.” In a 16 February missing person advisory, LA police said Pearlman was reported missing after she “failed to return home and has not been seen or heard from since”. The department also said “friends and family fear for her safety”. Police said Pearlman was last seen at about noon on 13 February. Smith said that was incorrect, and she was last seen at about 9pm on 15 February. A graduate of the Second City Conservatory, Pearlman moved from Chicago to LA after landing a recurring role on Chicago Justice, made by NBC, and in order to pursue more on-camera work, according to her website. The “about” page on the website describes her personality in good-humored fashion and lists her many roles. “Lindsey loves 90s R&amp;B. She is an activist for animals and humans,” the page says. “Her bat mitzvah bash is still the standard to which she holds all parties. Lindsey’s bladder is tiny, so remind her to pee before the movie starts please.” Pearlman was also an improviser and made numerous stage appearances in Chicago. For seven years, she performed in a touring show called Sex Signals, “which uses comedy to broach the difficult topic of sexual assault awareness at military bases and college campuses”.Newcastle continued their steady climb towards safety after Joe Willock’s equaliser earned a draw at West Ham to extend their unbeaten run in the league to six games. The unimpressive hosts were fortunate to take the lead through Craig Dawson’s header but an instinctive finish from Willock ensured another step in the right direction for Newcastle under their manager, Eddie Howe. Failure to beat Watford in January seemed to be a major blow to Newcastle’s hopes of avoiding relegation, but 12 points from their last six matches – two more than they managed in the opening 18 games of a turbulent first half of the season – have eased their supporters’ fears and lifted them out of the bottom three. Howe said: “I’m satisfied with the point but frustrated it maybe wasn’t more. The way we started the game was excellent. The only disappointment for me was that we only got one goal – there was more in it for us. “From the moment the game kicked off we started in a really positive way and the team’s in a good place at the moment.” West Ham’s inability to maintain their lead, leaving them with one win from five in the league, prevented them from climbing back into fourth place and underlined the nagging feeling that a lack of squad depth will prove costly in their quest for Champions League football. Kurt Zouma returned to the starting lineup, with the defender the subject of derision from the Newcastle fans for the inexplicable social media video of him abusing his pet cat. Newcastle’s hopes of a fourth successive league win were hampered by the loss of Kieran Trippier after the defender fractured his foot against Aston Villa, as well as the flair and pace of Allan Saint-Maximin, who is sidelined with a calf injury. The visitors were also forced to travel down by road rather than plane on Friday due to the impact of Storm Eunice, but there was no sign of any fatigue from their players. Newcastle made a sharp start which almost resulted in a third-minute opener but the goalkeeper Lukasz Fabianski blocked Joelinton’s shot from an acute angle. Willock went close with a shot that was deflected over the crossbar as West Ham floundered sheepishly during the early exchanges. But the hosts, looking much more sluggish than the team forced to take a 280-mile coach trip to London, finally spluttered into life. Jarrod Bowen, playing with great confidence after scoring five goals in his previous five league matches, was only denied by Martin Dubravka’s exceptional save which pushed his shot on to the bar. The excellent Willock was increasingly looking a threat with his thrusting attacking runs from midfield but Newcastle needed more of a knockout punch in the final third, with the striker Chris Wood still searching for a first goal since his January move. Although David Moyes’s team had struggled to move out of first gear during the opening half-hour, Dawson profited from Aaron Cresswell’s free-kick to head them into the lead with his second goal in as many games. But Newcastle, who are unbeaten in the league since the middle of December, deservedly equalised at the end of the first half after a poor defensive header from Declan Rice was seized upon by Willock, with his impeccably timed flick crossing the line via the post. The second half was a tepid affair and an agitated Saïd Benrahma, who was substituted in the 73rd minute, appeared to let out his frustration at Moyes after the manager asked him to speed up his exit from the pitch. It was another unconvincing performance, much to the disgruntlement of the impatient home fans, and one which suggested West Ham’s top-four challenge is likely to fall short. Moyes said: “I was thrilled to take a point because it was one of our poorer performances this season. “Getting a point hopefully will prove to be an important one later in the season.” Newcastle, meanwhile, coped admirably without two of their most influential players while their defensive improvement, inspired by the recent recruits Dan Burn and Matt Targett, has paid off handsomely. Their Premier League status looks safer by the week.No word from David Moyes, so that’s your lot. Thanks for reading this MBM. Eddie Howe talks to BT. “We are satisfied with a point, but frustrated it wasn’t more. The way we started the game was excellent, front foot. The only disappointment was that we only got one goal, there was more there for us, but they are a dangerous team and a very good one. They showed that: although we dominated, they still had a threat in the game. But the character was there. I’m really pleased for Joe Willock. He works hard and he got his reward today. He’s been a key component in our recent matches. We knew today would be a tough examination and I think we came through.” Toon goalscorer Joe Willock, a ball of positive energy, talks to BT. “We had to stick to our task. Everyone had to be at it to come away with a point today. We brought our gameplan to them, and was dominant in the first half. It shows how far we’ve come as a group, and what the manager’s instilled into us. I’m happy to score and help the team. Hopefully it continues. Eddie Howe is a brilliant manager and a brilliant person. We all trust him and we all buy into what he wants to do. I’m really happy he’s here and how far he’s taken us, and long may it continue. We’re looking to look up the table and not down.” West Ham remain in fifth, unable to find the winner that would have taken them above Manchester United for 24 hours at least. A top-four finish may be tantalisingly out of reach. Newcastle meanwhile are still looking over their shoulder, but the momentum is with them: that’s now ten points from the last 12 available, and 12 from the last 18. They’re unbeaten in the league since Christmas. The whistle goes just before everyone threatens to throw hands. Bowen wasn’t happy about that tackle. West Ham aren’t particularly enamoured with their point, either. Newcastle seem more content with theirs. 90 min +4: Cresswell catches Krafth on the knee. Krafth rolls off the pitch injured. Play continues, with Toon down to ten men. West Ham go up the other end through Bowen, who is cleaned out by Burn. He goes in the book for a brazenly late tackle. 90 min +3: BT co-commentator Lucy Ward names Craig Dawson as man of the match. 90 min +2: Antonio batters a header clear, and when the ball returns, Newcastle are collectively caught offside. 90 min +1: A long pass into the West Ham box. Dawson and Fabianski confuse each other, and the ball clanks off the former and out for a corner on the left. Targett to take. 90 min: Fornals slides in on Almiron, studding him on the knee. A yellow card. VAR has a look, and concludes yellow is enough. Fornals a lucky chap. There will be five bonus minutes. 88 min: Willock is replaced by Guimaraes. 87 min: Antonio barges his way down the right and crosses low. The ball breaks back to Fornals, who shoots from the edge of the box. Burn blocks bravely. A decent half-chance for West Ham to snatch all three points. 85 min: Fornals tries to release Bowen down the right but the pass is overhit and claimed easily by the alert Dubravka. 83 min: Antonio throws in long from the right. Burn rises to head clear. Joelinton goes down with cramp. It’s been a reasonably entertaining game, but it’s threatening to sputter out. 81 min: Zouma rakes a pass down the left for Bowen, who is nudged from behind by Schar. The West Ham fans holler for a free kick, maybe even a penalty, but the referee’s not interested. Goal kick. 79 min: Fraser finally departs and Almiron comes on in his place. Eddie Howe not so insistent with Fraser as Moyes was with Benrahma, suggesting Newcastle will be happy enough with a point. 78 min: Fraser is down, knackered more than anything. He hauls himself up off the turf and trudges off the pitch at Benrahmaian pace. 76 min: Antonio curls in from the left. Dubravka claims easily enough. A few hoots of frustration from the home faithful, with West Ham’s bid for Champions League football faltering. 75 min: Vlasic’s first involvement is to tear at speed down the left. Fraser chases across and slides in, flipping the West Ham sub into the air like a pancake. Into the book he goes. 73 min: Benrahma, who has been poor this afternoon, is replaced by Vlasic. He’s unhappy at being hooked, and takes an age to depart. Moyes unequivocally orders him to get an effing move on. He sort of complies, and cops another rollocking when he flounces towards the bench. Another bullet point for the debrief, which will no doubt be delivered with some feeling should West Ham fail to win this game. 71 min: Fraser’s deep cross from the right forces Johnson to hack out for a corner on the left. Targett sends it into a crowded box. Zouma, who is having a very decent game, heads decisively clear. 69 min: Antonio strides down the left, bustles infield, and larrups a wild effort 200 miles over the bar. On the touchline, David Moyes hangs his head in a mixture of sorrow and irritation. No doubt that’ll be mentioned in the post-match debrief. 68 min: Fraser threatens to break into the West Ham box down the inside-left channel. Zouma comes across and executes a perfectly timed tackle. The home fans enjoyed that old-fashioned cruncher; the denizens of the away end sing their song. 66 min: Willock glides in from the left and looks for the bottom right with an ambitious curler. It’s always heading wide, but not by too much, and Fabianski was concerned enough to dive at full stretch. 64 min: Antonio looks to cross from the left. The ball clanks off his standing leg and out for a goal kick, as he takes a fresh-air swipe. Hey, these things happen, and he has the good grace to chuckle at himself. 62 min: A cheer for Zouma, who wins a tussle with Willock down the West Ham left. The seeds of a redemption story are sown. 61 min: Both players are given the once-over, and are cleared to continue. Off we go again, then. 60 min: Joelinton and Johnson clash heads as they compete for a Fraser right-wing cross. Play stops. 59 min: This game is being played at a fair old lick, but neither team are achieving much at the moment. 58 min: ... a game of head tennis breaks out, but little else. 57 min: Murphy hasn’t been getting as much change from Johnson as he did from Fredericks down the left, but he wins a corner here. And from that ... 55 min: Newcastle, by contrast, haven’t really got going in this second half yet. 53 min: Bowen drives down the inside-right channel. He’s hoping to make space to shoot, but Targett sticks to him like glue, and he can’t even get a cross away. West Ham are playing like a team given a rocket at half-time by an animated old-school Scottish manager from Central Casting. 51 min: Targett is good to continue. 49 min: Fornals hooks in from the left. Bowen brings the ball down on the penalty spot, his back to goal, and attempts to spin and shoot. Targett, just behind him, does enough to put him off, then goes down holding his head. An accidental clash, and play is stopped. 48 min: Newcastle don’t deal with the corner particularly well, allowing Cresswell to drive through a crowded box. The shot pinballs away from danger, but the ball’s soon returned into the mixer by Cresswell from the left. Soucek heads down for Dawson, who has a crack with a crisp half-volley. His shot is blocked. 47 min: Targett crosses from the left. The West Ham defence is a little hesitant, but Fabianski eventually claims. The hosts go up the other end, Johnson winning a corner with his first act of the afternoon. 46 min: The rain’s still hammering down, appropriately enough. Newcastle get the second half started. West Ham have made a change, hooking Fredericks, on a booking and getting a chasing down the Newcastle left. Johnson comes on in his place. Half-time entertainment. Loss of noggin special! Fornals and Shelvey take note. That ball only just crossed the line before Fabianski desperately scooped it away. But cross the line it most certainly did. That’s pretty much the last act of an entertaining first half. As the players troop off, a heated discussion nearly escalates between Fornals and Shelvey. Burn steps in with the authority of a very tall man and puts a stop to the nonsense. Murphy and Fraser combine crisply down the left. The latter dinks a cross into the middle. Rice tries to head clear, but the ball skims off the top of his head and across to Willock, who, on the left-hand corner of the six-yard box, sticks out a leg and guides the ball across Fabianski, off the right-hand post, and in! 45 min: There will be two additional minutes to this first half. 44 min: Murphy wins a corner down the left. The set piece is lumped into the mixer. Murphy tries to carefully sidefoot goalwards, but gets it all wrong. West Ham attempt a quick counter, looking long for Benrahma, but Krafth is quickly across to cover. 43 min: Tell you what, though, had Zouma scored from that corner, it’d have been interesting to hear the reaction. A moral dilemma, right there. “Between kicking a cat and killing a journalist, maybe everyone should just boo each other constantly,” suggests Ian Copestake, who may be onto something. 41 min: Bowen nearly breaks clear down the inside-right channel, but Burn comes across to poke out for a corner. Zouma wins a header but can’t direct it goalwards. West Ham come again through Bowen down the right. He drops a shoulder to get into the box, and whistles a low shot towards the bottom right. Dubravka gets down to smother. 40 min: Rice heads the corner clear. The ball’s returned into the mixer. Shelvey competes for it, and goes down, shoved in the back. He doesn’t claim for a penalty, which is just as well because the referee isn’t interested in awarding one. 39 min: Murphy works his way down the left and wins a corner off Fredericks. Corner, and a chance to hit back. 37 min: A cross from the Newcastle left. Wood rises high, but Fabianski leaps higher, punching away from the big Toon striker just in time. 36 min: Antonio is down having taken a whack upside his head. Off he goes. A quick check. And now he’s back on. 34 min: That was a hell of a delivery from Cresswell, and a fine header to match. Newcastle didn’t do a great deal to stop it all unfolding, mind. Krafth lost his man, standing stock still with a confused look on his face. Krafth is booked for cynically bringing Antonio down on the left. The resulting free kick is curled in by Cresswell. Dawson times his run perfectly, and he’s got a free header, 12 yards out. He smacks a downward header into the bottom left, giving Dubravka no chance. Easy as that! 30 min: Schar crosses low from the right. Wood can’t control in the box. Newcastle are playing some nice football, but it’s not quite clicking in the final third. 29 min: Newcastle are winning most of the 50-50s at the minute. The home fans getting a little agitated, a few sighs, but no great drama. 27 min: Willock turns away from Rice and strides gracefully down the middle. He slips the ball wide left for Targett, who hits a low cross towards a crowded six-yard box. The ball’s blocked and rebounds off the Newcastle left back, out for a goal kick. An unlucky end to a smooth move. 26 min: Murphy loops harmlessly over the bar from the edge of the West Ham box. 25 min: Murphy barges Bowen from behind and is fortunate not to go into the book. Just a quiet word from the ref. Some booing, for once not directed at Zouma, in response to the non-decision. 23 min: Wood bullies Zouma off the ball down the Newcastle right. He whips a low cross into the six-yard box. A lovely teasing ball, but there’s nobody there in Newcastle black. West Ham hack clear. 22 min: Bowen plays a cute ball down the right for Antonio, who goes for power from a tight angle. The ball sails miles over the bar. 21 min: Fredericks could have had an assist to his name; now he’s got a yellow card for cynically barging Willock, in flight down the left, off the ball. 20 min: Fredericks flicks a header down the right to release Bowen into the box. Bowen lashes goalwards from a tight angle. Dubravka tips the rising drive onto the bar and away. The ball’s bundled out for a corner on the left. Nothing comes from that. West Ham so close to the opener! 18 min: Murphy skedaddles down the left and crosses low. Zouma, undeterred by the opprobrium, intercepts calmly and clears. 16 min: Schar rakes a long pass down the right in the hope of finding Wood. Zouma comes across to blooter clear. More boos, then some singing, as reported by Ben Bronx: “West Ham United continuing to start Kurt Zouma is a disgrace. No surprise that the Newcastle United fans are booing him every time he touches the ball. Also a chant ringing around the London Stadium: Hey, hey Zouma (Ooh aah), I wanna know how you kicked that cat.” 14 min: After some interminable faffing, Bowen floats a long diagonal free kick into the box. Soucek competes with Krafth, and expects a corner, the ball coming off the Newcastle man, but the referee points for a goal kick. Some mild fuming ensues. 12 min: Bowen makes good down the right and crosses. Blocked by the seat of Targett’s pants. The crowd holler for a penalty, but come off it. Bowen comes again down the right, nutmegging Krafth and getting bodychecked for his cheek. Free kick on the touchline, and a chance to load the box. 11 min: West Ham finally get something going in attack. Antonio picks up possession on the edge of the Newcastle box. He hesitates before shooting, allowing Targett to spread himself and block. 10 min: Dawson comes high-kicking in on Fraser. A clumsy knee in the ribs. VAR has a look, but there’s no interest in punishing the West Ham defender. 8 min: Newcastle continue to pour forward. Targett makes his way down the left and crosses for Fraser, whose first time shot is deflected away from the goal. The visitors are first to everything at the moment. 7 min: Predictable boos for Zouma when he touches the ball. He’s also getting pelters via the medium of the comedy inflatable. 5 min: Krafth sends a long throw into the West Ham box from the right. The whistle goes. Foul throw. The pressure on the hosts finally released. 4 min: Nothing comes of the second corner, but this is a confident start by Newcastle. West Ham are still cold. 3 min: A free kick for the Toon out on the right. Schar hoicks a long diagonal ball into the West Ham box. It drops to Joelinton, on the corner of the six-yard box. West Ham snoozing. Joelinton goes for goal. Fabianski blocks out for a corner, and a game of pinball breaks out. Murphy has a dig. Blocked. The ball twangs over the bar for another corner. 2 min: Newcastle get on the ball quickly, and stroke it around awhile. The confidence of a team on a three-win tear-up. West Ham get the ball rolling ... but only after everyone takes the knee. There’s no room for racism. The teams are out! It’s a miserable day in the East End. Rain coming down in stair rods. But it’s not totally grim: the wind has dropped, the pitch will be slick, and there are pretty bubbles in the air. West Ham wear their famous claret and blue, Newcastle sport second-choice black. We’ll be off in a couple of minutes! Eddie Howe speaks to BT Sport. “The attitude and commitment of the team has been of the highest level. Out of possession we’ve been very good. That’s given us a way of staying in the game, and confidence has slowly returned. The last three games we’ve been happy with what we’ve delivered. There’s a change to our back line, but we believe in the players coming in, so I don’t think it’s too big a disruption. Allan Saint-Maximin was kicked against Aston Villa and it’s a knock that keeps him out today.” David Moyes talks to BT. “We lost points at Manchester United in the last minute, so getting one at Leicester in the last minute was really good. Every point at this stage is really important. We think Kurt Zouma is OK. Lanzini picked up a knock in training, and Coufal has a problem with his hernia, but that gives a couple of players an opportunity. See if we can freshen it up and go again.” Kurt Zouma returns after illness, replacing Issa Diop, who drops to the bench. Said Benrahma and Ryan Fredericks are also recalled, in place of the injured Manuel Lanzini and Vladimir Coufal. Newcastle have a couple of big misses. Allan Saint-Maximin is out for a couple of weeks, while Kieran Trippier could be done for the season as a result of his fractured foot. Javier Manquillo is also absent. Jacob Murphy, Emile Krafth and Matt Targett step into the breach. West Ham United: Fabianski, Fredericks, Dawson, Zouma, Cresswell, Soucek, Rice, Bowen, Benrahma, Fornals, Antonio. Subs: Yarmolenko, Vlasic, Areola, Noble, Diop, Johnson, Kral, Alese, Chesters. Newcastle United: Dubravka, Krafth, Schar, Burn, Targett, Willock, Shelvey, Joelinton, Fraser, Wood, Murphy. Subs: Dummett, Lascelles, Fernandez, Almiron, Darlow, Gayle, Longstaff, Bruno Guimaraes, De Bolle. Referee: Chris Kavanagh (Lancashire). Two upwardly mobile teams here, albeit ones at different stages of the project. West Ham United, after years, decades, centuries of faff, look like finally getting their act together, with Europa League glory and Champions League football very real prospects. Newcastle meanwhile have recently become the richest club in the world, are currently winning their battle against relegation, and are looking forward to a summer of spend, spend, spending. Neither have reached their promised land yet, though, so three points this lunchtime would do very nicely indeed. Kick off is at 12.30pm GMT. It’s on!Channing Tatum, wrapped in a silk kimono, sucks on a weed lollipop. The scene is a perfect distillation of the actor’s appeal: goofy, flirtatious, manly but never macho. Those qualities are expertly drawn out in this charming comedy-drama, in which Tatum stars and co-directs with Magic Mike writer Reid Carolin. Tatum’s Briggs, an ex-soldier, must drive his recently deceased army buddy’s angsty military dog, Lulu, from Washington to Arizona for her owner’s funeral. Both man and canine have PTSD, and the unlikely odd couple bare their teeth at one another, before their relationship softens. Their journey plays out like a classic romcom, complete with a fun riff on the “race to the airport” ending that has become a cliche of the genre. What’s more surprising than watching Tatum share a bath with a Belgian malinois is the message nestled among the film’s sillier capers. In Portland, Briggs is subjected to smug liberals who make unfair assumptions about his “toxic masculinity” and complicity in “ecological warfare”. In San Francisco he is forced to confront his own prejudices when a drug addict – and former war veteran – breaks into his car. Tatum and Carolin cleverly use the road trip as a mechanism for a conversation about gentleness, connection and how to heal America’s political divides. The enemy’s bark is worse than its bite.Another week and the smell of another celebrity cooking show permeates the air. Gavin Rossdale, of 90s grunge-adjacent, arena-stuffing band Bush, is the latest star to turn to cookery, with Deadline reporting that he is to launch a cooking and entertainment show called E.A.T. In it, he will talk to celebrity guests, including Tom Jones, at his house in the Hollywood Hills, while designing, preparing and making them a three-course meal. He is part of a broader picture of celebrities widening their repertoires and his is not the first celebrity-to-chef shift of recent times. Those who follow such news will be familiar with Brooklyn Beckham’s move from photography to cookery, Cookin’ With Brooklyn, a social media series presumably conceived of as rhyme first, content later, in which Beckham describes making a sandwich, but confuses slices of bread with loaves. (Unless he really does put fish between two loaves of bread. Maybe that’s the twist.) Selena Gomez learns to cook on Selena + Chef, which is like a high-end version of that bit on Sunday Brunch where soap stars chuck flour in a bowl and pretend to enjoy baking. Sadly, Paris Hilton’s Netflix show, Cooking With Paris, has not been renewed for a second series, despite being a work of genuine high art. In an era of fame for fame’s sake, it gets harder and harder to work out what most celebrities do. Famous people now insist on doing a bit of everything, even interviewing other famous people, a format beloved of pivot-to-podcast celebrities, though it rarely pays off; with a handful of exceptions, it’s far too cosy and polite. Travel shows used to be fronted by professional travellers or explorers. Now, any comedian who’s done 15 minutes on Live at the Apollo gets given a camper van and a GoPro. The problem with this celebrity vogue for cooking – and travel shows, podcasts and so on – is that I’d still rather watch actual chefs in the kitchen, using their years of training and expertise to explain how to do something. (Gomez gets a pass, because she’s more student than cook.) I know it’s old-fashioned, in these post-expert times, to value skill over personality, but cookery isn’t even a field that’s lacking in personalities. I have no idea if Rossdale can cook and perhaps the show will reveal that he’s the René Redzepi/David Frost hybrid we’ve all been waiting for. However, the idea that cooking is in dire need of special celebrity sparkle is as daft as making a sandwich with two loaves of bread. Academy Awards: and the Oscar for best voter goes to Twitter We are mid-awards season and award ceremonies are still being reformed, revised and polished up. Some have taken categories that were previously divided by gender and removed gender from consideration, which did not stop women winning the bulk of the awards at the Brits a couple of weeks ago, or from dominating the Berlin film festival, which gave its Golden Bear to Alcarràs, directed by Carla Simón. The Oscars, shunted to the end of March, remain the grande dame of the season, haughtily adjusting her bosom as the young ’uns play havoc at her feet. But it has famously struggled to find its identity in recent years and ratings have fallen away. It seems as tough to recruit a presenter as it is to find anyone who is up for replacing Laura Kuenssberg, but this year the ceremony has opted for three presenters: Wanda Sykes, Amy Schumer and Regina Hall. It will be the first time that three women have hosted and hopefully it will resemble the heady days of Tina Fey and Amy Poehler’s reign at the now less-appealing Golden Globes. In the spirit of reform, the Oscars have also added a sort of people’s choice moment, allowing Twitter users to vote for their favourite film of 2021, regardless of its nomination status, by tweeting #OscarsFanFavorite. This will then be “recognised” during the ceremony, though that sounds like it’s being held at a careful arm’s length – will it get a chocolate Oscar instead? I can’t imagine that there will be any problems at all, whatsoever, no way, with using a Twitter hashtag as a voting device. Taylor Swift: Glastonbury will probably get over her absence In 2019, Taylor Swift tweeted that she was “ecstatic” to announce that she would be headlining Glastonbury on its 50th birthday. I don’t know if you’ve noticed, but it has been an eventful couple of years and while all fingers are crossed that the festival will go ahead this summer for the first time since 2019, rumours have emerged suggesting that Swift will not be rolling over her booking. In other words, she is not feeling ’22. Right now, Billie Eilish is confirmed as the headliner on Friday night and, it’s rumoured, Kendrick Lamar on Sunday night, leaving one main slot to fill. But the beauty of Glastonbury, above almost every other festival, is that it hardly matters who is playing at all. It’s so vast that you’re as likely to spend an unknowable amount of time trying to find your way out of the gong bath section as you are making sure you see an act that seemed essential when the tickets arrived. I would love to see Swift at Glastonbury. She is an exquisite performer with a decade of hits to her name. Hopefully, it will still happen, at some point, but I am sure this year’s crowd will, forgive me, shake it off. • Rebecca Nicholson is an Observer columnistKingslee James McLean Daley, better known as Akala, 38, is a rapper, author, activist and poet from Kentish Town, north London. In 2006 he won a Mobo for best hip-hop act; in 2009, founded the Hip-hop Shakespeare Company; and in 2015 won a Bafta for a BBC Two series about Romantic poetry. His publications include 2018’s bestselling Natives: Race and Class in the Ruins of Empire, graphic novel Visions, and YA novel The Dark Lady, about street life in Renaissance England, out now in paperback. His conversation about it with Mustafa the Poet can be seen on the Southbank Centre’s website until 6 March. 1. Album Lila Iké: The ExPerience Lila Iké is a Jamaican reggae artist – she’s like a Jamaican Lauryn Hill, in a way: plays guitar, sings, raps, extraordinarily talented, top quality songwriter. She has an album out called The ExPerience, which I’m listening to a lot. Stars Align is probably my favourite song of hers. It’s just a really gorgeous love song: it reflects that moment when you first meet someone and it feels like the stars have aligned to bring you together, you’ve got butterflies in your stomach and you can’t really look at the other person because you feel a bit self-conscious – that almost teenage love. 2. Film The Harder They Fall (dir Jeymes Samuel) I went to the premiere of this film, starring Idris Elba and Regina King. It’s basically a black western – Jeymes Samuel blended the stories of different real-life black cowboys and created this fictional story around the central character of Rufus Buck. It’s really well written, funny and action-packed – just a great movie. I haven’t seen Idris do a mean character since Stringer Bell [in The Wire], apart from a brief appearance in American Gangster. So it was nice to see that side of his acting again. 3. TV Billions (Sky) My current TV show of choice, which stars Damian Lewis and Paul Giamatti. It’s about a hedge-fund billionaire who’s in beef with a lawyer; they’re both in love with the same woman, so it’s partly a love triangle. And it’s also really a philosophical discussion of free-market capitalism versus the state, in the incarnation of these two characters. Lewis is just a fantastic actor. There’s a scene at the end of series one where the two leads have a face-to-face confrontation – their Pacino De Niro Heat moment. It’s a great scene, with unbelievably sharp dialogue. 4. Livestream Verzuz music battles I haven’t been to a gig for quite some time, other than my own. But during lockdown it felt like everybody in my world was tuned into [US webcast series] Verzuz: cultural clashes between various icons within the music of the African diaspora. So for Jamaica they did Bounty Killer v Beenie Man, for neo soul they did Erykah Badu v Jill Scott. As a concept, it provided such cultural enrichment. The highlight for me was Jadakiss’s performance in the clash between Dipset and the Lox – it was beautiful to see him having a resurgence with a moment like that. 5. Book The Status Game: On Social Position and How We Use It by Will Storr This is a really interesting book about the way we use and view status. It looks at social media and how it brings out our most argumentative, status-seeking side, but also at what Storr calls success games, which he says are the best kinds of status games – if you’re, say, Lionel Messi or Stevie Wonder, at least your form of status brings joy to others. He argues that even when we’re not conscious of it, we treat people differently based on our perception of who they are, their achievements, their background – that it’s human nature to play games of status. 6. Art Tupac Shakur: Wake Me When I’m Free at the Canvas, LA Live, Los Angeles This is a really good, expansive exhibition, and shows you just how much Tupac achieved by the age of 25. It has all his lyrics written out, business ideas he was dealing with, and audio of Tupac speaking. It takes about an hour to get round it – it presents Tupac as the artist of stature he was. It’s hard to think of another hip-hop artist, dead or alive, for whom this scale of a show could be done. I believe it’s due to come to London at some point, so people should look out for it.The former boss of a French model agency accused of rape and under investigation on suspicion of supplying underage girls to the late American financier Jeffrey Epstein has been found dead in prison. The body of Jean-Luc Brunel, 75, was reportedly found hanging in his cell in the early hours of Saturday. The French prosecutors’ office confirmed the report and said an inquiry had been opened into the exact cause of death, but early indications pointed to suicide. Brunel was arrested in December 2020 at Charles de Gaulle airport before boarding a plane for Dakar in Senegal where he told police he was going on holiday. He was officially put under investigation on allegations of the alleged rape of a minor and sexual harassment shortly after his arrest, and was put under a second investigation for the rape of a minor in June last year. Investigators had also questioned Brunel on suspicion of the human trafficking of underage girls for sexual exploitation. He was being held on remand in La Santé prison in Paris. Several top models had come forward to accuse him of sexual assault and rape, and French police had reportedly interviewed hundreds of potential witnesses. Brunel had denied any wrongdoing or any involvement in illegal activities. He disappeared from public life shortly after Epstein’s death in August 2019. Epstein also hanged himself in his prison cell while awaiting trial. In the 1990s, Paris-born Brunel was a model talent scout and boss of the prestigious agency Karin Models. After he was banned from the agency in European 1999 following a BBC undercover report on abuse in the fashion industry, he moved to the US and founded MC2 Model Management with funding from Epstein. He is credited with discovering a number of supermodels including Christy Turlington and Milla Jovovich. He met Ghislaine Maxwell, Epstein’s partner, in the 1980s and she had introduced him to Epstein. Brunel had been released on bail last November but had been ordered to return to prison after a few days to await trial. His legal team said in a statement: “His distress was that of a man of 75 years old caught up in a media-legal system that we should be questioning. Jean-Luc Brunel never stopped claiming his innocence and had made many efforts to prove it. His decision [to end his life] was not driven by guilt but by a deep sense of injustice.” In 2015, Virginia Roberts Giuffre, who recently accepted an undisclosed sum from Prince Andrew – another Epstein friend – after bringing a civil case against the royal, accused Brunel of supplying girls to Epstein. She said the American financier had bragged to her that he had slept with more than 1,000 “of Brunel’s girls”. Giuffre, who was abused by Epstein, had claimed she had sex with Prince Andrew on three occasions, the first of which when she was 17 years old. The prince had denied her claims. Maxwell, 59, is currently in prison in the US, having been convicted of sex trafficking. French prosecutors said Brunel’s death would put an end to the legal case unless other suspects were put under investigation. • In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org. • In the UK, the National Association for People Abused in Childhood (Napac) offers support for adult survivors on 0808 801 0331. In the US, Rainn offers support for survivors of sexual abuse or assault on 800-656-4673. In Australia, support is available at 1-800-RESPECT, or other places listed here.Concerns are growing among Tory MPs about proposals that would scrap free prescriptions in England for some people aged between 60 and 65, as ministers search for ways to stem rising NHS costs. Charities have already sounded their alarm at a consultation by the Department of Health and Social Care (DHSC) proposing to link free prescriptions to the retirement age, meaning the threshold would rise from 60 to 66 years old. It is estimated to save the Treasury more than £250m a year, but comes as MPs are already concerned about rising living costs. Ministers have been considering the move for months, but no decision has yet been taken on the move that could affect more than 2 million people. The new system would see them paying £9.35 per-item cost for medicines prescribed by their GP, unless they qualified for free prescriptions in another way. Prescription changes are often made in April, meaning a decision could be imminent. The former Tory health minister Dan Poulter said that ministers should consider whether a time of rising living costs was the right moment to increase the age for free prescriptions. “Under the coalition government, we looked at raising the age at which people are entitled to a free prescription to link it with retirement age, but at that time, we were in the midst of a period of stagnating wages, so we decided that for the relatively modest savings it would generate, it was not the right time to implement the policy,” he said. “While I can still see the logic of linking the entitlement to a free prescription with the retirement age, it would be a brave government that decided to implement this policy at a time of rising household bills and increases in national insurance. In my view, it would be more prudent for the government to reconsider this matter at a later date.” In another sign of Tory unease, Stephen Metcalfe, the Conservative MP for South Basildon and East Thurrock, has also warned in parliament that he did not want to see the current rules around free prescriptions changed. While ministers say that no decision has been taken so far, the government has argued that about 90% of community prescription items were already free of charge, while those on low incomes or certain medical conditions did not have to pay. The government has also said that the upper age limit for free prescriptions has not changed since 1995, meaning it had become completely disconnected from the pension age.The Super League season is a fortnight old, but the signs already look ominous for the rest of the competition in their quest to prevent St Helens winning a fourth consecutive title. Plenty can change between now and the business end of the season but on what we have seen so far, they are going to take some stopping. Perhaps the most encouraging aspect of St Helens’ opening two victories is that they came in vastly different conditions and required completely different performances. Last week’s impressive win against Catalans was played in near-perfect conditions, but with sleet, rain and even snow here, Saints had to go about their business in a different manner. They were industrious and gritty when it mattered, and clinical at the right moments. Any notion that the departure of Lachlan Coote and Kevin Naiqama, mainstays of the side that won three successive Super League crowns, would weaken this remarkable team is clearly wide of the mark. In a World Cup year, how heartening it is to see young English talent such as Lewis Dodd and Jack Welsby begin to come to the fore. Welsby, in particular, was outstanding here. “We played some great footy in difficult conditions and defended really well,” Kristian Woolf, their coach, said. There is no avoiding the fact that St Helens’ cause was aided by a red card shown to Hull’s captain, Luke Gale, midway through the first half. Gale attempted to charge down a Jonny Lomax kick feet first, and caught Lomax on the leg in a dangerous manner. From that point onwards, Hull were up against it, and against a side this good, playing with 12 men is not advisable. By half-time, the game was over as a contest. Two tries from Josh Simm, another from Mark Percival and four goals from the boot of Tommy Makinson made it 20-0 in St Helens’ favour and even before Gale was sent off, the warning signs were evident for Hull. Welsby was at the heart of everything Saints did in the first half and, unfortunately for the hosts, he raised his game to an even higher level after the break. That was epitomised by his try that made it 26-0, a wonderful kick and chase that he collected, just beating Jamie Shaul to ground the ball and remove any lingering doubt about the outcome of the match – as if there were any. On an afternoon when Hull paid tribute to one of their greatest players, Johnny Whiteley, who died this week at the age of 91, the home supporters should take pride from the way they battled against such tough opposition. Hull at least avoided the ignominy of being nilled when Josh Griffin seized on a rare St Helens error to touch down. But within minutes, the balance of power had shifted back to St Helens in devastating fashion. Sione Mata’utia barged his way through some tiring defence for their next try, before Dodd rounded off the scoring by crossing the line with a stunning individual effort.Team GB finally have a medal. The men’s curling team claimed silver after a 5-4 defeat to Sweden after the final went to an extra end. Nico Porteous defied the wind and crashes to win the freeski halfpipe – New Zealand’s second ever Winter Olympics gold. Irene Schouten of the Netherlands won her third gold and fourth medal overall from Beijing in the women’s mass start as the speed skating competition drew to a close. Bart Swings won Belgium’s first gold of Beijing in the men’s mass start race. Laura Nolte and Deborah Levi continued German dominance at the Xiaohaituo Bobsleigh and Luge Track in Yanqing. They took gold in the 2-woman bobsleigh. Compatriot and defending champion Mariama Jamanka piloted herself and Alexandra Burghardt for silver. Sui Wenjing and Han Cong of China won the pairs skatings by the narrowest of margins from Eteri Tutberidze-trained Evgenia Tarasova and Vladimir Morozov of the Russian Olympics Committee. US figure skaters whose Olympic team silver medals are being withheld on account of the positive drugs test by 15-year-old Kamila Valieva have filed an appeal with the Court of arbitration of sport to have them awarded before the end of the Games, with a decision expected before the closing ceremony. British freestyle skier Gus Kenworthy, an advocate for LGBTQ+ rights, signed off his Olympic career with a swipe at the IOC for allowing China to host, saying “When there’s human rights and the country’s stance on LGBT, those issues should be taken into consideration by the IOC.” Sweden won the bronze medal in the women’s curling - beating Switzerland, who had topped the round robin stage with only one defeat in nine matches, 9-7. Two late empty-net goals handed Slovakia a 4-0 victory over Sweden to claim the bronze medal in the men’s ice hockey tournament. The Alpine skiing mixed team parallel contest has been rescheduled to tomorrow due to adverse weather conditions. The Russian Olympic Committee (ROC) and Norway staged a shut-out of the first six places in the men’s 50km mass start cross-country ski. The race was delayed by an hour and shortened to 30km due to cold temperatures and high winds. Alexander Bolshunov won his third gold of the Games for ROC. We will be back tomorrow. Here is what you can expect – all times are Beijing time: 9am Alpine Skiing – the rescheduled mixed team parallel contest 🥇 9.05am Curling – the women’s gold medal match: Great Britain v Japan (that is an unsociable 1.05am in the UK I am afraid)🥇 9.30am and 11.20am Bobsleigh – the final two runs of the four-man competition 🥇 12.10pm Ice hockey – the men’s gold-medal match, Finland v the Russian Olympic Committee 🥇 3pm Cross-country skiing– the women’s 30km mass free start – this has been moved a bit later due to the weather, and presumably shortened although I am yet to see any confirmation of that 🥇 8pm Closing ceremony – Oh, that’s it. I’ll be here on the live blog again for that, and probably crying again. Here are some of our key stories and galleries from today: Take care, I’ll see you tomorrow. Men’s ice hockey: Two late empty-net goals handed Slovakia a 4-0 victory over Sweden to claim the bronze medal in the men’s tournament. It is the first time that Slovakia’s men or women have earned a medal in ice hockey at the Winter Olympics, although back in the day Czechoslovakia earned four silvers and five bronzes in the men’s contest. Since the countries split, the Czech Republic have earned a gold in 1988, as well as a silver and a bronze in the men’s contest. Slovakia were yet to make a similar impression, and were overjoyed at the buzzer. Men’s ice hockey: Slovakia have wrapped up the ice hockey bronze for sure, with two empty-net goals in rapid succession as Sweden were chasing a way back into the match. It is now 4-0, with less than a minute to go. If you were hoping for a little bit more controversy from the penultimate day of these Winter Olympics, then I have good news for you. Associated Press are reporting that the US figure skaters whose Olympic silver medals are being withheld have filed an appeal to have them awarded before the end of the Beijing Games, with a decision expected before the closing ceremony. The Court of arbitration for sport confirmed to AP that it was hearing the case Saturday evening in Beijing and expected a rapid ruling. In a letter sent to International Olympic Committee president Thomas Bach, lawyers for the skaters said they sought a decision before Sunday’s closing ceremony. Kamila Valieva led the Russian team to a victory in last week’s team event, but the medal ceremony was cancelled as the event became mired in the news of her positive doping test. US figure skating executive director Ramsey Baker has given a statement in support of the skaters, saying “Having a medal ceremony at an Olympic Games is not something that can be replicated anywhere else, and they should be celebrated in front of the world before leaving Beijing.” Men’s ice hockey: There are less than five minutes left of the third period in the bronze medal play-off. Slovakia still lead Sweden 2-0. If you missed this earlier I got in touch with Katie Tannenbaum, the only US Virgin Islands athlete at these Winter Olympics. She was having an absolutely torrid time, but I thought if I interviewed her it would be a lovely feelgood story with a happy ending leading into tomorrow’s closing ceremony. Dear reader, it was not … Having lived through the Olympic Games being held in London, I know there is loads of stuff that goes on behind the scenes. In Beijing, as in Tokyo, a lot of that has been complicated by the pandemic and the need to take precautions against Covid infection. Steven Bloor has put together this gallery of the sights away from the events themselves, showing an entirely different side to these Winter Olympics in Beijing. Women’s curling: Sweden – ahem – pretty much swept all before them in the round-robin stage, except for Switzerland. That stage of the contest finished with the Swiss top of the pile with a record of eight victories and one defeat, and the Swedes in second place with seven wins and two losses. But neither side could win their semi-final, and now Sweden have prevailed 9-7 to take the bronze. Men’s ice hockey: Slovakia have tightened their grip on the bronze medal. At the end of the second period, they lead Sweden 2-0. Samuel Takac scored the second. Women’s curling: Well, what do I know? Switzerland just scored a three in the ninth end, so the two teams go into (potentially) the last end with Sweden’s lead cut down to 8-7. The bronze medal is at stake. Pejman Faratin has been putting together the best pictures of the day today for you. You can find that here, and there are some absolutely cracking images out of Beijing today, one of which will give you a new understanding of why they cut the men’s 50km cross-country today down to 30km. Women’s curling: Sweden look to be on the verge of securing the bronze medal. They lead Switzerland 8-4 as they are halfway through the ninth end, and the Swiss need to score well here or the jig is up. 2-woman bobsleigh: The Germany team have been absolutely unbeatable at the Xiaohaituo Bobsleigh and Luge Track in Yanqing. They took every luge gold medal, both skeleton gold medals, and so far have two out of three bobsleigh gold medals, with the 4-man to come which is currently being led by … a German team. Kaillie Humphries’ monobob gold for the US is the only interloper so far into this German party. In that women’s contest just now, the Australian pair of Breeana Walker and Kiara Reddingius finished 16th. The British pairing of Mica McNeill and Montell Douglas were one place behind. 2-woman bobsleigh: Mariama Jamanka and Alexandra Burghardt will get at least silver for Germany. It depends what Laura Nolte and Deborah Levi do on the very final run. The answer is that Nolte and Levi have gold on their Olympic debut! They’ve set a track record every time they’ve gone down the course over the last two days. They don’t quite manage it this time, but they end up winning by 0.77 seconds overall from Jamanka. Elana Meyers Taylor and Sylvia Hoffman take bronze for the US. 2-woman bobsleigh: The US pair had different ideas and Elana Meyers Taylor and Sylvia Hoffman are now guaranteed a medal. They lead with two German sleds to go. Meyers Taylor got silver in Sochi, silver in PyeongChang. What colour will it be in 2022? 2-woman bobsleigh: Germany’s Kim Kalicki and Lisa Buckwitz have gone into the virtual gold position with three sleds still to go. It is possible that the German team could pull off another podium sweep here, but standing in their way is Elana Meyers Taylor and Sylvia Hoffman of the US. They go next. Men’s ice hockey: Slovakia have taken the lead 1-0 against Sweden in the men’s ice hockey bronze medal play-off. Juraj Slafkovsky scored the goal. 2-woman bobsleigh: Right, having brushed aside the odd tear there, let’s get straight back to people hurtling down an ice chute for no readily apparent reason. There are nine sleds to go. Breeana “two ‘e’s” Walker and Kiara Reddingius have been for Australia, and didn’t have a great run. I didn’t see it because I was crying at watching the figure skating, but they went nearly half-a-second slower than any of their other runs, which must be a frustration to them and has seen them drop down the order. They are currently eighth after twelve sleds. Figure skating: Sui Wenjing and Han Cong of China finish their routine and the home crowd – which is much larger today despite Covid restrictions – make a lot of noise. They did their routine to a version of Bridge Over Troubled Water and I know I’m tired after doing the Winter Olympics for days on end, but I found it all quite emotional. Sui bursts into tears at the end of the routine. There were a couple of tiny errors though. What will the judges think? Can they pip Evgenia Tarasova and Vladimir Morozov of ROC to the gold? THEY CAN! THEY HAVE! The Chinese score 239.88, the Russians scored 239.25. Could that be any closer? Figure skating: Eteri Tutberidze’s charges have done their routine to Lighthouse by Patrick Watson, and Evgenia Tarasova and Vladimir Morozov have skated absolutely flawlessly, it seemed to me. “Just gorgeous” said Eurosport’s commentator so I am not alone. They missed out four years ago finishing fourth, but they definitely have a medal here. Has it been enough for gold? It is a ROC clean sweep of the virtual podium places. Only China’s Sui Wenjing and Han Cong can stop them. There was lot of emotion on the ice. The Chinese pair have a vocal home crowd cheering them on. It is genuinely nail-biting pressure stuff here. Live blogging the evening shift in Beijing can often be a whole lot of nothing much happening, and then loads of things all at once. The women’s bobsleigh final heat is driving towards its conclusion, there are only two couples left to skate in the pairs skating, and Sweden have just taken a big 6-2 lead in the women’s curling bronze medal match against Switzerland at the end of the sixth end. The ice hockey bronze medal match between Sweden and Slovakia remains 0-0 with about three minutes left of the first period. Figure skating: The World and European champions Anastasia Mishina and Aleksandr Galliamov have put in a technically difficult routine, and have taken the lead. That guarantees them a medal for the Russian Olympics Committee of some value. Can anybody beat their combined score of 237.71? Two couples to go … 2-woman bobsleigh: Heat four has started. As I mentioned earlier, they go in reverse order this time, which makes for a tense finish. Mica McNeill and Montell Douglas have made their final run of the Beijing Olympics, and it is their fastest time of the competition at 1:02.14. They go into first for now. There are eighteen more sleds to go. Figure skating: I’ll be the first to admit that I’m not an expert on skating – it seems to me that even attempting most of these moves is a victory in itself – but I do know that stumbling doesn’t score you points, and Aleksandra Boikova’s disappointed face said it all at the end of their routine after she failed to land one throw. They still had enough cheer to pull off a comedy belly-flop into the padded wall as they left the ice, which I think would be about the height of my ambition in this sort of contest. They’ve gone first for now, but there are three excellent pairs to follow. Figure skating: The Eurosport coverage of the pairs skating free skating just showed a close-up of Russian Olympic Committee coach Eteri Tutberidze giving an absolute death stare to the camera so intense that I felt it in London from Beijing. On the ice, there are four pairs left to go, the four highest scoring couples from the short program, and three of those pairs are from the ROC. Aleksandra Boikova and Dmitrii Kozlovskii go next, and need a great score to push themselves from fourth into a possible podium finish. Reuters are carrying some interesting quotes from Tony Estanguet. He is a triple canoeing Olympic champion who was France’s flag-bearer at the 2008 Beijing Games opening ceremony, and is president of the Paris 2024 Organising Committee. He has been setting some bold ambitions for those 2024 Games, and maybe having a slight dig at the organisation of Tokyo and Beijing at the same time. See what you think. He told Reuters: We want to take the Games out of the stadiums, with a ceremony out in the city and a marathon open to the general public. We are very ambitious, we want to break new ground and offer a popular and spectacular Games. With Milan-Cortina two years later, this is an opportunity for us to start a new cycle in Europe. We want this Games to be popular, close to the people. For a lot of people, the Paris Olympics are the light at the end of the tunnel, there are a lot of expectations in these Olympics. The Games will change everything that has been done before, we’re going to experience something unprecedented. The Games changed my life, I hope these Games can change other lives and that France will magnify the Olympics. Organisers say that some 600,000 people are expected to attend the 2024 opening ceremony with around 160 boats setting off on the Seine on July 26 from the Pont d’Austerlitz for a six-kilometre journey to the Pont d’Iena. While the lower part of the river bank will be subject to ticketing, there will be free access to the upper part with spectators able to see holograms on the water, dancers on the roofs of nearby buildings, and aerial shows. The Paris Olympics will feature events staged in city locations like the Place de la Concorde and the Chateau de Versailles. In contrast to the hours travelling that athletes, the media and spectators have racked up travelling in recent Olympics, the Paris organisers stress that many venues will be within walking distance of each other. As well as Sweden’s women curlers battling for a bronze at the moment, Sweden’s men are about to try and finish third in the men’s ice hockey competition. They lost their semi-final 2-1 to the Russian Olympic Committee. Slovakia stunned the US in their quarter-final, but then couldn’t overcome Finland in the semi-final. Sweden v Slovakia starts about ten past the hour. Regular readers of my contributions to this live blog will know that I have got quite a cob on about the format of this tournament, where none of the group matches actually eliminated anybody. Sweden played Slovakia in Group C on Friday 11 February, and the Swedes overpowered the Slovaks 4-1 on that occasion. I’ll bring you the goals as they go in today. Sweden have opened up a two point lead over Switzerland in the bronze medal match for the women curlers. It is 3-1 after four ends. Mica McNeill and Montell Douglas have done their thrid and fastest run in the bobsleigh for Team GB. They have posted their best time of 1:02.17, but it is nowhere near fast enough to move them up the rankings. They are 0.11 seconds behind 18th placed Anastasiia Makarova and Elena Mamedova of the Russian Olympic Committee. Not only have I got to remember that Breeana has two ‘e’s, I now discover that Anastasiia has two ‘i’s. This is becoming trickier than I bargained for. Everybody has gone in heat three now. There is a break of about forty minutes in the bobsleigh until we get going again at 9.30pm in Beijing. Away from the bobsleigh – which I am finding very compelling – the pairs skating competition is halfway through today’s free program. The medals will be decided by the end of the night. At the moment it is the Georgian pair of Karina Safina and Luka Berulava who are sitting at the top of the rankings with a combined score of 192.44. However the eight remaining pairs are those who scored highest in the short program the other day, including a strong contingent of three pairs from the Russian Olympic Committee, and China’s Sui Wenjing and Han Cong, who scored the most in that opening round. Breeana Walker and Kiara Reddingius have gone for Australia in the bobsleigh. 1:02.04 wasn’t their best time, but they have done better than a couple of the sleds that were ahead of them, and have managed to gain two places. With five sleds to go, they are sitting tenth. There’s a bonus point in it for me if I can get all the way through this live blog shift and remember that there are two ‘e’s in Breeana every time. First blood in that women’s curling bronze medal play-off has gone to Sweden, who have taken a 1-0 lead over Switzerland after the first end. Team GB finally have a medal. The men’s curling team claimed silver after a 5-4 defeat to Sweden after the final went to an extra end. Nico Porteous defied the wind and crashes to win the freeski halfpipe – New Zealand’s second ever Winter Olympics gold. Irene Schouten of the Netherlands won her third gold and fourth medal overall from Beijing in the women’s mass start as the speed skating competition drew to a close. Bart Swings won Belgium’s first gold of Beijing in the men’s mass start race. Laura Nolte and Deborah Levi continued German dominance at the Xiaohaituo Bobsleigh and Luge Track in Yanqing. They took gold in the 2-woman bobsleigh. Compatriot and defending champion Mariama Jamanka piloted herself and Alexandra Burghardt for silver. Sui Wenjing and Han Cong of China won the pairs skatings by the narrowest of margins from Eteri Tutberidze-trained Evgenia Tarasova and Vladimir Morozov of the Russian Olympics Committee. British freestyle skier Gus Kenworthy, an advocate for LGBTQ+ rights, signed off his Olympic career with a swipe at the IOC for allowing China to host, saying “When there’s human rights and the country’s stance on LGBT, those issues should be taken into consideration by the IOC.” The Alpine skiing mixed team parallel contest has been rescheduled to tomorrow due to adverse weather conditions. The Russian Olympic Committee (ROC) and Norway staged a shut-out of the first six places in the men’s 50km mass start cross-country ski. The race was delayed by an hour and shortened to 30km due to cold temperatures and high winds. Alexander Bolshunov won his third gold of the Games for ROC. The remaining action today features the bronze medal match for the women’s curling, a bronze medal play-off in the men’s ice hockey, the free skating in the pair skating, and the conclusion of the 2-woman bobsleigh. Cynthia Appiah and Richardson Wilson of Canada have just crashed on their third bobsleigh run. Everyone held their breath as they slid a long way on their side, and at one point one of them reached their arm out to try and slow the sled down against the wall. They are both up and walking and seem fine. Appiah looks furious with herself. The sled crossed the line and they’ve been given a time though, so, provided they feel ok, they will probably still go in heat four. There will be a slight delay now. So far eight sleds had gone. The only position change has been Germany’s Kim Kalicki moving up from sixth to fifth. Also just starting as we get into the evening in Beijing is the bronze medal match in the women’s curling. This feels like a distinct lesson in keeping your form up right to the last moment. Switzerland only lost one of their nine round-robin matches. Sweden only lost two. And then both of them contrived to lose their semi-finals and find themselves out of contention for the gold, despite clearly being the two strongest teams in the competition. They played each other on Valentine’s Day during the round robin stage – Sweden emerged victorious 6-5 in that match. There will be no love lost between them today etc etc Laura Nolte and Deborah Levi went first, and they’ve just set a new track record again – touching 133kph at one point. They are the first women on this track to go sub 1:01.00, with a time of 1:00.70. Fellow Germans Mariama Jamanka and Alexandra Burghardt are second down. They record a time of 1:00.98, which would have been a track record if they’d gone first. It means they’ve slightly slipped back in second place. The gap between Nolte and Jamanka at the top of the standings will be 0.78 going into the final heat. That’s a lot of time to try and make up, although fractions of seconds are very easy to lose in the bobsleigh. Hello, Martin Belam here. The third heat of the women’s 2-women bobsleigh is about to take place. They do four runs in total, and we are now down to the last twenty sleds. Slightly unsatisfactorily from a sporting spectacle point of view, on this run they go in the order of the standings, fastest first, so it is a bit like watching twenty teams, each slightly progressively slower than the last. The fourth heat, when they go in reverse order, is much more fun. Germany’s Laura Nolte and Deborah Levi lead going into this heat, with compatriots and reigning champions Mariama Jamanka and Alexandra Burghardt next. Elana Meyers Taylor and Sylvia Hoffman of the US are in the virtual bronze position. Australia’s pairing of Breeana Walker and Kiara Reddingius go twelfth, Team GB’s Mica McNeill and Montell Douglas are in 19th place, 2.49 seconds off the lead. That’s all from me: As the clock ticks towards 8pm in Beijing, I will leave you in the very capable hands of my colleague Martin Belam, who assures me he is feeling very Olympic today. Thanks for your time and have a great weekend, folks. The Scot has been sharing his thoughts after he and his team-mates came up marginally short in the final of the men’s curling, going down by a solitary point to their imperious Swedish opponents led by Niklas Edin, who played a borderline perfect game. “It’s very special to have that kind of support from back home,” upon being told he’d been sent tweets from the Royal family’s official Twitter account before and after the match. “To have messages from the Royal Family is one of the biggest moments of our lives I’m sure. Asked if this defeat would help fuel Team GB’s efforts to go one better in 2026, Mouat said: “It definitely drives us forward. We’ve put in so much hard work over the last five years and we can’t thank the National Lottery and British Curling enough for all the work they’ve put in for us. It’s always going to continue hopefully and we will be driving harder to get that gold medal next time.” Men’s cross-country skiing: Alexander Bolshunov of the Russian Olympic Committee (ROC) blazed his way to a third Beijing Olympic gold when he took the mass start 50km title in a race postponed for an hour and shortened to 30km due to freezing winds on Saturday. It was the first time the race had been shortened since making its debut in the first Games of 1924 but it made little difference to supreme all-rounder Bolshunov, who took charge in the latter stages to come in 5.5 seconds ahead of compatriot Ivan Yakimushkin. Norway’s Simen Hegstad Krueger recovered from a lengthy COVID isolation to claim an impressive bronze but his highly-fancied team mate Johannes Klaebo pulled out just after the 20km-mark having been ill overnight. Bolshunov completed a hat-trick of golds after victories in the skiathlon and the relay, as well as 15km classical silver and team sprint bronze. “Five medals, three gold, it is something unbelievable because before the season I set the goal of two gold medals and now I have three and a medal in every race I took part in,” he said. - Reuters Women’s team figure skating: The United States figure skating team have asked the Court of Arbitration for Sport (CAS) to rule that they can receive their team silver medals before the end of the Beijing Olympics, Reuters report. The International Olympic Committee (IOC) had decided no medals for the competition - won by the Russian Olympic Committee team - would be presented until the doping case of Russian 15-year-old Kamila Valieva had been resolved. That matter could take weeks or months. Russia finished top, with the USA in second and Japan third. A source close to the proceedings told Reuters that the USA had appealed that IOC decision and asked sport’s highest court CAS to rule before the end of the Games. Valieva tested positive for a banned heart drug after the Russian national championships on 25 December but the result was not revealed until 8 Feb, the day after she helped the ROC win the team competition. Valieva was cleared to compete in the women’s single event by CAS, but stumbled to fourth place amid all the drama. CAS did not immediately responded to requests for comment. “The IOC will not comment on an ongoing procedure,” they said. Women’s cross-country skiing: The final cross-country event of the Beijing Olympics has been brought forward to Sunday morning as high winds continue to buffet the skiing venue. The men’s 50km event was postponed by an hour on Saturday and shortened to 30km due to concerns over athlete safety and the possibility that wind chill could cause frostbite or other injuries. Now the women’s event has also been moved, from 6.30am (GMT) on Sunday to the earlier time of 3am. “The race distance and use of course remains the same,” the organisers from the International Ski Federation (FIS) said in a statement. Women’s mass start speed skating: Irene Schouten of the Netherlands swept around the National Speed Skating Oval to win gold in the women’s mass start, clinching her third title (and fourth medal) at the Beijing Olympics. In a showdown with Ivanie Blondin, Schouten broke away from the pack as the bell sounded for the last lap, butthe Canadian took an inner line to overtake her with half a circuit to go. Blondin still had the lead at the last corner, but Schouten skated with everything she had and squeezed past Blondin in the last few metres before the finish. “It is a game. Not always the fastest wins, you need some luck,” said the 29-year-old. “Today I had luck. I was fast, but I got some luck, too. Normally I skate with my team mate but she crashed so I had to switch and go on my own. I am happy my own plan worked out.” Men’s mass start speed-skating: Belgium’s Bart Swings has won his country’s first Winter Games gold medal in 74 years. The silver medallist from Pyeongchang initially hung back before the race turned into a blistering sprint to the finish line. Still in second place, Swings skated for his life as he rounded the final corner to overtake South Korean silver and bronze medallists Chung Jae Won and Lee Seung Hoon to win. “It’s historical and it’s unbelievable,” the 31-year-old said after his race. “I always want to raise the bar and the next thing after silver is gold. I know it was ambitious and it’s a dream to work towards. I knew today everything could happen so I was just going to go as hard as possible and eventually I achieved it.” Staff and agencies. Team GB receive their silver medals: Standing to the right of Sweden, with Canada on the other side in the bronze medal position, Bruce Mouat and chums collect Team GB’s first medals of these winter Olympics. Niklas Edin and his team-mates are presented with gold medals few would begrudge them. One who almost certainly will begrudge them it is Team GB’s Hammy McMillan. “We’ve had a good week,” he said straight after the final. “It’s not how we wanted to end it but we’ll look back at this and we’ll be proud. Right now it kind of sucks. “They started strong, they didn’t give us an inch. We weren’t at our best at the start. We fought back hard and had a good second half.” Great Britain had to settle for a silver medal after losing their Olympic men’s curling final 5-4 to Sweden in an extra end in Beijing. Forced to try an ambitious effort to salvage an improbable win against the hammer, Bruce Mouat’s attempted take-out missed by inches to give Swedish skip Niklas Edin his first Olympic crown. Mouat’s men were never in front after losing two in the second end but nevertheless the 27-year-old and his team of Hammy McMillan, Bobby Lammie, Grant Hardie and alternate Ross Whyte can take solace in becoming Britain’s first medallists of the Games. It was a thoroughly impressive display by Edin, a former soldier in the Swedish army with five world titles to his name, who was under pressure in Beijing to land the one major title that still eluded him. Sweden took the initiative when Edin took two in the second end, and under Edin’s expert stewardship, it was one they would never quite relinquish. The Swedes extended their advantage by stealing one in the third despite a brilliant double take-out by Mouat that have given him a glimmer of a greater reward. Mouat pulled one back in the fourth for 3-2 and after Edin intentionally blanked the sixth and seventh ends to retain the last stone advantage, he made a rare error in the eighth to hand GB a steal and allow them to tie up the score at 3-3. More clever tactics by Mouat in the eighth forced Edin to settle for one, and a pair of superb double take-outs in the ninth - first by Lammie, then Hardie, set up an intentional blank to allow GB to retain the hammer for the final end. However, forced to take one in the 10th after some more expert work from Edin, they gave the advantage back to the Swedes for the extra end, and they forced Mouat into attempting an improbable effort which came up short. PA SPort Meanwhile in Stranraer: “I’m bitterly disappointed for the guys because they played so well, says David Hardie, father of British curler Grant Hardie in an interview with the BBC. “They maybe started off a little bit slow in the final but it is a final and that’s the way it goes. I’m disappointed for them because they played so well. “They set up this team four years ago with a view to getting gold at the Olympics. They just played so well but it just wasn’t for them today, unfortunately.” Men’s curling: Arguably the greatest curler of all time, Sweden skip Niklas Edin adds Olympic gold to a medal haul that already included Olympic silver, bronze, fgive world championship golds and seven European championship golds. He and his team-mates Oskar Eriksson, Rasmus Wranaa and Christoffer Sundgren are understandably delighted with themselves. Men’s curling - first extra end Great Britain 4-5 Sweden Mouat comes so close but gets no cigar with his final stone, failing to dislodge a Swedish stone in the button despite frantic efforts from his sweepers. Sweden win the gold without Niklas Edin having to play his final stone. Team GB did little or nothing wrong in this match but have to settle for silve nonetheless. Men’s curling - first extra end Great Britain 4-4 Sweden Oof! Niklas Edin leaves his penultimate stone a mite short, leaving the door open for Bruce Mouat’s final shot of this extra end ... tense times. Men’s curling - first extra end Great Britain 4-4 Sweden Sweden’s early stones are landed precisely, gradually erasing any hope for Team GB. We’re down to two stones each with team skips Bruce Mouat and Niklas Edin to play. There’s a time-out which Niklas Edin avails of to go spend a penny or perhaps just gather his thoughts ... Men’s curling - 10th end Great Britain 4-4 Sweden Edin removes Bruce Mouat’s penultimate stone from the equation. Mouat can’t win the match with his final stone but he can force it to an extra end. He does exactly that, with sweepers Bobby Lammy and Hammy McMillan acknowledging his effort. Sweden have the hammer and a huge advantage. Men’s curling - 10th end Great Britain 3-4 Sweden Under a ridiculous amount of pressure, Edin plays a near perfect shot, tapping red on to yellow to all but ruin Team GB’s chances of getting a two. There are two stones left to play. Men’s curling 10th end Great Britain 3-4 Sweden A fine effort from Grant Hardie sets up an opportunity for Britain to get their two, giving Swedish skip Niklas Edin plenty to think about as he prepares to take the first of his two shots ... Men’s curling 10th end Great Britain 3-4 Sweden “With every stone that gets played, the options for Great Britain start to fade,” says Steve Cram on the BBC, with just four of the team’s eight stones remaining and Team GB’s chance of scoring two dwindling with each slide past the hog line ... Men’s curling - 9th end Great Britain 3-4 Sweden Team GB went into the penultimate end ideally needing to score at least two, or try to force a blank in order to keep the hammer in the final end. A brilliant shot from Grant Hardie with his second and Team GB’s third last stone allows Bruce Mouat to blank the end to leave the Brits a point down but - crucially - with the hammer in the final end. They’ll be happy with that. They need two to win and one to take the final to an extra end, in which case Sweden would have the hammer. Men’s curling - 8th end Great Britain 3-4 Sweden Niklas Edin deliberately tries to blank the eighth end to retain the hammer as the match reaches its knockings but his first stone is misjudged. He’s forced to take his one to restore Sweden’s lead but Great Britain have the hammer with two ends to go. “The British team are definitely growing in strength and their stone placement is really key,” says Jackie Lockhart on BBC. “I am very shocked at Niklas Edin not trying to go for his two and then forcing Great Britain to the one in the ninth before they go into the tenth. That was a real strange tactic for me.” The upshot? Both teams will think they can win this gold medal match from here. Men’s curling - 7th end Great Britain 3-3 Sweden A long, long end regularly punctuated by long and animated conversations and consultations between the players of both teams. Sweden get themselves in a little bit of bother with a minor error and Grant Hardie capitalises with a wonderful shot to the button. With Sweden’s final two stones, Niklas Edin is unable to dislodge it. Britain take the point and are level with Sweden, who have the hammer in the eighth end. Sweden still have the advantage but Team GB have given themselves a fighting chance. Men’s curling - 6th end Great Britain 2-3 Sweden Sweden blank the sixth end to frustrate Great Britain, retain the hammer and stay in control of this gold medal match. Meanwhile in Stranraer, the family and friends of several Team GB members have convened to watch this final. Katie Lammy, mother of Bobby, is interviewed by the BBC and reveals she is a bag of nerves. Men’s bobsleigh: Brad Hall has steered his four-man Great Britain bobsleigh team within 0.31 seconds of an Olympic medal after the first two runs of the competition at Yanqing Sliding Centre, according to PA Sport. Hall, Greg Cackett, Nick Gleeson and Taylor Lawrence sit in sixth position at the halfway stage, with two German crews and Canada’s Justin Kripps making up the medal positions ahead of the event’s conclusion tomorrow. It marks an impressive response from Hall, a three-time four-man World Cup medallist this season, after overturning his sled in the two-man competition last Tuesday. “We’re feeling pretty good,” he said. “There were a couple of mistakes on the first run but it wasn’t a bad performance. I’m quite content with sixth place. The Germans have got three sleds, three times the amount of runs to test everything and find the best way down the track, and make sure the equipment works. We’re against it, we’ve got less resources to pull upon, so we’ve just gone with what we know and we’ll see how it turns out.” Men’s curling final: The story at the halfway stage - if you’re just joining us, Great Britain trail 3-2 at the halfway stage against Sweden at the National Aquatics Centre in Beijing. Swedish skip Niklas Edin has the upper-hand after taking two in the second end then stealing one in the third in a controlled and tensely-fought affair. Edin chose to intentionally blank the fifth end in order to retain the ‘hammer’ advantage heading into the second part of the contest. Men’s curling - 5th End Great Britain 2 - 3 Sweden The excitement of the men’s curling final has proved too much for my coplleague Jonathan, who has gone for a lie-down after a long shift at the Beijing ice-face, so it falls to me to see out the rest of the game. Sweden’s Niklas Edin and his fellow curlers are playing some sublime stuff with everything going their way, and are in control of this final at the halfway point. Team GB are not playing badly at all and have made few if any mistakes. They could still turn things around but it will be difficult as Sweden have the hammer in the next end. Men’s Curling – 4th End Great Britain 2 v Sweden 3 The measuring contraption has been wheeled out and has dished up good news to the Brits! Swedish Skip Niklas Edin is five-time world champion and has won seven European titles. But he’s never won Olympic Gold. He’s reading the ice to perfection here, and is edging ever so closer to the elusive Gold. Russian Rout in Men’s Cross Country We’re halfway through the shortened 30km race, and it’s a Russian 1-2-3. Race favourite Alexander Bolshunov narrowly trails countryman Artem Maltsev. Men’s Curling – 3rd End Great Britain 1 v Sweden 3 The pesky Swedes steal a point after a Bruce Mouat curl comes within a bee’s appendix of evening things up. Meanwhile As the Swedes wrest back control in the Curling, the men’s and women’s mass start speed skating (Semi Finals) and Men’s 50km Cross Country are now both underway. We’ll check in with both shortly. Men’s Curling – 2nd End Great Britain 1 v Sweden 2 A bullet from GB’s Bruce Mouat wasn’t enough as the Swedes, with the last stone advantage and world’s best player in control, went two up. Men’s Curling – 1st End Great Britain 1 v Sweden 0 For the uninitiated, each team has 8 Stones per end, with each chap having two goes each. A rudimentary knowledge of Swedish would come in handy here, as they’re a very vocal outfit. But the Brits are off to a slick start. Men’s Curling Gold Medal Match Great Britain v Sweden We’re just about off at the National Aquatics Centre. The respective quartets are being introduced, and now we’re listening to the obligatory Eminem warm up tune. Apparently he’s a Curling fan. Why is Norway so dominant at the Winter Olympics? A gentleman called Birk Ruud, a skier and no relation to the former Australian Prime Minister, explains: “We’re a country with a lot of good genes and we work hard.” For those just waking up in the UK, here’s a little Bruce Mouat taster. Men’s 50km mass start freestyle race postponed and shortened We were scheduled to kick off now, but the inclement weather has seen the race postponed for an hour and shortened to 30kms. It takes a healthy set of lungs, a slow resting heart rate, and a unique capacity for pain to compete in this event. Russia’s Alexander Bolshunov has already claimed four medals at these Games - gold in the 15km + 15km skiathlon and men’s relay, silver in the 15km classic and bronze in the team sprint. He’s the favourite for this event, with his stiffest competition expected to come from Norway’s Emil Iversen and Simen Hegstad Krüger. Great Britain’s take on Sweden for Gold in just over an hour. The Semi Final score belied what was actually a close and gripping contest. Here’s Sean Ingle’s recap. Wind Wreaks Havoc on Alpine Teams Event As mentioned, the last Alpine skiing race has been postponed, with gusts at up to about 65 kph making it a no brainer for organisers. At this stage, it’s unsure when, or even if, the event will be rescheduled. Earlier, Nico Porteous became New Zealand’s youngest individual Olympic champion, winning the freeski halfpipe in spectacular style. The 20-year-old eclipsed Zoi Sadowski-Synnott, who won gold a fortnight ago, as New Zealand’s youngest medallist. Preamble Welcome the second last day of the Winter Olympics, brought to you for the next three hours from my ski lodge in Melbourne, Australia. Things are officially tense on the Ukraine border, and the weather is officially wretched in Beijing. So much so that the Alpine Teams Event has been postponed, and perhaps cancelled. There’s actually a dearth of events today, with all the British focus on the Men’s Curling Final. We also have the Men’s 50km lung-buster coming up in an hour’s time, with a little bit of Jamaican bobsledding, Kiwi Snowboarding and speed skating carnage thrown in for good measure.After news of Prince Andrew’s settlement with his accuser Virginia Giuffre, the question of who or what the tentacles of the Jeffrey Epstein and Ghislaine Maxwell sex-trafficking conspiracy will envelope next remains. New York attorneys believe it is unlikely any more will be said by the parties involved in Andrew’s case, assuming the senior British royal keeps to the agreed settlement. The letter that accompanied the court filing last week, agreed by both sides, was unusually explicit and calculated to the purpose of settling the matter for good. “It gave Giuffre something, including recognition that she’d been a victim of sex trafficking, but not everything she wanted, including an admission of guilt,” said the New York lawyer Julie Rendelman. But attention will now return to a slew of other unfinished business stemming from the sex-trafficking ring run by the disgraced financier Epstein, his one-time girlfriend Maxwell and possibly others. Certainly the nature of the circles that Epstein moved in – powerful, elite, famous and wealthy – make continued interest by media and law enforcement inevitable. The loose ends in the Epstein saga include the outcome of challenges to Maxwell’s conviction and her yet-to-be scheduled sentencing over the summer, which will include victims’ impact statements. There is also the question of prosecutors’ appetite to reach down the conspiracy chain and the disposition of about $440m left in Epstein’s estate after $121m was paid out to victims through a compensation fund. Finally, there is potential for a new round of civil claims against those involved in the sex-trafficking conspiracy. But the release of the names of 16 “John Does” – in effect, potential clients of the conspiracy – that were redacted from depositions in Virginia Giuffre’s defamation lawsuit against Maxwell may initially produce little more than headlines. Maxwell, who was returned to Brooklyn’s Metropolitan detention center, where she has been held in isolation since her arrest in July 2020, has said she no longer wishes to fight the release of men’s identities. “Each of the listed Does has counsel who have ably asserted their own respective privacy rights. Ms Maxwell therefore leaves it to this Court to conduct the appropriate review,” her lawyers wrote. “Generalized aversion to embarrassment and negativity … is not enough to warrant continued sealing of information,” Giuffre’s attorney Sigrid McCawley wrote to the court. “There is little reason to retain protection over the vast swaths of information about Epstein and Maxwell’s sex-trafficking operation.” It’s up to Judge Loretta Preska, who presided over the Giuffre-Maxwell action, to unseal them. When Preska previously ordered the release of testimony, she said that claims to privacy were “far outweighed by the presumption of public access”. That in turn could lead to a wave of new civil cases, said Professor Marci Hamilton, an expert on child sex abuse statutes of limitations at the University of Pennsylvania and CEO of Child USA, citing a New York City law that allows sex abuse cases outside the normal statute of limitations to be brought. The law goes into effect in September, and opens for cases to be filed in March 2023. “It’s not over for the survivors and we’ll see new lawsuits against Epstein’s co-conspirators – the men who willingly accepted the girls to abuse them, the men who were frequently in his space. As of March, any woman will have her claims revived and be able to sue any and everybody involved in the Epstein system, even if they have received compensation for the Epstein victim’s fund.” Hamilton was involved in advising both the compensation fund and the US Virgin Islands attorney general, Denise George, who filed claims against Epstein’s estate. While most say the fund was administered fairly, the overall amount released by the estate to compensate Epstein’s victims is questioned. “In the end I was disappointed that more women weren’t compensated higher dollars. Reserving so much of it just didn’t seem like a laudable goal,” says Hamilton. Arick Fudali, a lawyer with the Bloom Firm that represented eight women to the fund, said he had mixed feelings. “It was a good opportunity for them to have their voices heard in a non-confrontational way and get some measure of justice. But I think every single penny from Jeffrey Epstein’s estate should have gone to victims, and I fault the program for leaving any money in the estate.” Late last year, the Virgin Islands’ George asked the British bank Barclays to hand over information related to Epstein, days after its former chief executive Jes Staley left the bank over his ties to the financier that included unexplained emails referring to “snow white”. Barclays said it had “complied with its obligations”. These issues have been dragging for years. But, with a saga as sprawling as the Epstein scandal, new wrinkles are constantly appearing. There is now pending, and highly contentious, litigation between the multibillionaire former Apollo CEO Leon Black and his former mistress Guzel Ganieva, who claims she was trafficked to Epstein. Black denies the allegation and has countersued in federal court, claiming that his former business partner, Josh Harris, masterminded a smear campaign in 2021 to “destroy” him. But the question of whether the justice department itself wants to go after others lower down in the Epstein-Maxwell conspiracy – “reaching down”, in prosecutorial terms – remains open. Following Maxwell’s conviction, the government dropped perjury charges against the ex-British socialite and complaints against two detention guards who failed to keep watch over Epstein the night he took his life. Lawyers for members of Epstein’s personal staff, including Sarah Kellen, have indicated Epstein’s staff are not in the frame. “I don’t believe there will be further criminal charges,” said Rendelman. The next criminal aspect of the Epstein conspiracy would then be Maxwell’s sentencing. Maxwell’s defense attorneys will submit a lengthy motion – typically public record – incorporating every positive aspect of Maxwell’s life – lack of criminal record, any time of community service, her family background, mental health. “You name it, they’ll include it in an effort to get the judge to go as low as possible in terms of sentencing guidelines,” said Rendelman. But that assumes her conviction survives expected motions for a mistrial on various grounds, including two jurors saying they had omitted from a pre-trial questionnaire that they had been sexually abused as children and may later have helped shape jury deliberations. If Maxwell seeks to overturn the verdict, or launch an appeal, any cooperation she might offer the government in exchange for a lighter sentence, would probably fail, said David Weinstein, a former assistant US attorney in the southern district of Florida. “It’s always been a practice and policy of the Department of Justice that if you’re pursuing an appeal of your conviction, then we’re not interested in having you cooperate with us because you’re not really cooperating, you’re fighting with us.” On the other hand, if she offered to cooperate against high-value individuals who were equal or only slightly lower down, that might be something the government would be interested in. “Epstein was their big target. Maxwell was their No 2, who became No 1. There may be some high-profile individuals involved, but for the most part they were not necessarily co-conspirators recruiting and providing victims but rather – and for lack of a better word - their services,” Weinstein said. For Andrew, his immediate legal woes are over, even though a horrific PR problem remains. But for others, just maybe, their troubles might be just beginning.As Joe Biden lurched from crisis to crisis with plummeting approval ratings, the Republican party seemed largely content to bury its internal differences and enjoy the show. But not for long. Earlier this month Alyssa Farah Griffin, once communications director for President Donald Trump, made clear that her loyalties have shifted to former vice-president Mike Pence and the Senate minority leader, Mitch McConnell. “Put me squarely in the Pence/ McConnell camp,” Farah Griffin wrote on Twitter. “Certain denunciations must be unequivocal.” This drew a sharp retort from Keith Kellogg, who served as Pence’s national security adviser. “As midterms draw close and 2024 looms large, choices will have to be made and lines will be drawn,” he tweeted. “For me – it is Trump.” The exchange was a microcosm of factional struggles once again boiling to the surface of the Republican party. Trump remains dominant but, with elections in 2022 and 2024 concentrating minds, fragments of the establishment wing are stirring and probing for signs of weakness. What is unclear, however, is how much these disparate forces have in common and whether they are willing to make sacrifices to unite. Republicans’ recent ceasefire between Trumpists and not-Trumpists ended when Pence, who served as Trump’s loyal deputy for four years, uttered four words that few imagined they would ever hear: “President Trump is wrong.” It was a reference to Trump’s false claim that his vice-president could have overturned the 2020 election. The comment was endorsed by Pence’s former chief of staff, Marc Short, who has also testified to the House of Representatives select committee investigating the January 6 insurrection. Should Pence challenge Trump for the Republican nomination in 2024, he would have a ready-made entourage, including Short and Farah Griffin. McConnell has made clear that he approves of Pence’s actions on January 6 and refused to amplify Trump’s bogus claims of voter fraud, even as opinion polls suggest a huge majority of the Republican electorate wrongly believes that Biden did not legitimately win the 2020 election. The senator from Kentucky also recently condemned the Republican National Committee for censuring Representatives Liz Cheney of Wyoming and Adam Kinzinger of Illinois for sitting on the January 6 committee, which is led by Democrats and has subpoenaed many in the former president’s inner circle. Such positions have earned Trump’s wrath. He declared: “Mitch McConnell does not speak for the Republican Party, and does not represent the views of the vast majority of its voters.” Like other Trump antagonists before him, McConnell, who turns 80 on Sunday, has even suffered the indignity of a Trump nickname – “Old Crow”. Senate Republicans have never entirely yielded to Trump. Seven voted to convict him at last year’s impeachment trial. Mitt Romney of Utah is a trenchant critic. Last month Mike Rounds of South Dakota rejected his false claim of widespread voter fraud, prompting Trump to lash out: “He is a weak and ineffective leader, and I hereby firmly pledge that he will never receive my endorsement again!” But House Republicans are more tightly in Trump’s grip. Kevin McCarthy, the minority leader, frequently breaks with McConnell in his expressions of fealty, in part because his caucus includes “Make America great again” extremists such as Madison Cawthorn, Matt Gaetz, Ronny Jackson, Jim Jordan and Marjorie Taylor Greene. Then there are Republican state governors who, typically more pragmatic, have shown greater willingness to speak out against Trump. They include Larry Hogan of Maryland, who said on Sunday he is “certainly going to take a look” at a presidential bid in 2024. But as the centrist leader of a Democratic-leaning state, Hogan has little affinity with hardline conservatives such as Pence or Cheney. Add in vociferous groups of disaffected alumni such as the Lincoln Project and the Republican Accountability Project and it is clear there are different constellations in the Never Trump firmament. What they are against is self-evident; what they are for is more ambiguous. Henry Olsen, a senior fellow at the Ethics and Public Policy Center thinktank, said: “There’s not really a Never Trump movement. There is a collection of people who aren’t for Trump’s continued domination of the Republican party. They tend to be on various sides of what we would have recognised pre-Trump as establishment Republicans.” But, notably, even Trump’s Republican critics rarely denounce his policies on border security, crime, immigration, taxes, voting rights or issues such as abortion or how race is taught in schools. Pence, for example, tempers his rare dissent with paeans to the accomplishments of the Trump administration. Olsen, author of The Working Class Republican, added: “Centrist Republicans have to ask whether or not they want to be leaders of this Republican party or of the Republican party they wish they had. The centre of the Republican party today is broadly pro-Trump policies, but preferring to move beyond Trump personally.” “A lot of these people still have problems with Trump policies. Larry Hogan is definitely not somebody who is national material for the Republican party, which is why I don’t think he’s going to run. He would have his hat handed to him because he’s not a conservative of any stripe and the Republican party is still a conservative party of some stripe or another, whether it is a Trump personality aspect or pre-Trump movement conservatism or something in between.” The challenge for any future standard bearer may be to create a coalition that links these different blocs. Olsen argues that the Florida governor, Ron DeSantis, a co-founder of the conservative House Freedom Caucus, has shown an ability to adapt to the new Trumpist Republican party and is widely seen as an heir apparent. But first the party must navigate the midterm elections in November. It is expected to regain the House and possibly the Senate but Trump’s obsession with the “big lie” of a stolen election could prove a dangerous liability among votes focused on the future. McConnell is reportedly manoeuvring to recruit Republican candidates who reject the baseless assault on American democracy, with limited success so far, but is working behind the scenes rather than offering the kind of full-throated repudiation of Trump that some would like. Michael Steele, former chairman of the Republican National Committee, said: “If you’re trying to achieve real change inside the party, if you’re trying to take the party back or you want to move off of Trumpism, you’ve got to make it very clear. Mitch McConnell no more wants Donald Trump to be the nominee of the party in 2024 than I do. Then come out and say that.” If McConnell, McCarthy and Republican governors held a joint press conference to declare that Trump lost, denounce his lies and set out their governing principles, “then it begins to move the needle inside the party”, Steele added. Such an act seems unlikely, to put it mildly. McConnell is not a figure of mass popular appeal and his powers as a kingmaker are limited. Trump, by contrast, retains a fervent fanbase in the Republican grassroots, as evidenced by the big crowds at his campaign rallies. Next week’s Conservative Political Action Conference in Orlando, Florida, is expected to be another show of strength, with speakers including Trump, DeSantis, Cawthorn, Gaetz, Jackson and Jordan. Tim Miller, writer-at-large for the Bulwark and former political director for Republican Voters Against Trump, said: “I think the problem is bottom up, not top down. The voters want Trump and crazy and so the politicians that are giving it to them are doing the best.” Even so, the midterms could give Trump a black eye. He has showered endorsements on dozens of candidates, some of them long shots who trail their establishment counterparts in the polls and in fundraising. Defeats for Trump’s champions in marquee races such as Georgia would revive the perennial question – asked every year since 2015 – of whether his command of the party is declining. Frank Luntz, a pollster and strategist, said: “It’s now over a year since January 6 and support for Trump has decreased a little but those who have stayed with him are even more passionate and that’s what is going to characterise the next 12 months.” An NBC News poll last month found that 56% of Republicans now define themselves more as supporters of the party than of Trump, compared with 36% who are first and foremost committed to the former president (this marked a reversal from October 2020 when 54% put Trump above party). But his favorability remains high among registered Republicans – just under 80% in an Economist-YouGov tracking poll – and he is the clear frontrunner for 2024. Michael D’Anonio, a political author and commentator, added: “He does still have a death grip on the party and I don’t see that fading. As much as people who I admire want that to happen, I don’t think it’s at hand just yet.”First, the whole foods store shrank to half its previous size, then, in the premises it had vacated, the renovation work began. At first, I thought we were about to get a physiotherapist or a chiropractor: the space seemed somewhat medical, and in the window hung two neons that looked, unlit, like they might be a couple of human spines. But when they were finally switched on a few weeks later, all became clear. In fact, the neons are stylised meat carcasses. It seems there’s now a groovy new butcher at the end of our street. Naturally, I was triumphant about this at first, a feeling that only grew when I Googled to find out more. Stella’s is, apparently, the younger sister of Hill &amp; Szrok in Broadway Market in Hackney, a shop I’ve never visited – I left that part of London in 2004, before its swankification was complete – but which is, according to one source, London’s best butcher by day and a restaurant by night. Stella’s, too, may one day expand to include a “tartare bar”, but for now it is a purveyor of meat from small herds (tick) and a supporter of sustainable farming (tick, tick). Inevitably, its young staff are also very cool, though this was something I discovered without recourse to the internet: passing by on my way to the post office soon after it opened, I surreptitiously gawped at them swinging their cleavers, and thought how they looked more like bartenders than the butchers of my childhood, who were exclusively bald, ruddy-faced, middle-aged men, and who used to keep jars of free lollies on the counter for well-behaved children. (One of my earliest memories is of standing behind my mother as she bought lamb chops, and making patterns in the sawdust on the floor with my sandals, the better to pass the time until Swizzles’ finest came my way.) But reader, I have a problem. So far (it’s been weeks!) I haven’t bought anything from Stella’s, thrilled though I am by its presence in our hood. I want to, desperately, but hipster butchers are high on the increasingly long list of aspects of our food culture I find painfully intimidating. Not quite so high, perhaps, as cooking for a vegan, which I did the other day – having bought Oatly creme fraiche to dollop on some sautéed mushrooms, I spent the hours before supper in a state of total anxiety that real vegans consider such products, as I think I might do myself, to be the evil work of the biotech industrial complex – but pretty high all the same. The last time I went into a hipster butcher, it did not end well. His face, which was covered with a luxuriant beard, said: oh God, an old woman in search of rabbit. My face, which was suddenly crimson, said: oh God, I’m about to be intensively patronised for assuming that bunnies don’t need to be “pre-ordered”. Because I’ve no wish to look like a walking, talking tomahawk steak the first time the nice people (I’m absolutely sure they are!) at Stella’s clap eyes on me, I’ve spent the past month rehearsing. Round and round the house I go, trying out my lines. “Have you any shin beef?” I mutter first, under my breath. But this won’t do! I should be more assertive. “I would like some shin beef, please, and I don’t want it all to be fat,” I then say in a voice that would certainly be audible above the sound of metal hitting wood. But again, no. Not warm enough. Don’t I want this butcher to be my new best friend? So I try again: “I would like some shin beef for a ragu I plan on making, the one they serve at the restaurant up the road, which is my favourite, when I can get a table there, which I never can, of course, but perhaps you are luckier than me?” But … aargh! These guys don’t want to know the story of my life, and I’m not Miss Bates in Emma (or not yet). On and on it goes. Such agony, and all for a bit of sodding stewing steak. And so, again, I retreat to the freezer in search of supermarket sausages – or anything at all that doesn’t involve the judgment of a hot young man in selvedge jeans.The UK’s £6bn film and TV production boom faces being derailed as an acute skills shortage – from set decorators and special effects experts to accountants – causes delays to shooting schedules and drives up the cost of productions for the big and small screen. The streaming wars have fuelled an unprecedented boom in demand for content in the battle to attract new subscribers and viewers, with a record £5.6bn spent making blockbusters such as Mission: Impossible 7, big-budget dramas including Bridgerton and reality shows such as MasterChef in the UK last year. The huge increase in spending – double the figure for pandemic-hit 2020 and £1.3bn more than in 2019 – has put pressure on the deep-pocketed Hollywood studios and streaming giants to fight for studio space to make sure the production pipeline continues to flow freely. Last week, Amazon’s Prime Video struck a record-breaking deal to lease space at Shepperton Studios, home to productions ranging from Alien to Mary Poppins, in the company’s first long-term commitment to making TV programmes and films in the UK. The streaming giant joins Disney and Netflix, which already have deals in place with Pinewood, home to the James Bond and Star Wars franchises, and Shepperton, as the race for space continues. However, behind the scenes of the British production boom a crisis is looming: sources suggest that a shortage of as many as 40,000 workers will have arisen by 2025 – with shooting schedules already affected. “We are absolutely back and flying,” said Paul Golding, the chief executive of Pinewood Studios, which is also the owner of Shepperton Studios. “I have not in my time seen the studios being used as intensively as they are currently. However, the biggest challenge the industry is facing is crew. Building infrastructure, studio space – that can be done relatively quickly when it is needed. But crew, that is much, much harder. We have been talking about this for a long time.” The British Film Institute (BFI) is in the process of assessing the scale of the skills shortage, at the behest of the Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport, and sources say its report will detail an industry facing a crisis when it is published in April. The skills shortage is not just creating delays to some shooting schedules, it is also fuelling wage inflation as productions fight to secure in-demand crew. ScreenSkills, the body that represents workers in the UK film and TV industry, says there is a particular shortage in the “squeezed middle” of experienced crew. “The really pressing problems are at the experienced mid-level, and that is our big focus in the coming year because shortages there are hitting production schedules, causing delays and creating wage inflation,” said Seetha Kumar, chief executive at ScreenSkills. “All the research we do, and the regular feedback from industry who sit on our skills councils and working groups, [tells] of skills gaps and shortages across the board – from production coordinators and managers to editors, script supervisors and accountants.” There is rising concern that the skills shortage could have an impact on the quality of British-made productions. ScreenSkills’ research has found that crew are being promoted to meet demand before they are ready to handle a more senior role. There is also the growing practice of what is termed “show-jumping”, where crew that are in particularly hot demand leave a production before it is finished because of the offer of better-paid work. For now, the growing skills shortage has not led the UK to lose out to other countries as a location for making Hollywood blockbusters and crown-jewel content for the streaming giants. Amazon is due to start shooting the second series of its $1bn-plus small-screen adaptation of JRR Tolkien’s Lord of The Rings in the UK in the coming months. Amazon made the surprise decision to move filming from New Zealand, the home of all previous Lord of the Rings and Hobbit productions, to the UK last August. “It is great that the UK continues to be seen as a great place to make film and television and that there has been such growth, not just in production spend but in the scale and ambition of what is being made,” said Kumar. “But skills shortages are the biggest risk to continued growth and we think there is an urgent need for an injection of funding. There is no quick fix to this.”Once upon a time, intensive surveillance was a prerogative of states. After the arrival of the internet, and especially the rise of companies such as Google and Facebook, ISPs (internet service providers) and mobile networks, it became a prerogative shared between the state and private companies – corporations that log everything you do online. Surveillance became a kind of public-private partnership. The companies do much of the work and readily cooperate with security agencies when they come armed with a warrant. Way back in 2009 the German Green politician Malte Spitz went to court to obtain the data that his mobile phone operator, Deutsche Telekom, held on him and then collaborated with the newspaper Die Zeit to analyse and visualise it. What emerged was a remarkably detailed timeline of his daily life, a timeline that would have been readily available to state authorities if they had come for it with appropriate legal authorisation. But in internet time 2009 was aeons ago. Now, intensive surveillance is available to anyone. And you don’t have to be a tech wizard to do it. In mid-January this year, Kashmir Hill, a talented American tech reporter, used three bits of everyday consumer electronics – Apple AirTags, Tiles and a GPS tracker – to track her husband’s every move. He agreed to this in principle, but didn’t realise just how many devices she had planted on him. He found only two of the trackers: a Tile he felt in the breast pocket of his coat and an AirTag in his backpack when he was looking for something else. “It is impossible to find a device that makes no noise and gives no warning,” he said when she showed him the ones he missed. Hill’s report makes for sobering reading. AirTags and Tiles are products sold to help consumers find lost objects. But her experience confirms that these gadgets are also pretty good for tracking people and, being small and unobtrusive, are easy to plant on targets. Of the three Hill used, the GPS tracker was the most intrusive. The manufacturer describes it on Amazon.com as “the ultimate in discreet tracking! Keep track of movement in real time with your very own private eye.” As far as the Hill household was concerned, it certainly delivered on that promise. If you wanted a case study for how a particular piece of technology can be both used and abused, these tracking devices really fit the bill. On the one hand, there are all kinds of excellent uses for gizmos such as AirTags or Tiles. Many people (including me) use them to keep track of frequently mislaid objects such as house keys. On a less mundane level, a German activist, Lilith Wittmann, had a suspicion that a particular mundane government agency was a front for a spy operation, a hunch that was stoutly denied by all concerned. Reasoning that one way of checking might be to see where post addressed to the agency actually wound up, she sent a parcel with an AirTag in it to the agency and watched through Apple’s Find My system as it was delivered via the Berlin sorting centre to a sorting office in Cologne-Ehrenfeld and then appeared at the federal domestic intelligence agency in Cologne. On the other hand, there have been examples of people being followed or stalked using AirTags. And bad actors have also found other malign uses for them, for example, tagging valuable personal property (expensive handbags) as well as cars and bikes targeted for theft. Suddenly, AirTags seem less cool than they appeared when they were launched. Which is doubtless why Apple recently announced a number of new measures and forthcoming technical fixes clearly intended to head off what could become a public-relations nightmare if the abuse of AirTags led to the death or injury of a victim of stalking. Let’s hope that these changes make the tech safer. In the meantime, where did I leave those blasted keys? What I’ve been reading The ex factor Happy Valentine’s Day from Facebook. Here’s a Photo of You and Your Ex is a delicious satire by Emily Kling in McSweeney’s. Read it and then delete your Facebook account. Ode to Joyce A terrific New Yorker essay by Merve Emre, The Seductions of Ulysses is a nice way of marking the centenary of the book’s publication. Total recall Lavender in a Drawer is an elegant essay about Proust and memory by Peter Hitchens in the Lamp magazine.Over two previous albums, Brighton band Bird in the Belly have cut a distinctive course, allying musical innovation with the exhumation of obscure songs and overlooked texts, usually with a dark undercurrent of social commentary: Newgate hangings, 19th-century sex work and the like. After the City delves further into antique gloom, being a concept album steeped in pandemic and desolation, complete with the four horsemen of the apocalypse, though the mood and music prove dramatic rather than depressing. Its principal inspiration is the Victorian author Richard Jefferies, celebrated for his nature writings and dystopian novel After London, though the group also draw from the Elizabethan playwright Thomas Nashe and poems lamenting the poverty wrought by the Lancashire cotton famine of the 1860s. Blessed with a couple of multi-instrumentalists, the quartet navigate such unpromising material with flair, mixing lively acoustic folk-rock – opener Tragic Hearts of Towns, for example – with desolate pastoral pieces such as Pale Horse. In Ben Webb and Laura Ward they have two powerful singers, the former’s gravelly tones contrasting and blending with Ward’s clear, melodic voice, which can handle a piece like Smokeless Chimneys pretty much solo. In a culture steeped in dystopias, do we need another? Apparently so. An album of well-realised ambition.When Andy Palmer left school at 15 to become an apprentice draughtsman – helping design car gearboxes – he quickly caught the automotive bug. “By the age of 21, when I came out of my apprenticeship, I wanted to be the CEO of a car company, which was extraordinarily arrogant,” he recalls as we talk in a London hotel restaurant. Four decades on, he made it, taking over in 2014 as chief executive of one of the UK’s truly world-famous brands: Aston Martin, sports car maker to James Bond. What happened next was probably not part of Palmer’s dream: after organising a successful turnaround plan he led the company through a flotation that quickly turned sour, pushing the carmaker to the brink of its eighth bankruptcy in 105 years, even as it boldly launched a new SUV. He was unceremoniously pushed out in May 2020 following a financial rescue led by the fashion billionaire Lawrence Stroll. Palmer could have laid low and licked his wounds, using the pandemic as cover. Instead, he used the time to do something fairly startling: stepping in to lead an unheralded Yorkshire bus manufacturer and quietly turning it into a $1.6bn (£1.2bn) business. The company, Switch Mobility, formerly known as Optare, says it is now aiming to be the “Tesla of buses and vans”. Palmer grew up in the West Midlands, the UK’s traditional automotive heartland, and says his interest in carmaking was piqued when his father, a manufacturing engineer, gave his son a knackered old Mini engine to take to pieces. After his apprenticeship, he moved to British Leyland, from where he was headhunted by Nissan UK. He thought he would stay there a few years and return to work in a British company, but after the breakup of British Leyland there was no home industry to return to. He ultimately spent 23 years at Nissan – the latter 13 in Japan – and played a key part in making the Nissan Leaf the first mass-market electric car to be built in Europe (in Sunderland, more precisely). He eventually rose to become a “samurai” under former chief executive and chair Carlos Ghosn, who later gained notoriety with the business world’s most famous flight from arrest. Palmer acknowledges his former boss as a huge influence and says he was a genius at simplifying problems. Yet as Ghosn gained more power via an alliance with France’s Renault, Palmer found himself covering more and more for the “naked emperor” at the top. “What I saw was a guy who started to become disconnected from reality,” Palmer says, pointing to Ghosn’s regular use of a Gulfstream G550 private jet and his failure to visit Japan promptly following the devastating tsunami of 2011 – although he says there were no clues about the allegedly concealed income. In his next car industry post, Palmer learned a lesson in the importance of narrative, especially for a public company. When he took over Aston Martin in 2014, he says, it was unprofitable, three months from bankruptcy and had been valued at just £420m. When he left in 2020, it was valued at £2bn – but had floated at £4.3bn. “If you tell the story of going from £420m to £2bn, it’s an amazing turnaround,” he says. “If you’ve taken it from £4.3bn to £2bn, that’s a different story altogether.” Palmer holds up his hands when asked about the endgame at Aston – much of which is covered by a non-disclosure agreement. Yet it seems clear he thinks the owner at the time, Italian private equity firm Investindustrial, has questions to answer. It wanted to cash out, and wouldn’t wait, which left Palmer with a dilemma. “Do I just quit, or do I try to make something of it?” he says. “That question still exists in my mind: what was the right thing to do?” The initial public offering did not provide cash to the business, so when the costs were higher than expected, it was exposed, and the glare of public markets meant there was no room for error. “I will never put myself in the position I was in at Aston,” he says. “My goal now is always to work where there is available liquidity – and to work for people I like. Life’s too short otherwise.” *** CV Age 58 Family Has a daughter with wife Hitomi, whom he met at Nissan in the UK, and two more daughters and a son from his first marriage. Education Kineton school, near Gaydon (“I barely went”) followed by apprenticeship at 16. Returned to studies at 21, earning an industrial management degree on evenings and weekends at the Lanchester Polytechnic, now Coventry University. At Rover he completed an MSc, and at Nissan he completed an MBA and a PhD part-time from Cranfield University. Pay “My Aston salary was on the record, so I was on £1.2m and bonuses and what have you. I earn more now than I did then.” Last holiday Two and a half years ago (pre-pandemic) to the Maldives. Best advice he’s been given “Listen” – the quietest people in meetings can have the best ideas. Word he overuses “Not one that you can print … but ‘work, work, work’ according to my kids.” How he relaxes Sitting in his toolroom working on clocks and a motorbike, listening to punk and rock music: the Clash, the Sex Pistols, Bob Geldof, Siouxsie and the Banshees, the Jam. *** Switch Mobility is a different proposition. In a pleasing coincidence, it is majority-owned by Ashok Leyland, the Indian conglomerate that has absorbed (via a circuitous route) parts of the British Leyland empire. Palmer was approached to start consulting work there a day after leaving Aston Martin, and took over as chief executive in June 2021. If the past 18 months have been better for Palmer, the same can’t be said for his former company. Aston Martin Lagonda is languishing at a valuation of £1.3bn, or $1.8bn, just $200m more than Switch, which is in the middle of raising £200m. It is not inconceivable then, that a rise in its valuation or an Aston Martin stumble could see Palmer’s new employer overtaking his old one. “I won’t say I haven’t thought of that moment,” Palmer says. Switch took the old Optare bus business and combined it with a faltering Ashok Leyland electric vehicle division. “Had it been Optare by itself,” says Palmer, “it would probably have died, but we were able to stabilise Optare because we’ve got India now starting to really bubble.” The firm has just taken a major electric bus order from Bangalore. From nine engineers in the UK when he joined, Switch now has 100, with 300 in India. A factory in Spain will eventually employ 2,000, although the 300 workers at the Leeds factory will still make buses and, eventually, vans. Switch buses and vans will initially use batteries made by Austrian company Kreisel, but Palmer has had talks with both Envision, now owner of the Sunderland battery factory he started, and Britishvolt, the startup which is building a gigafactory in Northumberland. Palmer has become an electric vehicle evangelist, meeting council leaders and trying to sell them electric buses. Switch vehicles are more expensive than ones from Chinese rivals such as BYD, but, crucially, he claims his buses have net zero emissions during their life, including production – although for now that require buying carbon offsets. He spots a chance for the UK to undo some of the ravages the car industry has suffered. “This is your one opportunity in many lifetimes to rebuild an industry that used to be number two in the world, and is now number 15,” he says. “How stupid would we be to then give that all to the Chinese?”The end of the pandemic-fuelled home entertainment boom that has driven record breaking growth for Netflix and its rivals has revealed an uneasy truth – the streaming revolution has peaked. The market is facing a perfect storm as, after a decade of making easy converts, streaming companies are seeing dramatically slower growth and increasing competition fuelling an unsustainable content war, just as stretched household budgets prompt consumers to start cutting back on entertainment services. Rolling global lockdowns provided the perfect conditions for stratospheric growth. Netflix added a single-year record of 37 million subscribers in 2020, and newcomer Disney+ hit 100 million in 16 months, a feat its rival took a decade to achieve. Rapturous investors sent the market values of both companies to all-time highs late last year. Netflix bumped back to earth last month, forecasting just 2.5 million new subscribers globally in the first quarter, its worst start to a year in over a decade, and confirming that last year it added the fewest subscribers since 2015. Rattled investors, focused on subscriber growth, have wiped almost $300bn (£220bn) off the combined market value of the two giants since last year’s highs. Netflix has traditionally acted as a bellwether for the industry, and its worrying growth slowdown – on the heels of its self-proclaimed strongest content slate ever, with record setters Squid Game, Red Notice and Don’t Look Up – raises questions about the future for peak streaming. Analysts at MoffettNathanson, long-time Netflix sceptics, said the forecast was “worrying” for the rest of the industry. Netflix’s once-revolutionary binge-watching model, the source of much head-scratching by traditional TV companies, is proving a balance-sheet nightmare. The company will increase content spending to an estimated $19bn this year, and there’s a further $23bn on its balance sheet for long-term content costs, plus $14.8bn in long-term debt. Disney, which also owns sports operation ESPN and streaming service Hulu as well as its Marvel, Pixar, Star Wars and Disney film businesses, is spending an eye-watering $33bn on content this year. Netflix has scrapped the 30-day free trials loved by binge-watchers, and is finding that even its huge spending is not enough to keep customers loyal, with many unsubscribing after watching big-budget hits. “Squid Game? That’s so last quarter,” said analyst Michael Nathanson in a note to investors last month after shares in the streaming giant suffered their biggest fall in a decade. “The Witcher? Done on New Year’s Eve!”. The new trend, used by Disney+ and Amazon’s Prime Video, is to release episodes of hit shows weekly, to extend the life of content and stop subscribers cancelling after bingeing a few must-see hits. Last year, Apple ditched its attractive offer of a year’s free access to its streaming service with purchases of an Apple device. Netflix, and later Amazon, had almost a decade’s head start, but now traditional media giants are vying for a share of streaming spend, the market is severely overcrowded. The biggest US media groups, from Disney and Sky-owned Comcast to WarnerMedia, ViacomCBS and Discovery, will spend about $140bn on content this year with a heavy focus on streaming services. Globally, content spending is set to pass $240bn, according to Ampere Analysis, all of which will add to the pressure to hold on to subscribers and win new ones. “Everyone has started to feel the heat,” said Dominic Sunnebo of research group Kantar. “As well as a wave of new well-funded subscription services, there is also now an acceleration of advertising-funded low- or even no-cost. The Netflixes are suddenly not so cheap any more.” However, with the wealthier populations of the US, Europe and Australia mostly picked clean of potential subscribers, providers are having to accept that not all customers are financially equal. In markets with huge potential, such as India, consumers are not able or willing to pay much for services, which means price competition is fierce, and subscriber growth brings much smaller revenue increases. Globally, monthly average revenue per Disney+ subscriber is just $4.12, because around 37% of its 118 million base is derived from its ownership of low-cost Indian service Hotstar. In December, Netflix had to cut its standard price in India by almost a quarter to $6.60, and its mobile-only offering to less than $2; in the US and UK its most-popular package costs $15.49 and £9.99 respectively. Newer services such as HBO Max are, however, showing relatively strong early growth. And Disney+, which disappointed investors in November when its final-quarter results revealed the lowest number of new subscribers since its launch, staged a remarkable recovery last week, beating Wall Street expectations to surge to nearly 130 million subscribers at the end of last year. “For now, Disney is defending its position but this isn’t the walk in the park one might expect from a company with a content cupboard already brimming with blockbusters,” said analyst Sophie Lund-Yates of Hargreaves Lansdown. Disney’s stock surged nearly 10% as investors breathed a sigh of relief, hoping that the halcyon days of streaming growth are not over yet. The new golden age of TV is in some ways proving too much of a good thing, with the overload of choice beginning to cause streaming fatigue among consumers. Analysis of the nine major streaming services available in the UK, including ITV Hub, All4 and BBC iPlayer, as well as the US subscription services, found 125,000 hours of content. Given that the typical Briton watches in the order of three hours of TV a day, it would take 86 years to see it all. “The market has got an awful lot more crowded over the past few years and it is not going to support many more services at this stage,” said Richard Broughton, analyst at Ampere. “Consumers now have more services than they could possibly need.” It’s an unlikely scenario, but a viewer who wanted to sign up to streaming services to cover all major entertainment and sports events – from Sky, BT and Virgin to Amazon, Disney and Netflix, with a bit of ad-free ITV Hub+ and specialist streamers such as reality TV service Hayu – and pay the BBC licence fee, would have to spend about £2,000 a year, excluding the cost of broadband. There are signs that consumers are becomingly increasingly selective about how many services they want to manage and pay for. Kantar found that a fifth of German consumers who took out a new subscription video-on-demand service in the final three months last year cancelled one of their existing ones as a result. “Planned cancellation goes up exponentially when people go above three services,” said Sunnebo. “Consumers are not going to keep spending forever: there is a ceiling and that ceiling is coming closer and closer. I don’t think we have reached peak streaming in viewing terms yet, but we are coming close in terms of what people are prepared to pay.”“It’s like a vegetable treasure hunt,” says Jenni Duncan, 54, ankle deep in mud, looking at the rows of cauliflower plants stretching out in front of her as the Cornish drizzle gets heavier by the minute. This field near Hayle in west Cornwall has already been harvested, but not all the produce met supermarket standards and so some was left unpicked. This is where Duncan and her team of volunteers come in, working down the rows, peeling back the leaves of plants that have been left behind, hoping to find small but perfectly formed cauliflowers still tucked deep inside. They are resurrecting the ancient practice of gleaning – harvesting surplus crops to redistribute to those in need. It was common from biblical times up until the 18th century, when landowners began closing off land and restricting access to fields. Duncan and the Gleaning Cornwall network are part of a growing number of volunteer groups taking to the fields once more to harvest leftover produce that would otherwise go to waste. Groups have formed up and down England, including in Kent, Sussex, Southampton, Birmingham, Bristol, Exeter and London, each approaching local farmers to ask about harvesting produce they cannot sell. The gleaners then give it to food banks, community kitchens and food projects, which distribute it as raw produce or cooked meals, soups, pickles and preserves. The Cornwall network started last year with a grant from Feedback, a national charity that supports local gleaning groups. “We wouldn’t say that gleaning will resolve the problem of food waste or food insecurity. But it’s a positive and practical way for people to get a sense of the food system and make a really tangible difference,” Phil Holtam of Feedback said. Nick Haigh began gleaning in Bristol in September 2020, collecting leftover swede from a community farm to give to various charitable food projects in the city. He’s now running the Avon Gleaning Network, a list of 200 volunteers who have carried out gleans on 15 farms across Somerset, collecting around eight tonnes of surplus produce. “Last week we got chard and beetroot; this week we’re doing a glean of jerusalem artichoke. Soon we’ll start getting brassicas – cabbage, kale and cauliflower,” said Haigh. “I started this from an environmental perspective. But it’s become about something much more than reducing waste. It’s about connecting people with food and farming, getting people outdoors and seeing where their food comes from.” The Glean for Brum network in Birmingham is also expanding its war on waste after a challenging start last year. “The hardest thing has been finding farms to glean from. Many of the farmers around us in the West Midlands are cereal growers or livestock. But we are finding more community and pick-your-own farms which have surplus and are happy for us to come in,” said Katherine d’Apice, who helps run the network. “There is such a big detachment among individuals and their food. Gleaning is a great way to get people on to agricultural sites to experience it themselves.” Research from Feedback has found that up to 16% of a crop can be wasted due to a range of factors that are often beyond a farmer’s control, such as produce not being the right shape or size for supermarkets, unexpected weather patterns changing harvest times or labour shortages. This is the first time Cornish grower Simon Whear has invited gleaners into his fields, having been contacted by the local group only a couple of weeks ago. “You get to a point with a commercial crop where there are too few pieces left in the field to make it financially viable to come back in again and cut what’s left,” said Whear. “There’s always some left, and I thought this would be a good way for people to make use of it. It’s better that it gets picked than just ploughed back into the field.” What is a small amount of waste to Whear in retail terms is providing rich pickings for the gleaners. Duncan and her volunteers have managed to fill 66 crates of perfect, albeit small, cauliflower in just six hours. “This one’s a little too yellow for the supermarkets; this one’s too small. This one has started to blow, which means it’s just opened up a little too much. The farmer couldn’t sell these but they are perfectly edible,” she says, raking through the crates. “It’s difficult for farmers as they are tied into the demands of retailers and all their commercial pressures. But this is beautiful fresh produce that shouldn’t go to waste. We’re so grateful to our farmers for letting us come and do this – and the food banks are so grateful too.” As the crates are loaded into a van and taken off to food banks and community food projects across the county, Pip Evans, 55, reflects on only her second volunteer glean. “I was out for a walk over Christmas with my husband and I could smell rotting cauliflower in the fields. I just thought: what a waste. There are so many people who are hungry who need this amazing produce,” she says. She came across the gleaning group on Facebook and signed up to volunteer:“To play a part in the chain of getting food out of the ground and into the mouths of people who need it, to be part of this growing movement of people doing this – it just makes me feel so good. I will walk away from this field buzzing with joy.”The Spain manager Jorge Vilda has hailed Sarina Wiegman’s European title rivals as the “best England team ever” before their Arnold Clark Cup meeting at Carrow Road on Sunday afternoon. “We’ve prepared well for this game, they’ve been training really well and we’ve been doing exercises based on dealing with high intensity opponents,” said Vilda. “I personally believe that this is perhaps the best England team ever. They’ve got plenty of youth in the side, players who play with coverage.” England host Spain in the second round of the inaugural friendly tournament that includes Germany and Canada and Vilda believes it is “potentially the best game of the tournament”. For the three European teams it is an opportunity to test players and formations before this summer’s Euros, while the Olympic champions Canada can ramp up their preparations for the World Cup in Australia and New Zealand next year. Spain conceded in the 88th minute of their opening match against Germany to deny them three points against the eight-time European champions at the Riverside. While Millie Bright’s stunning volley in a blistering first half for England against Canada was undone by a shift of momentum in the second that led to the Manchester City forward Janine Beckie’s equaliser. The rise of Spain on the international stage has been rapid and fuelled by the impressive rise of the all-conquering Barcelona, with 10 of the 22 player squad and nine of the starting XI against Germany from the Champions League holders. “They have developed very well. We know they have a lot of Barcelona players and they’re very tactical and technical,” said Wiegman, who led the Netherlands to the Euro 2017 title on home soil. “They tied the first game, but before that they won lots of games, so we’re aware. But we also think we have the opportunity to harm them too.” The England manager was coy when asked what she thought about Spain’s Ballon d’Or, Fifa Best and Uefa player of the year Alexia Putellas. “She’s a great player, and a lot of people think she’s a great player,” said Wiegman with a smile. Spain’s fulcrum was more forthcoming in her praise of her team’s opponents on Sunday. “England are a great team, one of the best in the world,” said Putellas. “I always love playing against big teams like them. “I believe that we have improved a lot since [Spain last played England, securing a 1-0 win at] the 2020 SheBelieves Cup. We are a better team now. Tomorrow will be a really tough test. It will be a really high quality contest. We’ll need to be at the top of our game to win. We need to do the little things right.” With a crowd of 8,769 in Middlesbrough for England’s game against Canada, Spain will have a chance to see what it feels like to play in front of a hostile crowd in Norwich. “We need to play well and try and quieten the crowd because they’ll be a lot of fans on England’s side, like there will be in the Euros this summer,” said Putellas. “That is exactly what we need to do if we’re going to be on the right side of the result come the end of the game tomorrow.” For Wiegman, the result is not the most important thing, with building towards the Euros uppermost in her mind. “Of course we want to approach every game to win but also we know this is a step in the preparations for our Euros in the summer,” she said. “So, yes, we want to win, but [against Canada we] had a tie and we just stay neutral because we know we’re working on how we want to take the next step. It’s nice when you win and it gives us a good energy but we shouldn’t be urgent about it because it’s a step in our progress to the Euros.” After Sunday’s double header, England play Germany in the evening game on Wednesday at Molineux, after Spain face Canada, to complete the tournament.Boris Johnson has declared Russia “must fail and be seen to fail” if it invades Ukraine, warning of a bloody and protracted conflict once Russian troops cross the border. In a speech on Saturday to the Munich security conference, which went further than many other speeches condemning Vladimir Putin’s action, Johnson did not rule out 11th-hour diplomacy, but made clear that a Russian victory would send disastrous echoes around the world that the postwar order is being dismantled by force. He said overall the omens were grim. He said: “If dialogue fails and if Russia chooses to use violence against an innocent and peaceful population in Ukraine, and to disregard the norms of civilised behaviour between states, and to disregard the Charter of the United Nations, then we at this conference should be in no doubt that it is in our collective interest that Russia should ultimately fail and be seen to fail.” He added: “I believe that in preparing to invade Ukraine, a proud country whose armed forces now exceed 200,000 personnel, considerably more expert in combat today than in 2014, President Putin and his circle are gravely miscalculating.” He backed up his remarks in a meeting with the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, where the two men agreed an invasion would be met with fierce resistance. Zelenskiy, receiving a standing ovation, told the conference Ukraine is longing for peace and Europe is longing for peace. Zelenskiy had flown from Kyiv to the conference in Germany, despite advice from the US president, Joe Biden, that it might not be wise to do so. He met Johnson, the US vice-president, Kamala Harris, and the German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, spelling out that he needed more military protection to stave off an invasion. Zelenskiy used much of his 20-minute address to challenge the west about what had happened to its promise of Nato membership, and asked what message the west had for the two soldiers killed on the frontline on Saturday. Zelenskiy called for world leaders to meet to create a new security architecture. He said: “The security architecture of our world is brittle, obsolete and the rules that were agreed dozens of years ago are no longer working. The security system is slow and failing us time and time again.” He blamed “egotism arrogance and irresponsibility at the global level. Some countries resort to crime and others resort to indifference”. “It is too late to fix the current architecture. It is high time for a new one before we pay with millions of casualties.” But he vowed his country would support itself with or without the help of its partners. The conference heard a plethora of world leaders promise severe economic sanctions on Russia if an invasion went ahead, but also various gradations of optimism about whether talks could still find a path to de-escalation. A meeting of G7 foreign ministers chaired by the German foreign minister, Annalena Baerbock, issued a statement of solidarity. Baerbock said: “We are facing the unimaginable concrete threat of a military conflict at the heart of Europe,” adding the world knows Russia must be made responsible for the steps that were unseen since the cold war. She said Russia was behind an orchestrated false-flag operation to provide a pretext to launch an attack in Eastern Ukraine. She said: “We are not talking about days, but minutes and hours.” The meeting was attended by the Ukrainian foreign minister. She said she did not know if “an attack was a done deal”. A breach of the integrity of the sovereignty and integrity of Ukraine would be sufficient to trigger sanctions, but she did not precisely define this phrase, adding there could be different trigger points. Earlier the European Commission president, Ursula von der Leyen, had been the clearest yet on the sanctions being envisaged. “We – the EU and its transatlantic partners – have been preparing a robust package of financial and economic sanctions, including on energy and cutting-edge technology,” she said. “If the Kremlin strikes, we can impose high costs and severe consequences on Moscow’s economic interests. The Kremlin’s dangerous thinking, which comes straight out of a dark past, may cost Russia a prosperous future.” Harris said the United States would reinforce Nato’s eastern flank to act as a further deterrent to any Russian military action in addition to the threat of sanctions. “We have prepared economic measures that will be swift, severe and united,” she said. “We will target Russia’s financial institutions and key industries.” She added those who support the Putin regime and had aided and abetted the invasion would also be targeted. The full Russian playbook of false-flag operations was under way, she said, adding the US commitment to Nato’s Article 5 is ironclad. Security officials have warned that Russia has forces in place to invade Ukraine at any moment, and said Moscow could be seeking to create an excuse to invade with a false-flag operation. Baerbock urged more OSCE monitors be sent to the region to establish facts on the ground. Russia opened an investigation on Saturday into Russian media reports that a Ukrainian shell exploded in Russia’s region of Rostov about 1 kilometre (0.6 miles) from the border. Scholz said it was unacceptable that a war in Europe was imminent over Russia’s demand that Ukraine’s path to Nato membership be blocked, when Putin knew such membership was not on the agenda. He also described as ridiculous claims by Putin that a genocide was under way in the Donbas.The UK’s biggest crisis text line for people needing urgent mental health support gave third-party researchers access to millions of messages from children and other vulnerable users despite a promise never to do so. Shout, a helpline launched with a £3m investment from the Royal Foundation of the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge, says it offers a confidential service for people struggling to cope with issues such as suicidal thoughts, self-harm, abuse and bullying. An FAQ section on its website had said that while “anonymised and aggregated”, “high-level data” from messages was passed to trusted academic partners for research to improve the service, “individual conversations cannot and will not ever be shared”. But that promise was deleted from the site last year, and access to millions of messages from people – including children under 13 – has since been given to third-party researchers, the Observer has found. Mental Health Innovations, the charity that runs the helpline, said all users agreed to terms of service that allowed data to be shared with researchers for studies that would “ultimately benefit those who use our service and the broader population”. But the findings have led to a backlash among privacy experts, data ethicists and people who use the helpline, who said the data sharing raised ethical concerns. More than 10.8m messages from 271,445 conversations between February 2018 and April 2020 were used in a project with Imperial College London aimed at creating tools that use artificial intelligence to predict behaviour, including for instance, suicidal thoughts. Personal identifiers including names and phone numbers were removed before the messages were analysed, according to Shout, which says the messages had been “anonymised”. But data used in the research included “full conversations” about people’s personal problems, according to the study. Part of the research was aimed at gleaning personal information about the texters from their messages, such as their age, gender and disability, to get a better understanding of who was using the service. Cori Crider, a lawyer and co-founder of Foxglove, an advocacy group for digital rights, said giving researchers access to the messages raised “serious ethical questions”. “Trust is everything in health – and in mental health most of all. When you start by saying in your FAQs that ‘individual conversations cannot and will not ever be shared’; and suddenly move to training AI on hundreds of thousands of ‘full conversations’, you’ve left behind the feelings and expectations of the vulnerable people you serve,” she said. “It’s particularly sad because this can set back proper consented research by years. Lack of trust in these systems can discourage desperate people from coming forward.” Others raised concerns that people using the service could not truly comprehend how their messages would be used when at crisis point – even if they were told it was going to be used in research – because of their vulnerable state. About 40% of people texting the helpline are suicidal, according to Shout, and many are under 18. Claire Maillet, 30, who used the service for support with anxiety and an eating disorder in 2019 and 2020, said she had no idea messages could be used for research. “My understanding was that the conversation would stay between me and the person I was messaging and wouldn’t go any further,” she said. “If I had known that it would, then I can’t say for certain that I still would have used the service.” Maillet said she “absolutely understood” the need to conduct research in order to “make services better” in cases where people could give their informed consent. But she said using conversations from a crisis helpline raised ethical concerns, even when names were removed, due to the nature of what’s being discussed. “When you’re at that crisis point, you’re not thinking, ‘Will this information be used for research?’ You can spin it in a way that makes it sound good, but it feels like they are exploiting vulnerability in a way.” Phil Booth, coordinator of medConfidential, which campaigns for the privacy of health data, said it was “unreasonable to expect a young person or any person in crisis to be able to understand” that their conversations could be used for purposes other than providing them support. “There are clearly reasons why Shout might need to retain data: no one is denying that. It’s these other uses: they are just not what people would expect.” He added that it was “misleading” and “plainly wrong” that the charity had told users that their individual conversations would not be shared. “If you make a promise like that you should stick to it,” he said. Shout was set up in 2019 as a legacy of Heads Together, a campaign led by the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge and Prince Harry aimed at ending stigma around mental health. The goal of the service is to provide round-the-clock mental health support to people in the UK, many of whom struggle to access overstretched NHS services, who can text a number and receive a response from a trained volunteer. Mental Health Innovations states that a key goal is to use “anonymised, aggregated data to generate unique insights into the mental health of the UK population”. “We use these insights to enhance our services, to inform the development of new resources and products, and to report on trends of interest for the broader mental health sector,” it says. When service users first contact Shout, they are told: “This is confidential unless we’re worried for your safety and must tell someone to keep you safe.” They are also sent a link to a text with a link to the website and privacy policy with the message: “In using the service you confirm acceptance of our terms and consent to processing of your data.” However, previous versions of the FAQs made a promise that has since been deleted, meaning people who texted the service in the past – including those whose messages were used in the research – are likely to have read information that was later changed. An archived version of the helpline’s website from March 2020 shows that, in the FAQ section, users were told: “We anonymise and aggregate high-level data from conversations in order to study and improve our own performance. We share some of this data with carefully selected and screened academic partners, but the data is always anonymised, individual conversations cannot and will not ever be shared.” In late spring 2021, the FAQ section was updated and the promise about individual conversations removed. The privacy policy was also updated to say that as well as sharing data, it could be used to “enable a deeper understanding of the mental health landscape in the UK more generally”, opening the door to a broader range of uses. The Imperial study, published in December 2021, involved analysis of “entire conversations” manually and using artificial intelligence, according to the paper. To improve the service, it had three goals: predicting the conversation stages of messages, predicting behaviours from texters and volunteers and “classifying full conversations to extrapolate demographic information” – for instance by scanning messages for things such as numbers or mentions of school life, which might indicate a user’s age. “Looking forward, we aim to train models to classify labels that could be considered directly actionable or provide a direct measure of conversation efficacy. For example, a key future aim is prediction of a texter’s risk of suicide,” wrote the researchers. Data was handled in a trusted research environment and the study received ethics approval from Imperial, which said the research “fully complied” with “stringent ethical review policies” and provided “crucial insights”. But Dr Sandra Leaton Gray, associate professor of education at University College London, an expert on the effects of technology on children and young people, said that as a researcher she saw “a lot of red flags” with the secondary data use, including that parental consent was not sought. Dr Christopher Burr, an ethics fellow and expert in AI at the Alan Turing Institute, said responsible data analysis could bring huge benefits. But he said not being clear enough with users about how sensitive conversations would be used created a “culture of distrust”. “They ought to be doing more to ensure their users are meaningfully informed about what’s going on,” he said. The concerns about Shout follow an investigation in the US by the news site Politico that exposed a data-sharing partnership between an American mental health charity and a for-profit company. Shout is the UK counterpart of Crisis Text Line US, which faced intense scrutiny earlier this month over its dealings with Loris.AI, a company that promises to help companies “handle their hard customer conversations with empathy”. After details of the partnership with Loris came to light, Crisis Text Line cut ties with the organisation, and UK users were assured that their data had not been shared with Loris. As well as working with academic researchers, Mental Health Innovations has formed partnerships with private bodies including Hive Learning, a tech company. Hive, whose clients include Boots and Deloitte, worked with Shout to create an AI-powered mental health programme that the firm sells to companies to help them “sustain mass behaviour change at scale”. It is owned by Blenheim Chalcot, “the UK’s leading digital venture builder”, which was founded by Shout trustee Charles Mindenhall. Mental Health Innovations said “no data relating to any texter conversations” had been shared with Hive and that its training programme was “developed with learnings from our volunteer training model”. In a statement, the charitysaid that all data shared with academic researchers, including Imperial, had details including names, addresses, city names, postcodes, email addresses, URLs, phone numbers and social media handles removed, and claimed it was “highly unlikely” that it could be tied to individuals. It said seeking parental consent before using the data in research “would make the service inaccessible for many children and young people”, adding that it understood that texters “desperate for immediate help … may not be able to read the terms and conditions that we send before they start their conversation with us”, but that the privacy policy remained available for them to read at a later stage. If they later decided to withdraw consent, they could text “Loofah” to the helpline number and would have their information deleted, a spokeswoman said. Victoria Hornby, Mental Health Innovations’ chief executive, added that the dataset built from Shout conversations was “unique” because it contained information about “people in their own words”, and could unlock huge benefits in mental health research. She said the promise about individual conversations never being shared was in the FAQs, rather than the actual privacy policy, and had been removed from the website because it could be “easily misunderstood” due to there being “different interpretations” of what “individual conversations” meant. “We didn’t want it to be misunderstood so we changed it,” she said. The Information Commissioner’s Office, the UK’s data protection watchdog, said it was assessing evidence relating to Shout and Mental Health Innovations’ handling of user data. A spokeswoman said: “When handling and sharing people’s health data, especially children’s data, organisations need to take extra care and put safeguards in place to ensure their data is not used or shared in ways they would not expect. We will assess the information and make enquiries on this matter.” In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie.Francesco Manni feared for his and his wife’s lives on Friday when, just after 9am, he heard a loud crack and turned to their home office window to see an enormous tree falling towards it. “I just had time to alert my wife, she was sitting close to me and she started shouting,” he said. They were among thousands of people across the UK impacted by the devastation caused by the deadly Storm Eunice. Thankfully, the tree was so tall that instead of coming through their window, it landed on the roof of their West Reading home, saving them from its impact. But after calling the fire brigade, who rescued Manni, 39, and Jade Dawber, 33, and found the house structurally sound, they woke on Saturday morning to a destroyed garden, cracks in the walls and a damaged roof and gutter. To go outside they had to wear helmets to protect them from falling tiles. “We’ve been really lucky. Basically, if the tree was slightly smaller, by probably a few metres, instead of banging on the top of the house, it would have smashed exactly on the sidewall and inside the window,” said Manni, who works in IT. He hopes that the cost of repairs will be covered by insurance, but following the traumatic experience, he said it was a struggle to sleep because he kept thinking of what had happened. “I saw the whole scene, from the crack to the tree falling towards the house.” He estimates that the tree, which he understands is protected by Reading council and is in his neighbour’s garden, is about 50ft tall and visible from as far as two miles away. On Saturday, as tiles were falling from the roof, he said he “still couldn’t believe it”. “Seeing this massive tree lying in our garden, to be honest we are grateful,” he added. “We are grateful that it could have gone much worse and it didn’t.” In Binfield, Bracknell, Steve Moody told how his and his wife’s cars and garage roof were destroyed when a pine tree, which he estimates was about 20 metres tall, crashed on it. Moody, 71, said: “Both cars are undrivable because they’ve had half the roof fall on top of them. They’ve got broken windows, broken roofs, broken lights. Pretty much anything would break if you dropped a load of clay tiles on it.” They have put in insurance claims but in the meantime will be reliant on buses and walking to get around. He said he was relieved that no trees fell on the house, which he said would have been a disaster, but that it still felt like a “catastrophe”. He added: “It’s a big deal. We’ve been in there this morning when the winds have died down, so there’s a lot to do. I don’t even know how they’d get the tree out of the roof of the building.” In the 30 years that they have lived there, it was the worst storm they have seen. “It’s 35 years really since anything like this happened here,” he said. In Mullion, Cornwall, Ross Hocking said his business, Poldhu Beach Cafe, took a “beating” during the storm, which blew off most of their front roof. The 36-year-old was forced to close because it was too dangerous and the beach and cafe was covered in seafoam so thick it looked like snow. “I was here for maybe 10 minutes max because it was just too dangerous and too wild. You couldn’t stand up,” he said. “I went to just take a photo for our Instagram and it literally took me straight off my feet and blew me over so we called it a day and went home.” After getting in at 7am to clean up, they reopened on Saturday but won’t be able to repair the roof until after the winds have died down. Around the area, he said there were lots of power cuts, missing roofs and fallen down fences and that lots of homes were still without power on Saturday morning. “I’ve had the cafe for 22 years and I’ve never experienced gusts with such power.” In Essex, part of a home was destroyed and car crushed by a 400-year-old oak tree that came through the roof of the family’s house. Dominic Good, 57, was on a work call at home in Stondon Massey, near Brentwood, on Friday morning when he was shocked by an “almighty crash”. The father-of-two said his family are “very lucky” that nobody was injured but that his children’s bedrooms are now filled with rubble and the house covered in dust. “The whole tree fell on the north-west corner of the house and the roof took the brunt of it,” he told the PA news agency. “The roof is pretty much destroyed, and my son’s and my daughter’s bedrooms are completely filled with rubble.” His son, Sven, who was in the room directly below where the tree hit, had his Mazda MX5 “completely crushed” by the tree’s branches. “He just grabbed his laptop and grabbed the dog and ran out of the room,” Good said. Once the tree is removed from the house, he said they will probably have to knock down a significant portion and rebuild it.In my childhood, it was the three Ps: Pop-Tarts, Peperami, Pot Noodle. That was my diet and I could still eat that as a three-course meal now. It’s a miracle my organs are still working to be honest, I’ve eaten so much of them. Then a blue ice pole for dessert. I’ve had a lot of interesting conversations over a lot of interesting meals. One was a Thanksgiving dinner in a prison in Iowa with a load of female lifers. They’re in prison for the rest of their lives, they’re going to die there, so they look forward to this for months. It’s a big deal: they were pressing their shirts, everyone looked super-smart and we’re sat there eating lukewarm turkey. I’ve eaten in loads of prisons; it’s a bit like plane food, not bad. On Strictly, I was living off Hobnobs. You’re dancing till silly o’clock; honestly, sometimes we were dancing 12, 13 hours a day and I was just in such great shape. So it was biscuits and crisps, I wasn’t eating quinoa. Some people describe these idyllic memories of baking with their mum and preparing food for hours with their mum. There wasn’t really any of that. We got home from school, then my mum had to go to work and so dinner was in the oven or in the fridge or a couple of quid on the side to go to the chippy. It doesn’t matter how much I resist, I am now middle-class. I can’t deny it. I never used to eat olives and balsamic vinegar, and now I do. My palate has changed. My favourite cuisine is Japanese. I just never get fed up of sushi: when I was in Japan, I was having tuna nigiri for breakfast every single day. And I remember being addicted to these bottles of warm green tea that you get out of vending machines. I was living off them: my skin must have been immaculate because I was just drinking green tea and eating tuna. I had the diet of a supermodel. My stomach is made of tin. I shouldn’t say that, I shouldn’t be too cocky; I’m going to get ill next week, aren’t I? I haven’t drunk alcohol for years. It’s probably about 15 years since I’ve been drunk. When I was younger, I’d just go out and get really pissed. By the age of 18, 19, I’d got it out of my system. I’d already been down the park drinking for years. When you’re older, it feels like, “Oh, you’re allowed to do it now.” So it feels less naughty. My partner Kev [dancer Kevin Clifton] is useless at cooking, too. We eat a lot of takeouts. For his last birthday, we had a chef and she did lobster pasta and then white chocolate pasta for dessert. It was quite heavy on the pasta, but it was gorgeous. The chef didn’t give me the recipe – I think she knew that it’d be lost on me. Know what would help my cooking? This is so me. If I had a nice kitchen. You want to hang out in the kitchen, don’t you? My kitchen’s really ugly at the minute. It’s super-old and super-dated. Recently I was hanging out with a load of nuns in a convent. And I was like: “Actually, I really love what they’ve done with the place.” Just one long, solid set of cupboards and one shelf, dimly lit. Maybe a little fire and a couple of chairs and the table. I want it to look like either I’ve just moved in or I’ve just been robbed. I’ve just made a cooking show, Hungry For It – it’s a really lovely series with 10 brilliant cooks, but not professional chefs. As you’ve learned, I’m completely useless when it comes to cooking and food, but my job was to look after the aspiring chefs and make sure they felt comfy. It can be quite high-pressured, can’t it? And you end up having such a soft spot for these people. You’re rooting for them because we know a TV show can totally change their life. My favourite things Food If I’m celebrating, oysters. I could eat, I don’t know, 20 oysters, one after the other. That’s a bit gluttonous, now I say it. Drink Cup of tea, Yorkshire tea, with oat milk. And if I’m out for dinner, I’ll have a Shirley Temple. Restaurant We’re a bit late to the game, but we went to Luca [in Clerkenwell] recently and it felt very relaxed and the food was beautiful. Desperate to go back there. Dish to make A roast dinner is the one dish I’m actually capable of making. For whatever reason, I haven’t grasped the concept of cooking as an adult. I’m just useless. But I am able to nail a roast. And when I’m travelling, you’re a bit nostalgic, and a roast is comfort food, isn’t it? Are You Really OK? Understanding Britain’s Mental Health Emergency by Stacey Dooley is published by BBC Books (£16.99). Hungry For It will be on BBC Three in the spring5 Live Drive (BBC 5 Live) | iPlayer Nazanin (BBC Radio 4) | BBC Sounds Shaun Keaveny’s Community Garden Radio/Shaun Keaveny’s Creative Cul De Sac “A lot of news today,” said Clare McDonnell on Tuesday, her second day on 5 Live Drive alongside veteran Tony Livesey. She wasn’t wrong: the Prince Andrew statement landed just as the programme started. McDonnell was unfazed. A vastly experienced presenter, with the BBC 6 Music, Radio Kent and the World Service under her belt, as well as often covering 5 Live slots, she’s stepped into Anna Foster’s place with aplomb (Foster is now the BBC’s Middle East correspondent) and she’s already into her stride. “She’ll do,” said one text to the programme on Tuesday and McDonnell was chuffed. She should be: a newbie at the helm of an established BBC radio show isn’t always welcomed. Radio listeners do not always like change, as Jo Whiley, Craig Charles or Emma Barnett can attest. To be fair, the listeners are sometimes right: controllers can be clumsy in forcing out old favourites or moving presenters around. But the warm and newsy McDonnell is not one of those appointments. She’s made for this show. On Tuesday, her interviews with various US lawyers about thesettlement between Prince Andrew and Virginia Giuffre – about what it might actually mean, beneath the legalese – were insightful and pointed. On Wednesday, she spoke to Matt, a young man with autism who volunteers at a farm, and Kwajo Tweneboa, the inspirational campaigner for better social housing. In both interviews, she was empathic as well as serious, teasing out the background that creates these gripping individual stories. I do enjoy 5 Live Drive; the camaraderie between Livesey and McDonnell is cheering and its news stories mix well with more human tales. This is due to excellent production, as well as great presentation. Plus: the listeners. On Tuesday, they were asked to suggest who could play Livesey in the forthcoming Netflix film Bank of Dave (based on the real life of Dave Fishwick, Livesey’s childhood friend). “Sean Bean,” said one. “Or if he’s not available, Mr Bean.” On Wednesday, they got in touch to describe when they had met famous people in real life. This was inspired by Livesey and McDonnell being about to go to see Echo and the Bunnymen and McDonnell not wanting to go backstage, for fear of embarrassment. A listener texted in to say that, a few years ago, he’d pretended to be Ian McCulloch, lead singer of Echo and the Bunnymen, in order to blag his way into a gig. The producers got him on the phone. If you’re feeling down about the world, 5 Live Drive will keep you cheerful while you eat your tea. While we’re talking great producers, here’s Ceri Thomas, chief producer on the Today programme between 2006 and 2012, before he moved to Panorama and, for the past few years, Tortoise Media. Now Thomas has turned reporter-presenter, for Nazanin, a five-part Radio 4 series that explains the background to Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe being held hostage in Iran. Unsurprisingly, Thomas is excellent. His opening salvo, about how ordinary people can get caught up in world events, has stayed with me: “It’s as if the scenery steps forward and engulfs us.” He explained everything: the debt that the UK owes to Iran; why it’s hard to pay it; how decisions taken before Zaghari-Ratcliffe was even born are now being played out, with her as one of the pawns. He was especially good on political will: Jeremy Hunt talked about how close he got to getting Zaghari-Ratcliffe out, before he failed. God, this is heartbreaking stuff. “The state is the coldest of cold monsters,” said Thomas. Shaun Keaveny, one of those presenters who fell victim to a controller reshuffle, has been busily continuing his audio career. I mentioned last week that he’s set up an internet “station”, Community Garden Radio, where he broadcasts live for two hours every Friday. If you join his Patreon for £4 a month, you get the station and also a podcast, Creative Cul De Sac, as well as Keaveny’s regular blogs and musings. (This on top of another, free-to-access podcast, about festivals: The Line-Up. He’s working hard.) The radio shows are very Keaveny, meaning: packed with familiar music (Jarvis, the Style Council, Blur), plus funny little features: Lost and Found, Wedding Playlist (something old, something new etc). The plan is eventually to have callers, said Keaveny on Friday, but not immediately: “The shoes are new. They’re still a bit squeaky and rubbing at the back.” In Creative Cul De Sac, Keaveny and his guest explore their unrealised ideas, the ones written down but never used. After Keaveny’s somewhat rambly opener, his conversation with Greg James, his first guest, was great. James spoke about why most of his ideas are radio ones, rather than anything else: “The listeners, they come back with the other half.” Just as in 5 Live Drive. And it is listeners that Keaveny is gradually building. It may take a while, but you feel he’ll get there.The François Truffaut season at the BFI in London remains a delightful event for me, irrespective of the fact that some of the director’s less well-known films turn out to be turkeys. Agreed: The Woman Next Door from 1981, starring Gérard Depardieu and Fanny Ardant, is quite terrible. But deprived of travel, as we have been for so long, there in the darkness I hardly cared. The clothes, the houses, the restaurants: not since I was a moody teenager and obsessed with Françoise Sagan has la vie française seemed more bewitching. Each film makes me think again about the way movies date (or not). While some age painfully fast – the scene in which Ardant finds herself in her underwear at a garden party, her dress having been ripped off in one fell swoop, is straight out of Benny Hill – others come into their own only late in life. When The Bride Wore Black was released in 1968, for instance, the critics disliked it. But in 2022, it reads rather well, at least for any women in the audience. Every time the vengeful widow played by Jeanne Moreau (in a startling monochrome wardrobe by Pierre Cardin) sets about killing another of the men responsible for the shooting of her husband on her wedding day, she must first endure not only their utter conviction that, yes, of course this beautiful woman only wants to sleep with them, but also their inevitably pompous monologues. Truffaut gave us mansplaining avant la lettre. Piano was not my forte Parents, don’t give up on your recalcitrant children! They will come good in the end. My young self, who refused ever to practise the piano no matter how much I was nagged, would be amazed to learn of my latest project: an essay I’ve written for BBC Radio 3 about JS Bach (part of a series celebrating the 300th birthday of The Well-Tempered Clavier, it will be broadcast this week). These days, I don’t even own a piano. But my love for classical music grows exponentially with every year that passes, a blessing for which I should really give grateful thanks, not only to my long-suffering parents but also to the many teachers who had to put up with both my rotten arpeggios and my barefaced lies (“Yes, I have practised every night for an hour… No, I have no idea why this has had no effect whatsoever on my playing”). Sweet memories I’m enjoying Nine Quarters of Jerusalem, a new biography of the Old City by Matthew Teller (it’s published next month). The fact that it’s as much about the present as the past makes it vivid, even if it does come with standard tales of the utterly dysfunctional Church of the Holy Sepulchre, where a ladder has leant against the facade for 265 years and Ethiopian Christians have long since been exiled to the roof. But there is a catch. Every time I open it, all I want to do is eat. I long for halawa, a sweet I haven’t liked since childhood; I’ve never been more desperate for a warm slice of mutabbaq, the fragrant, sugary pastry that in Jerusalem is folded over melting Nabulsi cheese. Teller writes that the Via Dolorosa branch of Zalatimo’s, a Palestinian baker that has been making mutabbaq since the 19th century, closed its doors in 2019, and this has come as the most terrible news to me (I was last there in 2018). As someone once said, to visit Jerusalem without calling in at Zalatimo’s is not really to visit Jerusalem at all. • Rachel Cooke is an Observer columnistFrank Lampard did not return to the dugout for a relegation scrap but Everton are firmly in danger after falling to an insipid defeat at Southampton. Stuart Armstrong struck before the Southampton substitute Shane Long sealed victory less than two minutes after stepping off the bench, heading in with his first touch to register his first Premier League goal in almost two years. Jordan Pickford, who ensured Everton went in at half-time with the score blank, had a face like thunder. Southampton, meanwhile, can start thinking about making a play for the European places. At the final whistle, a smiling Ralph Hasenhüttl doffed his baseball cap towards a largely happy directors’ box. Lampard made no attempt to sugarcoat what was a wishy-washy and, to use his words, eye-opening performance that allowed Southampton to stroll to victory. Everton have not won away from home since August. For Lampard, whose side face Manchester City next, the task is to find answers and quick after three of the four teams beneath them gained ground to narrow the gap to the relegation zone to four points. “Our league position explains a lot,” Lampard said. “The table doesn’t lie to that effect and we’ve not been getting results away from home for a while. What we’ve seen in the away games is that when we’ve been in games – not flying, but in them – when we go behind there hasn’t been a reaction. We stopped trying to play. When the game turned we reverted to long balls, lacking belief in each other to getting around the press. A lot of things have to improve to get results away from home.” For Everton, an achingly poor display was typified by the manner of Southampton’s opener seven minutes after the interval. Oriol Romeu, who has made light of his supposed shelf life in the centre of Southampton’s midfield this season, stole possession from Everton’s half-time substitute André Gomes and found Ché Adams, who shuffled the ball on. Armstrong took one touch to compose himself and coolly picked his spot, curling it inside Pickford’s near post. Everton could not argue it had not been coming and they had Pickford to thank for preventing James Ward-Prowse and Tino Livramento, the former from a rasping free-kick, from scoring in the first half. For Romeu and Ward-Prowse, it was another authoritative midfield performance and their energy overawed Everton. Allan was booked for a crude challenge on the marauding Kyle Walker-Peters, who was again excellent at left-back, and was fortunate to avoid a second yellow card moments later. Donny van de Beek was overrun and among those left chasing shadows. Gomes, Allan’s replacement, wilted, while another substitute, Dele Alli, offered nothing after being introduced late on. Lampard in effect said his players could not handle things when the going got tough. “It is a blind understanding,” Hasenhüttl said of a midfield pairing that offered all the might and discipline Everton did not. Lampard spent much of the first half wandering around the Everton technical area, shielding his eyes from the low sun and waves of Southampton attacks. Armando Broja was superb in attack, dragging a shot narrowly wide with nine minutes to play and also producing a first-half effort that was saved by Pickford after the Everton captain, Séamus Coleman, often exposed by Southampton’s quick thinking, did enough to deny the striker a clean shot. A couple of minutes later Broja put Jonjoe Kenny on all fours before winning a corner, from which Jan Bednarek headed against the crossbar. Mohamed Elyounoussi should have doubled Southampton’s lead before Long leapt above Coleman to head in Livramento’s hanging cross. Ward-Prowse’s free-kick was, typically, on the money and Elyounoussi easily slipped Coleman, who totally lost his man at the back post. But the Norway midfieder, perhaps distracted by Mohammed Salisu’s desperate attempt to reach the ball, headed against the bar. Southampton won this fixture last season too, when Everton were at the summit under Carlo Ancelotti. These days they have more pressing concerns. “There was never a magic wand,” Lampard said. “I think it’s very clear what’s in front [of us]. The position we are in is clear to see.”Germany extended their historic sliding dominance at the Beijing Games with a one-two finish in the women’s bobsleigh to finish ahead of the United States’ Elana Meyers Taylor, who took bronze to become the most decorated Black athlete in Winter Games history in what may be her final race. Again there was disappointment for Great Britain after Mica McNeil and Montell Douglas finished a lowly 17th on the day when the men’s curlers narrowly missed out on gold. Laura Nolte held off defending Olympic champion and countrywoman Mariama Jamanka to capture a record-extending eighth sliding gold for the German team, who have swept all four luge and both skeleton events in addition to the two-man and two-woman bobsleigh on the sparkling new course nestled in the tree-lined southern foot of Xiaohaituo Mountain. Nolte, who became the youngest ever female Olympic medallist in bobsleigh, paired with brakewoman Deborah Levi to clock a four-run combined time of 4min 03.96sec, a yawning 0.77sec faster than Jamanka and Alexandra Burghardt. “I’ve never had this feeling before,” the 23-year-old Nolte said. “It’s like we are drunk, but we’re not. We’re just drunk on happiness.” The 37-year-old Meyers Taylor, who won the silver in the Olympic debut of monobob earlier this week before hinting at possible retirement, came in 1.52sec off the pace alongside Olympic debutante Sylvia Hoffman to earn a fifth career medal and eclipse speed skater Shani Davis’s mark for most won by an athlete of colour. “There’s a lot of people that came before me,” Meyers Taylor said. “[2002 Olympic gold medalist] Vonetta Flowers is the reason I’m here, and Shani Davis and even [US speed skater] Erin Jackson. It’s just been such a long legacy of Black athletes at the Winter Olympics and hopefully it just continues.” She added: “We want everybody to come out regardless of the colour of your skin. “We want winter sports to be for everybody, regardless of race, regardless of socio-economic class. I think the more diversity we have, the stronger our sport can be. So hopefully this is just the start of more and more people coming out and trying winter sports.” Meyers Taylor will take a far more leisurely trip on Sunday night when she carries the US flag into the Bird’s Nest for the closing ceremony, an honour she was forced to cede after testing positive for Covid-19 on arrival at Beijing, which kept her apart from her two-year-old son longer than ever before. Three-time Olympic champion Kaillie Humphries, who captured two-woman golds with Canada in 2010 and 2014 before joining the US team in 2019, dropped from fifth at the halfway stage to seventh overall after winning a third career gold in Monday’s monobob – the lone sliding event of nine in Yanqing that hasn’t gone to the Germans. “It hurts, I won’t lie,” said Humphries, who was denied in her bid to join Germany’s Kevin Kuske and Andre Lange as the only bobsleighers to win four Olympic golds but confirmed her intent to come back for the Milan Cortina Games in 2026, when she will be 40. “I gave every ounce of everything I had to the last two days and it wasn’t there. “I’m proud of the work that we put in and what we put into it. It sucks and it’s infuriating to know that it wasn’t good enough, but at the end of the day, that’s racing.” Team GB’s Brad Hall piloted his four-man Great Britain team to within 0.31sec of a rare Olympic medal, bouncing back nicely after crashing dramatically on the penultimate run of the two-man competition on Tuesday. Hall, Greg Cackett, Nick Gleeson and Taylor Lawrence were in sixth place at the halfway stage, 0.69sec behind the first of two German teams atop the leaderboard with Canada’s Justin Kripps sitting third. “Couple of mistakes on the first run,” Hall said. “It wasn’t a bad performance. Sitting in sixth place, I’m quite content with that.” The 31-year-old from Cardiff, who has reached three podiums in the discipline on the World Cup circuit this season, has marshalled a largely self-funded campaign to Beijing after UK Sport controversially defunded Team GB’s bobsleighers three years ago despite the country’s best ever women’s bobsleigh result in Pyeongchang. Hall’s four-man team enter Sunday’s final runs in the hunt for Britain’s second four-man medal in 58 years – and first since John Jackson was awarded a retrospective bronze in 2014. “It’s a pretty difficult thing for us to do, work out what’s best,” Hall said. “We’re just one team. When you’re looking at competing against the Germans, there’s three of them. “They’ve got three times the amount of runs to test everything, find the best way down the track and what best equipment works as well. We’re against it, we’ve got a lot less resources to pull upon, but we’ve just gone with what we know and [we’ll] see where it turns out.”Mikel Arteta might not always think so, but everything seems to be going Arsenal’s way. This was another exceptional day for their top-four prospects and, while they had enjoyed the luxury of watching rivals stumble in recent weeks, here they asserted those credentials all by themselves. Brentford were flattered by Christian Nørgaard’s added-time goal and the tone could hardly have been more different from the opening weekend of the season, when Arsenal were pummelled by the same opponents and appeared a hopeless case. On this occasion it was one-way traffic in the direction of Brentford’s penalty area. Arsenal would have enjoyed seeing West Ham drop points against Newcastle at lunchtime and were patently hungry to capitalise, barely letting up from the first whistle. A completely dominant first half did not yield enough in terms of clear chances, and much less where goals were concerned, but they re-emerged with the same tempo and deserved their reward. It arrived three minutes after half-time through a sublime finish from Emile Smith Rowe. Arsenal’s lack of depth is little secret, Arteta emphasising afterwards that their Champions League hopes may hinge on staying injury-free, but their left flank is the one obvious exception. The suspension of Gabriel Martinelli, whose red card at Wolves caused a disproportionate amount of angst given the significance of the win in which it arrived, meant a start for the England international and he oozed menace from the beginning. He took Alexandre Lacazette’s sprayed pass and, from midway inside Brentford’s half, made for the box. Sergi Canós and Kristoffer Ajer both looked fearful of conceding a penalty and Smith Rowe wriggled between them, snaking a precise curling effort into the far corner via David Raya’s fingertips. It was Smith Rowe’s 10th goal of the season in all competitions and he has become a matchwinner when afforded the chance. Exactly the same can be said of Bukayo Saka, who wrapped things up with a vaguely similar effort. Brentford had begun to threaten in something approaching a concerted fashion but, straight after Yoane Wissa had squandered a promising position, Arsenal broke. Sections of the crowd felt Thomas Partey had delayed his pass left to Saka, who had run 70 yards to receive it, for too long; in fact his decision-making was perfect, Saka taking it in his stride before raking a sweet drive inside the same upright. Saka and Smith Rowe are the subjects of a terrace anthem to the tune of Status Quo’s “Rockin’ All Over The World”, which received a hearty airing after full-time. “The supporters love that song and everybody loves that song because they are players that have been raised in our system,” Arteta said. “I am really happy that we have players that take the responsibility and manage to win games for us. It is really impressive at that age.” Equally eye-catching is the fact that Arsenal, callow though they might appear, operate with such control. Nørgaard’s scrambled effort with the last action, awarded by VAR, did not reflect their level of control and the extent to which they put the squeeze on Brentford. To that point, it should be said that Thomas Frank’s players held out manfully for long periods. The otherwise outstanding Martin Ødegaard should have settled the game before Saka but, beyond that, Arsenal were limited to half-chances even if there was always the sense Brentford were on the stretch. This Arsenal side plays so intensely that, in most opponents, something eventually has to give. “We defended fantastically in the first half,” said Frank, although the fact Brentford, without the injured Ivan Toney, could barely exit their own territory by the interval boded ill. A stream of corners, blocked shots, handball appeals and teasing crosses was not sustainable to resist for 90 minutes. Frank felt Brentford were better in possession during the second half but they did little with it and next Saturday’s meeting with Newcastle, which could see a debut for Christian Eriksen, now assumes huge proportions.As do most of Arsenal’s assignments from here. A point off Manchester United with two games in hand, fourth place may be theirs to lose. “We are a little bit closer today because we won our game,” Arteta said before adding a cautious kicker. “We cannot look too far. Things change very quickly.”Chelsea have developed a useful habit of leaving things until the last minute and it needed a late volley from Hakim Ziyech to snatch a victory that was scarcely deserved. But having arrived here shorn of wingbacks and being forced into a tactical reshuffle a few days after being crowned world champions, Thomas Tuchel was certainly not complaining. “It’s not been a normal week – we are just trying to survive at the moment,” said Chelsea’s manager. “There were a lot of reasons why I didn’t expect us to be on top form today but we managed to take something positive. We look a bit drained and everyone is looking for that spark at the moment.” Four weeks had passed since Chelsea’s victory over Tottenham in their last Premier League match and they have required extra-time to progress past Plymouth and Palmeiras in the intervening period. The latter in Abu Dhabi last week meant their kits proudly sported a new badge signifying their status as World Club champions – an honour that has clearly been welcomed at Stamford Bridge. In a rare departure for their manager since his arrival last January, they started with a four-man defence with Andreas Christensen deployed at right-back, while there were recalls for Christian Pulisic and Ziyech in attack. Patrick Vieira made four changes from Palace’s last match –a drab 0-0 draw at Brentford – but surprisingly chose Wilfried Zaha to lead his forward line and left three centre-forwards on the bench. It was even more surprising to see Jean-Philippe Mateta introduced after Palace had conceded having been pressing hard for what would have been their first Premier League win of 2022 for large parts of the second half. “It was frustrating to concede like that at the end because we defended well for most of the match,” Vieira said. “We lost some concentration and that has cost us a point that we deserved.” With loanee Conor Gallagher ineligible to face his parent club, it was up to Zaha and Michael Olise to inspire the hosts on a windswept afternoon. That combination almost paid dividends early on after an excellent ball from Jeffrey Schlupp found the Ivory Coast forward in aces of space but Olise’s shot dribbled just past the far post. Having made a slow start as they seemed to adjust to the unfamiliar formation, it was Antonio Rüdiger who finally sparked Chelsea into life when his piledriver from 35 yards was tipped over by Vicente Guaita. The Spaniard then had to be at his best to deny N’golo Kanté following a precise through ball from Malang Sarr. Palace looked dangerous on the few occasions when they managed to beat Chelsea’s press and were twice just inches away from connecting to pinpoint crosses from the left foot of Olise, who was on Chelsea’s books until the age of 14. A slaloming run from the 20-year-old that carved open the visitors’ defence just before half-time should have created the opening goal, only for Zaha to curl his effort agonisingly wide of the far post. Vieira was forced into a substitution at the break as the injured Guaita made way for Jack Butland having complained about a knee problem. Palace continued to look the more threatening side as they piled the pressure on Chelsea’s increasingly makeshift-looking defence. Ziyech looked like he fancied his chances of breaking the deadlock when Kai Havertz was brought down on the edge of the box by a combination of Schlupp and Nathaniel Clyne. But the Moroccan’s free-kick straight into the wall was as weak an effort as you will ever see. Romelu Lukaku was supposed to provide Chelsea with that cutting edge and after scoring against Palmeiras, it seemed like he had delivered again 15 minutes from time. Butland could only push the Belgian’s powerful shot into the path of Ziyech and he fired into the empty net, only for the goal to be disallowed because Lukaku had strayed offside in the buildup. Palace would not be so fortunate the next time, however, with Ziyech slamming home substitute Marcos Alonso’s cross before Zaha wasted a late chance to equalise.The family of a British man killed by a shark in Australia have paid tribute to “a wonderful human being” who had a “rare gift” of connecting with people. Simon Nellist, 35, died in the great white shark attack on Wednesday off Little Bay, east Sydney – the first fatal attack in Sydney for 60 years. Nellist, who was a diving instructor, had grown up in the west Cornwall village of Ludgvan near Penzance, before emigrating to Australia where he had set up home with his fiancee, Jessie Ho, whom he was about to marry. The former RAF engineer, who survived two tours of Afghanistan, was a “proud Cornishman” and a “very talented photographer” the family said, adding they would “miss him terribly”. “Simon was a gentle, kind and wonderful human being. He was a cherished fiance, son, brother, uncle and friend,” they said. “Simon was funny, compassionate and always had time for people. He had a rare gift of instantly being able to connect with others, gaining their trust and respect. Simon had a great passion for nature and the sea, as well as being a very talented photographer.” Nellist would swim regularly at the beach, the BBC reported, and had been training for a charity swim when he was attacked. State government shark experts who analysed footage of the incident, which had been recorded by a member of the public, said they believed the predator to be a great white shark that was “at least three metres” long. Most city beaches were initially shut after the incident and swimmers had been banned from the water. However, swimmers were once again taking to the water at Little Bay on Saturday. According to the Sydney Morning Herald, the shark has not been captured. Nellist’s friend Della Ross told the Australian broadcaster 7News: “Everything that is connected to Simon, to me, is connected to the ocean. The news hit us like a truck because he is really one of the people that makes this earth better.” Kris Linto, who witnessed the attack, told Australian network Nine News: “[The person] was swimming and a shark came and attacked [him] vertically. We heard a yell and turned around, it looked like a car had landed in the water, a big splash then the shark.” Reports said authorities had retrieved body parts from the water. Deadly shark attacks are rare in Sydney as it has various deterrents, including nets, in the waters. The last fatal shark attack in Sydney is believed to have been in 1963. Following Wednesday’s incident, a UK spokesperson for the Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office (FCDO) said consular staff were in touch with New South Wales police. “We are supporting the family of a British man and our thoughts are with them at this difficult time,” the FCDO spokesperson added.Finally, Watford threw a punch and it landed. Little wonder their travelling supporters celebrated wildly when Emmanuel Dennis nodded Ismaïla Sarr’s late cross past Emi Martínez; 440 minutes had passed since they last felt euphoria. On an afternoon where one goal always felt like being enough, it earned a precious three points. Roy Hodgson’s side are still embroiled in a relegation scrap but there were flickers of hope for the first time in a while. The worry in recent weeks had not been Watford jabs missing, but a complete inability to throw them. Instead, they had taken blows on what is admittedly a much strong chin of late, praying to avoid a knockout. Dennis himself has been guilty, but his ninth goal of the campaign ensured it would not be a dozen league games without a win. Crazily Watford’s last six top flight away victories have come under the same number of managers. “I was pleased with our composure on the ball,” said Hodgson. “We showed a lot more confidence to get on the ball, to pass the ball, to look to create chances. The balance between attack and defence was better.” Aston Villa fans will be puzzled by what happened to the razor-sharp attacking instincts that enabled them to put three past Leeds 10 days before. Ben Foster will scarcely earn a more comfortable Premier League clean sheet. “We need to wake up and wake up fast,” said Steven Gerrard. “Our recent performances are way short of what is needed.” After last week’s tepid display at Newcastle, Gerrard made clear he expected a rapid start. What he got was zippy and adventurous but missing quality. He had hinted at a much-changed line-up but in the end there was just one: Danny Ings for Ollie Watkins. Ings had a shot blocked by Craig Cathcart inside the opening minute before winning a corner under pressure from Samir. Replays brought audible dissatisfaction from the majority of Villa Park but VAR did not overturn the decision. Gerrard refused to clutch at straws. Ings hit the base of a post after Emi Buendía’s defence-splitting nudge, although it transpired he had mistimed his run. Otherwise Villa were restricted to strikes from distance, Lucas Digne coming closest with a free-kick that bent round the wall but did not come back far enough to trouble Foster. The fizz by then was already flat. “Nineteen shots at goal today but only one on target; for me that’s a quality issue” said Gerrard. “People have got to stand up and be counted.” Watford arrived late and started slowly save for Cathcart who several times nipped early danger in the bud. Not one for headlines or fanfare, the centre-back will never be under-appreciated by Hornets’ fans. They did, though, have their crown jewel, Sarr fit and available to start for the first time since November. Hodgson had literally clipped his team’s wings with a narrow midfield four in his opening three games, but with Sarr back they reverted to a 4-3-3 formation and with it came width and the ability to counter. Sarr and Dennis had tormented Aston Villa in the reverse fixture in August, and were the likeliest sources again for Watford. They combined on the break before the interval, the former finding the latter in acres of space; Martínez palmed the strike away. As time passed, visiting belief grew. After another break Moussa Sissoko blazed into the side netting. An unmarked Dennis was not amused but it would not be long before he was smiling again.Boris Johnson has appointed six Tory donors to help run the country’s leading cultural institutions since entering Downing Street after an appeal to party backers to help “rebalance the representation” on public bodies. The donors, who have between them contributed more than £3m to party coffers, were appointed by the prime minister to the boards of the National Gallery, the National Portrait Gallery, the Tate and the British Museum. One of the latest appointments to be announced is Howard Shore as a trustee of the Tate. The investment banker has contributed £1.75m to the party as an individual and through his firm Shore Capital. Former Tory culture secretary Lord Vaizey was also appointed a trustee at the same time. The government says such appointments are made after an open selection process in accordance with the Cabinet Office’s governance code on public appointments, but faces scrutiny over roles for individuals with ties to the party. Under the current system, the names of all candidates must be submitted to ministers, who then make the final appointment. Peter Riddell, the former commissioner for public appointments, has warned of a “more intensive effort” to appoint political figures to public institutions. It has emerged that Tory officials have been keen for donors to apply for public roles, circulating openings on public bodies to its donors. An email from party headquarters to donors in August 2019, the month after Johnson became PM, said: “We thought you may be interested in the latest list of public appointments. It is important Conservatives rebalance the representation at the head of these important public bodies.” The Tory donors appointed by Johnson to leading cultural institutions include John Booth, who was made a trustee of the National Gallery in August last year. Booth has donated more than £200,000 to the Tory party. In September businessman David Ross was reappointed as chair of the National Portrait Gallery. Ross helped arrange accommodation for a holiday in Mustique for Johnsonin December 2019 and has given more than £1m to the party. Ross sits on the gallery’s board with Tory MP Chris Grayling, whom Johnson appointed the previous year. Other Tory donors appointed by Johnson to cultural institutions are: Lord Marland, a Tory peer who has donated more than £300,000 to the party, appointed as trustee of the British Museum; James Lambert, a businessman whose firm has donated more than £80,000 to the party, appointed as trustee of the National Gallery; and Dounia Nadar, a philanthropist who has donated more than £66,000 to the party. All three were appointed in December. The government says the selection process for public bodies is open and rigorous, but Tory officials have been keen to support its financial backers seeking public roles. The Observer revealed this month how officials were keen to help one of its biggest donors Mohamed Amersi in his ultimately unsuccessful bid to become chair of the National Lottery Community Fund. One email stated: “I know you work with the public appointments team. Can we see that he is at least considered for the role.” Amersi has told the Observer he was shortlisted on his merits for the job and was not aware of any help from the Conservative party. The committee on standards in public life has called for stronger powers for the commissioner for public appointments to ensure the right balance between ministerial patronage and appointments on merit. There are concerns about appointments which are unregulated or don’t go through a rigorous and transparent selection process. The high court ruled last week that the government acted unlawfully and breached equality rules in appointing Baroness Dido Harding as interim chair of the National Institute for Health Protection in August 2020 during the pandemic. The role of non-executive directors in government departments is unregulated and is overseen by the lead non-executive director Lord Nash, a Tory peer who, with his wife, has contributed more than £500,000 to the Conservative party. Tory donors who are non-executive directors include Dominic Johnson, a Tory donor and chief executive of Somerset Capital Management, a firm co-founded by the Brexit minister Jacob Rees-Mogg, at the Department for International Trade; Ben Goldsmith, brother of Lord Goldsmith, the international environment minister, at the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs; and Ranjit Baxi, a businessman in the recycling industry, at the Department for Transport. Chris Bryant, the Labour MP and chair of the parliamentary committee on standards, said sweeping reforms were required across several areas of public life to restore public confidence, including appointments. He said: “We need root and branch reform of the public appointments system and also the revolving door between government and industry, the governance of all party parliamentary groups and lobbying.” A government spokesperson said: “The government encourages applications to public appointments from talented individuals from a wide range of backgrounds across the UK. All public appointments are made objectively based on merit. “The governance code is clear that ‘political activity should not affect any judgment of merit nor be a bar to appointment’ and must be declared.”A leading Commonwealth charity which has the Queen as its patron is promoting the online coaching business that employs Prince Harry as its chief impact officer. The coaching, by BetterUp, is described as “truly phenomenal” in testimony by one user on the website of the Queen’s Commonwealth Trust (QCT). Prince Harry was previously president of the trust. While Harry stepped back from royal duties in February last year, the partnership reveals how his royal connections are still proving helpful as he forges a new career in the US. One branding expert said the endorsement was valuable publicity for the startup, which is now valued at $4.7bn (£3.5bn) and is described as “the largest mental health and coaching company in the world”. Officials from the charity said last week that the charitable partnership was one of several agreed with organisations with the goal of providing support to young social entrepreneurs across the Commonwealth. About 1,000 young leaders are said to have been offered free coaching under the arrangement and the charity says on its website it will be “rolling out” the collaboration more widely this year. David Haigh, chief executive of the London consultancy Brand Finance, said: “Any company which is supported by the Queen’s Commonwealth Trust is going to gain credibility, and this will be of economic value.” He said a careful due diligence process would have been required to ensure the charitable partnership with an American startup was appropriate. The trust’s partnership with the firm, under which young leaders are given free access to the coaching platform, is prominently displayed on the charity’s website. A testimonial from one of the young leaders who has benefited from the coaching says: “The 3 staff members who have signed up have all been completely blown away by how much we are learning and growing.” BetterUp said in a blogpost on its website last year that it was working with the Queen’s Commonwealth Trust, but the exact terms of the arrangement, the duration of the partnership and the number of people who will benefit have not been disclosed. The initiative is part of a “Pledge 1%” movement, under which the firm donates 1% of its coaching to communities. Chris Kelly, chief executive of the QCT, says in a press release on the charity’s website: “Working with BetterUp will make a massive difference for us. The collaboration with BetterUp means [the charity] can add this to the package of support we offer our young leaders.” The QCT was launched on 21 April 2018, funded by money from the now defunct Queen’s Trust and Diamond Jubilee Trust. An inaugural statement read: “Our mission is simple. We champion, fund and connect young leaders who are working hard to change the world.” Harry was appointed president, and Meghan, the Duchess of Sussex, became vice-president the following year. The couple resigned from these positions in February 2021 when it was confirmed by Buckingham Palace they would no longer be working members of the royal family. Charity accounts show QCT raised £796,106 in the financial year ending March 2021, while paying staff costs of £787,314, including nearly £420,000 to its five most senior executives. It has faced challenges in raising funds during the pandemic and hopes to increase its number of financial supporters. The charity has its headquarters in London, and the model Naomi Campbell joined last year as a global ambassador. Harry joined BetterUp in March last year. The San Francisco-based company was founded in 2013 and is a mobile-based platform offering coaching to employees. The cost of individual subscriptions is not advertised on the website, but reportedly range from $249 to $499 a month. The charity said: “QCT is fortunate to benefit from multiple charitable corporate partnerships, all of which, through gifts in kind, enable the charity to enhance the support it offers young social entrepreneurs across the Commonwealth. “One of the charitable partnerships QCT is grateful to have is with BetterUp, a collaboration which came about through BetterUp’s chief impact officer, Prince Harry, the Duke of Sussex, the former president of QCT, who remains a friend of the charity. All gifts in kind are published in the charity’s annual report and accounts.” BetterUp said: “Our collaboration with QCT includes offering 1,000 young leaders free access to BetterUp’s full coaching platform, so that they are better prepared for the pressures of becoming an entrepreneur, and so that their creative ideas can become reality.”Harlequins returned to winning ways with a bonus-point victory in a match most significant for a first appearance for the visiting flanker Jack Willis in 53 weeks. Willis sustained the second horrendous knee injury of his career just over the road when playing for England against Italy last February, and has spoken candidly about his struggles along the path to recovery. Here he played the last 35 minutes from the bench and above all else it warmed the heart to see him back in the thick of it. By the time he had got his bearings, Harlequins – bolstered by the surprise availability of Joe Marler – had raced into a 24-3 lead with tries from Oscar Beard, Huw Jones, Cadan Murley and André Esterhuizen. Louis Lynagh added another for Harlequins to leave Wasps, who had won their previous four Premiership matches, reeling. While there were one or two signs of rust from the 25-year-old Willis, it was no coincidence Wasps fought back to within five points after his introduction. “He added a bit to us,” said Wasps’ coach, Lee Blackett. “When he came on we started going forward and on the back of that the breakdown got easier. Today was big for him. I’m just happy for Jack, it has been a long time, it has been tough for him.” Marler, meanwhile, has played a combined 31 minutes in England’s two Six Nations matches, and though Eddie Jones picked a smaller squad for last week’s training camp, the loosehead prop’s omission still caught the eye. He will almost certainly return to a wider squad on Sunday but there can be little doubt that Harlequins benefited from his experience, set-piece nous and sense of theatre. “Even before [Joe] joined England for the Six Nations he said if there are any fallow weeks and I’m not getting much game time then I’d love to come and play,” said the Harlequins coach, Tabai Matson. “Clearly he’s had that conversation with Eddie Jones, which is fantastic for us. On the back of that surely he’ll be playing [next Saturday] against Wales. At his best he’s one of the best players in the competition.” Given the blustery conditions, a repeat of the 94-point thriller edged by Harlequins in the corresponding fixture last season was always unlikely. But the hosts did not begin like a side who had lost their past three matches. Wasps were not helped by losing Tom Cruse to injury after 30 seconds but Harlequins were into gear from the word go. They struck with a trademark opening try from Beard after three minutes, Danny Care lighting the touch paper with a quick tapped penalty. Marler was also making his presence felt, winning a turnover at the breakdown to earn Harlequins some welcome respite and a scrum penalty, much to the delight of the home supporters. By that stage Harlequins had stretched their advantage to nine points – Jones taking a short pass from Esterhuizen and piercing the defence. It put the home side in command at the interval, with Wasps having a solitary Jacob Umaga penalty to show for their efforts. Harlequins struck with two tries in three minutes early in the second half, Murley finishing the first after a series of offloads before Esterhuizen added the second with a powerful finish from close range– Willis coming on in between those scores. His brother Tom finally got Wasps going in the second half in the left corner before a flying finish from the replacement Lynagh gave Harlequins a lead they surely could not let slip. Wasps did rally but tries from Sam Spink and Jeff Toomaga-Allen were enough only for a losing bonus-point.The British government is reportedly considering ditching its pledge to ban fur and foie gras imports after opposition from within the cabinet. The new rules, which were due to be part of the animals abroad bill, were expected to be introduced soon. But, according to the BBC, the government is likely to drop the plans due to objections from several cabinet ministers. The government said that a final decision was yet to be made, but it was “united in its commitment to upholding its world-leading standards in animal welfare”. A spokesperson added: “Our action plan for animal welfare sets out the government’s vision to introduce a range of world-leading reforms to improve the welfare and conservation of animals at home and abroad.” But the BBC said the bans on fur and foie gras are expected to be dropped after numerous cabinet ministers, including the Brexit opportunities minister Jacob Rees-Mogg, raised their concerns. According to the broadcaster, Rees-Mogg believes the government should not impose restrictions on customers and argued that the proposed ban would not benefit animal welfare in the UK. It also reported that ministers including the Northern Ireland secretary, Brandon Lewis, and defence secretary, Ben Wallace, had also shared their concerns about the ban. British farmers are banned from making foie gras, created by force-feeding ducks or geese, and fur farming has been illegal in the UK since 2000. The new draft legislation intended to improve animal welfare includes a crackdown on hunting animals for trophies and holidays that lead to animal neglect. But, following debate over how some aspects would be enforced, the bill has been delayed. In recent weeks, ministers have confirmed that they plan to ban importing hunting trophies from under-threat species such as elephants, lions and rhinoceroses. The environment minister, Zac Goldsmith, said last year that the government would bring in the ban on imports at “the earliest possible slot”. But animal rights campaigners warned that removing the ban from the bill would lead to anguish. “A very large number of people will be disappointed if they don’t,” Claire Bass, the executive director of the Humane Society International UK, told the BBC, adding: “People won’t stand for that.” Abigail Penny, the executive director at Animal Equality UK, called for an end to the importation of “immensely cruel” foie gras.Gloria Mertoli’s shift is over when the first light of dawn shines on the goalposts of a rugby pitch in the Librino district of Catania, a stronghold of the Cosa Nostra, the feared Sicilian mafia. Since mobsters torched the clubhouse and team bus, she and other players on the women’s rugby team, Briganti Librino RUFC, have taken turns to stay after evening practice and guard the area overnight. Since the club started working to take children – easy targets for mafia recruitment – off the streets of Librino, the clans have tried to put it out of business. “Librino is a complex neighbourhood,” Piero Mancuso, one of the founders of the Briganti, told the Observer. “We knew it wouldn’t be easy to work here. These criminal attacks risked destroying everything we had achieved in recent years. But if I look at what we have done so far, I can say that these attacks have made us stronger.” The story of the small Briganti team from Catania has made news around the world and received expressions of solidarity from England’s national rugby coach, Eddie Jones, as well as from former England captain Bill Beaumont. Even World Rugby has expressed its support for the team. Last year, the amateur rugby team from Bolton, with a 150-year heritage, forged a partnership with the Sicilian team. “For the people of Librino, rugby offers an alternative to a potential life of crime on the streets,” said the Bolton chairman, Mark Brocklehurst, in a note last year. “If we can help Briganti by offering a glimmer of hope, then amazing things can happen. What better motivator for Bolton to get involved?” The Briganti, which runs several junior and senior teams, as well as women’s teams across multiple age groups, was established in Librino in 2006, with the goal of doing more than simply playing rugby. “We built a clubhouse with a small library, a café, and a kitchen,’’ says Mancuso. “We offered after-school activities for the least advantaged kids in the neighbourhood, and we started teaching them the noble sport of rugby, which is based on a respect for adversaries and rules.” Librino, with a population of 70,000, is not an average district. School dropout rates reach among the highest levels in Europe, and the mafia has used the area as a hub for drug dealing and stockpiling, which are controlled by the Cursoti Milanesi and Cappello clans of Cosa Nostra. Here, crime is seen as a path to financial success, as well as respect within the community. Like other depressed areas in southern Italy, few institutions exist to offer a credible alternative to children in these neighbourhoods. And the youth are a prime target for mafia recruitment. In 2017, a police investigation revealed the use of a six-year-old boy as a drug dealer. In such a context, educating kids in legality and respect for others is met with distrust by the mobsters. At midnight on 11 January 2018, a fire broke out in the Briganti clubhouse. Books, footballs, the cafe, computers, jerseys and trophies were all burnt beyond recognition. “At least 10 years of memories went up in smoke,’’ says Mancuso. “It was devastating.’’ The clubhouse was rebuilt within months, thanks to private donations, but thefts and attacks continued. Last April, someone broke down the club’s iron door and stole equipment. Weeks later, on 16 March 2021, the team’s bus was set on fire. “My whole life I’ve heard people talk about the mafia, but when you have it right in your face it’s a completely different story,” says Mertoli, 22, who is the captain of the women’s rugby team. “When they torched our bus, it was as if they had set my own house on fire. You find yourself in a difficult situation because you don’t know how to handle it. You don’t know if you should go to the police. You really have no idea how to react.” Since that day, Mertoli and her teammates take turns at night watching over the locker rooms, the new clubhouse and the library. “We’re there all night,” Mertoli says. “We order food and pass the time playing Risk or Monopoly. If we hear a noise, we grab our clubs.” Claudio Fava, president of Sicily’s anti-mafia commission and son of the late journalist Giuseppe, killed in Catania by the mafia in 1984, says that “anyone who offers a different life to kids who are born and raised in these mafia strongholds are ball breakers for the mafia bosses”. Fava compares the terrorist acts against the Briganti to the assassination of Father Pino Puglisi in Palermo, a priest shot dead by mafia hitmen in 1993 after he challenged the organisation’s control over one of the city’s toughest neighbourhoods. The parish priest had fought for the building of a football pitch to get young kids off the streets. “In these neighbourhoods, offering a way out for these kids, through school or sport, is an affront to the bosses,” Fava added. But life, like rugby, is a game of resilience, and anything can change the outcome of the match, up to the last minute. Thanks to international support and donations, the Briganti have managed to christen their new rugby pitch, which was officially inaugurated last Friday. “We have risen from the ashes of the fire that these people started,” says Mancuso. “And if they come back to bother us, we’ll be here,” adds Mertoli. “And like in a rugby match, we will not move back an inch. We will continue to defend ourselves, because this, this is our home.’’In this memorable battle of top against bottom, it was mostly unclear which Premiership team was which. Bath were eventually defeated in the Tigers’ second success in 12 league visits to the home of their great rivals. But after the threat of another rout for the hosts had hung in the air, Bath hassled and disrupted their opponents and came close to a famous win. Leicester’s power and precision was decisive, though, as they stretched their lead to 11 points at the top of the table. “That’s one that got away,” said the Bath head coach, Neal Hatley. “They’re a good side, they’re well drilled, they’re well coached. But that feels like we’ve missed a real opportunity.” Leicester’s first visit to their opponents’ 22 demonstrated why they are top: they sliced through thanks to a fine floating pass from Freddie Burns to Dan Kelly. After Nemani Nadolo’s heavy-duty carry, the No 8 Jasper Wiese forced his way over and Burns converted. Bath were struggling to contain Leicester’s carriers but when the wind held up a Leicester kick, a beautiful grubber by Ben Spencer sent Will Muir over. A classy piece of work by Kelly soon had the Tigers breezing through again: Guy Porter was released and offloaded to Richard Wigglesworth, who strolled under the posts. The ease of the score did not bode well for the home side and when Muir was shown a yellow card for taking out Bryce Hegarty, things looked to be heading south even faster. Hegarty, however, was penalised on the Leicester 22 and Orlando Bailey converted the penalty. Some excellent work at the breakdown from Max Ojomoh brought another penalty. Bath twice kicked for the corner and were rewarded when a grubber by Jonathan Joseph was smartly finished by Ojomoh. Bath believed. It got better when Josh McNally and Bailey combined to put Josh Bayliss into space on the left. The back-rower had only just come on, but showed a clean pair of heels to Burns to speed over. Bailey converted to edge Bath in front. The hosts were competing, and then some, but Leicester slowly started to turn the screw after the break, camping in the home 22 and winning a couple of scrum penalties. A decoy run by Nadolo allowed Burns to score against his former club. He converted his own score to restore Leicester’s lead. Muir was soon scorching down the left and bringing the home crowd to their feet yet again, but after Leicester scrambled in defence, Hegarty’s penalty stretched Leicester’s lead to four points. Bath came close to shoving over with 15 minutes left, but a penalty for the Tigers shifted the momentum away from them again at a crucial moment. Danny Cipriani was introduced by Hatley and the former England wing Chris Ashton joined the fray for Leicester. As the final minutes ticked down and with the considerable wind behind them, the Tigers lodged themselves near the opposition line, pinning Bath back and extinguishing any hopes of a dramatic finale. “It was a tough game, a high-pressure game and one with pretty fine margins,” said the Leicester head coach, Steve Borthwick. “Freddie Burns has been absolutely amazing since he rejoined us and he was terrific again.”Hundreds of mourners gathered at a church in North Carolina on Friday night to celebrate the life of Cheslie Kryst, an attorney, former Miss USA and justice advocate who died last month, aged 30. “Cheslie … sowed many seeds through her work, her philanthropy, her advocacy, and most importantly, her genuine care for others,” said Kryst’s mother, April Simpkins, as reported by the Charlotte Observer. “I know those seeds will continue to bear fruit for many years.” The newspaper said “thousands” attended the memorial online. Kryst killed herself on 30 January in New York City. In addition to her pageant participation, Kryst created White Collar Glam and was a correspondent for the entertainment news show Extra. In the legal world, she advocated for criminal justice and social justice reform, fighting for the wrongly incarcerated. Edward Watson, whom Kryst worked to free several years ago, said at the memorial: “In life we encounter ordinary people, but there are rare cases when we meet extraordinary people. “I needed help. The Lord sent the help that I needed.” Watson spent 25 years behind bars on weapons and crack trafficking charges. Kryst worked with her stepfather, David Simpkins, and the attorney MiAngel Cody to shorten his sentence. “Cheslie preached the sermon just in how she showed up in the world, who she was there for and what she called us to do,” Cody said at the memorial. “I always found her to be [a] curriculum for how to be an attorney, how to be an advocate and how to be a human being.” Kryst was also an ambassador for Dress for Success, a non-profit that aims to “empower women to achieve economic independence by providing a network of support, professional attire and the development tools to help women thrive in work and in life”. Her work for the Charlotte-area chapter was praised at her memorial. “Be like Cheslie, honor Cheslie and share your gifts,” said Kelly Barr O’Conner, executive director of Dress for Success Charlotte. “Sweet Cheslie, rest in peace and may perpetual light shine upon you. You have shared your light with all of us and we’ll take it from here.” In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is at 800-273-8255 and online chat is also available. You can also text HOME to 741741 to connect with a crisis text line counselor. In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.orgIran can make a large-scale prisoner swap immediately and is willing to hold direct talks with the US if it makes a major goodwill gesture such as releasing $8bn (£5.9bn) worth of Iranian assets locked abroad, Iran’s top diplomat has said. Iran’s foreign minister, Hossein Amir-Abdollahian, also said the US and Iran had “never been so close to reaching a deal as we are today”, referring to an agreement to revive the 2015 nuclear deal from which the US had walked out on in 2018. Iran and European powers have been staging talks on reviving the deal since February, but all sides now agree a conclusion has to be reached. The minister speaking at the Munich Security Conference on Saturday said Iran still needed to see flexibility by the US in providing political, legal and economic guarantees that the US will honour the nuclear deal. Asked about the possibility of prisoner swaps as part of the deal, he said “it is a completely humanitarian issue. There was a kind of agreement that was formed last year that all the prisoners at once will be exchanged”. He said the Americans are interested in linking the prisoners to the Vienna talks, but he said “from Iran’s point of view there is no relationship between the prisoners and the Vienna talks. Away from it, we can do it immediately.” With both sides normally remaining tight-lipped about the final stages of the negotiations, the minister’s remarks lift the lid on some of the remaining stumbling blocks. It also confirms the Americans are trying to include guarantees about the release of dual national political prisoners in the deal. He said the most important guarantee about the future status of any non-proliferation agreement was economic, and Iran had proposed that no sanctions could be applied legally to any deal struck between an Iranian company and a foreign company so protecting that deal from the threat of sanctions being slapped on them if the US pulled out of the deal again. He revealed the US chief Iran negotiator Rob Malley in a non-paper had suggested statements made by the US president, Joe Biden, at the G7 Summit in Cornwall in June that his administration would abide by the agreement were politically sufficient. But Iran’s envoy said this proposal was not enough due to the high wall of mistrust between the countries caused by the US ruining the previous deal by walking out. He proposed the parliaments of the countries signing the deal “could confirm some kind of support for the talks’ outcome”, suggesting this could be “at any reasonable or acceptable level”. He said the most important guarantee was economic, pointing out that Malley had told Iran via intermediaries that he cannot guarantee that the next administration will remain loyal to the commitment Biden had made. He claimed this stance conflicted with international law that requires governments to abide by the international agreements made by their previous government”. He also confirmed the US repeatedly through intermediaries had been seeking to persuade Iran to hold direct talks with the US. He said the US could present a big goodwill initiative to lift sanctions or release $10bn Iranian assets frozen in foreign banks. “Saying we have goodwill in words is not enough for direct talks. On the ground they have to show it in practice.”Dymtro Hurin, a member of Ukraine’s parliament, was a pacifist until Friday, when he signed up for weapons training. “I decided the moment is now,” he said over a coffee at a chic central Kyiv cafe, where tables were still crowded with shoppers taking a break and young workers on laptops. “I need to know how to shoot. It’s a useful skill.” Ukraine’s capital is poised between normality and horror after a warning from US president Joe Biden that it could be directly targeted during a “catastrophic” Russian invasion. Hurin is one of millions of people trying to decide what they should do if war comes to their doorstep. Some have headed west, towards the border with Poland, and a few have left the country. But most are staying in their homes, through choice or compulsion, bracing for war, and weighing up whether to fight. More than a third of adult Ukrainians say they would like to join an armed resistance, if Russian troops cross into their country, one recent poll found. At Veteran Brownie cafe in Kyiv this weekend, owner Roman Nabozhniak is offering free coffee to anyone signed up with a new territorial army of volunteers. “Come after training, warm up, recharge, smile,” he wrote on Instagram, below a picture of a cappuccino and a paratrooper patch. The government says thousands of volunteers have been recruited since the start of the year. He wasn’t in the cafe himself because he’s getting ready to be called up again, six years after laying down arms. “My responsibility is to prepare for every scenario, then wait for something to happen,” he said over a salted caramel bake and coffee that wouldn’t be out of place in Hackney or Brooklyn. “I told my staff your safety is your priority. If serious fighting starts, take care of yourself, not the business. “I couldn’t imagine myself discussing such topics five or six years ago and being so calm, because it would have seemed like something not from this reality. Now we have to expect anything.” Ukraine’s east has lived with the daily toll of war for eight years, after Russian-backed separatists carved out territories along the border with Russia in 2014, and Moscow’s troops seized control of Crimea. Violence has continued in sporadic bursts there ever since, albeit across a frontline largely frozen since 2016. But hundreds of miles away in Kyiv, businesses and bars, shops and factories were emerging, making it the heart of a young democracy’s fight to escape the shadow of its powerful neighbour. “Russia’s reason to invade us is not about language, or economy or protecting Russian speakers. It’s because they know a free, democratic and economically successful Ukraine is a dangerous model for the Russian people. It shows them there are other possibilities,” said Hurin. “The irony is that (President Vladimir) Putin lost Ukraine for Russia. Ten years ago, there was a big debate about what kind of country we should be, close to Russia or to the west. Since 2014, support for joining Nato has climbed from 18% to over 60% now.” On Friday US President Joe Biden said he believed Russia had decided to launch a “catastrophic” war, though he also added that last-minute diplomacy might still offer some hope. Tensions had been rising since Moscow began massing tens of thousands of troops along Ukraine’s borders last year. The west responded with increasingly urgent warnings that Putin was mulling an invasion, and started shipping weapons to Ukraine, and sending troops to nearby countries including Poland. Western leaders had highlighted 16 February as the date of a possible invasion, so in the central Ukrainian city of Vinnytsia, 21 year-old Oleana and her friends planned to spend the evening together, just in case. “It seemed like we were prepared for everything, but everyone still had an extreme level of anxiety. So we decided to hold an ‘invasion party’,” she said by phone. They watched a comedy, opened a bottle of wine and tried to laugh and chat. “After 2am struck and we realised nothing is going to happen, we just celebrated another peaceful night and everyone went home. At this point there is nothing we can about the situation. We can only change our attitude towards it.” Ivona Kostyna, the CEO of Veterans Hub, which supports demobilised fighters, says she is grateful for the western decision to go public about potential Russian invasion plans, and the practical support in the form of military supplies, although she wishes it had come sooner. “Of course, we are encouraged by the international support, but it’s hard for veterans to understand why it wasn’t there before (when needed),” she said. “For eight years, we knew we were fighting a war, but it seemed the world didn’t notice it. Now everyone is using the same language.” She worries that the country’s 460,000 veterans, many of whom needed years to recover from the front lines, face “pressure and distress” from escalating tensions, and many could be called up again. That would leave her organisation short on staff just as demand for their services are soaring, because so many of her 68-strong team are veterans. No one in Ukraine has any illusions that the west will fight with Ukrainian forces, but many are grateful for the strong stance taken by Biden, Boris Johnson and other western leaders including France’s Emmanuel Macron, who have been shuttling to Moscow and Kyiv in a bid to fend off war. “We have a joke that that the president who did the most to create modern Ukraine was Putin,” said Yaroslav Yurchyshyn, another member of parliament. “He is not fighting against Ukraine, he is fighting against western values and way of life, so the more close connections we have with western partners the better.” The Ukraine which Putin resents is the cosmopolitan city where activists try to shape a different future, and independent journalists root out corruption. At its kiosks, where people gather for their morning coffee, and speakeasy bars where mixologists serve up the latest trends, people are just trying to get on with their lives. But the roads are thinning of traffic as people stay at home, or slip away to stay with family and friends further west, reunite with relatives in rural areas, or leave the country entirely. Some employers have even helped their entire staff fly overseas. Alina Viatkina, who spent nearly a year on the front line as a 19-year-old, now works in a mental health support team. She cancelled a trip to the US this week, which had been more than two years in the planning, because she felt she could not leave her family, including her parents and a nephew, in Kyiv without her. She is grateful for western support, saying: “I look at flight radar and see all the weapons and equipment coming in and I know it’s really expensive for other countries to send it.” Still, after years of trying to escape the long shadow of combat, she is terrified that her efforts will be destroyed in a moment. So last Wednesday she and her boyfriend went for dinner at an expensive restaurant. “We thought if Russia is coming, why not?” she said. “I was trying so hard to come back from war (mentally) and now, it’s not even that I am going back to war. War is coming to me.” Additional reporting by Iryna GorlachEsi Edugyan, 44, is a Canadian author who was born and raised in Calgary, Alberta. She wrote her debut novel, The Second Life of Samuel Tyne, in 2004 when she was just 24. In 2011, she won the Scotiabank Giller prize for her novel Half Blood Blues and in 2018 she was shortlisted for the Booker prize with Washington Black. Out of the Sun: Essays at the Crossroads of Race is her first nonfiction work and interweaves personal narrative with discussions on racism, the slave trade in Canada, art history in the west and ghosts. You open with an essay on black sitters in western portraiture… The first [piece] is very much about 18th- and 19th-century portraiture and how depictions of black people have changed throughout history and how what we see is often predicated on the prejudices that the artist has brought to bear on their own paintings. A work I considered was Johann Gottfried Haid’s painting of Viennese courtier Angelo Soliman, an enslaved man who was taken captive as a child and arrived in Marseille in the 1700s. One of the most interesting takeaways, looking at both his portrait and also at David Martin’s portrait of Dido Elizabeth Belle Lindsay, a British heiress born into slavery, is the fact that details specifically included to elucidate certain elements of their lives are paradoxically obscuring. Their turbans, for instance, speak to exoticised notions of the “Orient” and yet neither had actual connections to what would then have been considered the Orient. You expose many little-known histories and facts regarding slavery in Canada. In what ways did it differ to America and the Caribbean? I was born and raised in Calgary. In all of my school years, slavery in Canada was never mentioned. This was not something that was in the curriculum in the 1980s. That’s quite striking. The underground railroads [the network of secret routes and safe houses established in the US during the early to mid-19th century to help enslaved African Americans reach Canada] seems to have been our central Canadian story. That we were a place of refuge and very welcoming. That’s not quite the full story. Afua Cooper is a tremendous Canadian historian and has done so much work in this realm. From the 1600s into the 1800s, we had slavery on our territory. There were people who were enslaved, mainly working as domestics in households. That is something that is very much a part of our history, but we don’t discuss it. So I really wanted to draw attention to [stories] like the hanging of Marie-Joseph Angélique. She was a slave born in Portugal in 1705 and was sold to a businessman in Montreal. At the age 29, she was accused of starting a fire that destroyed 46 buildings. She was hanged and her corpse was burned. You also write, with some ambivalence, about Rachel Dolezal and Jessica Krug, two white women who fraudulently claimed black identities. How do you see the discourse around being “transracial” developing? Even though these controversies happened four or five years apart, the more recent response to Krug was just as vehement. It seemed to suggest that not only had things not progressed – where we feel like there’s a possibility to cross racial lines in a way that’s benign – but that there’s been a hardening. As I say [in the book], for me it felt unfair to deny this woman [Dolezal], who very much feels herself to be a black woman, her blackness. But on a visceral and emotional level, it feels like an encroachment. Having done some research into it, people expressed this feeling of them being caricatures. That isn’t her natural hair texture, this isn’t her natural skin colour. I understand that sensibility. Maybe in 10 years, we’ll feel differently about it all. Or maybe we’ll be more entrenched in the sense of the fixity of racial identities. Do you feel a pressure or duty to write about race? I did start this book soon after the murder of George Floyd, [so] I felt deeply compelled, rather than obligated, to write about race. Race and racism play their part in my life. Washington Black, for instance, is a book about race and racism, but it’s also very much a book about a young boy finding his feet and establishing his place in the world and discovering that he’s gifted. Character, for me, will always trump ideological explorations of race. I want to explore the lives of people. How important is travel to your writing practice? I spent almost a year and a half living in Germany and that prompted me to write Half Blood Blues. Travel has been the backbone of my writing. Looking back, I feel like if I never went anywhere ever again, I would have enough material to write for the rest of my days. Having said that, I think moving around a lot impedes your writing. These past two years have been so hard for so many. One of the more positive things that’s happened for me personally is being forced to stay still. Connecting with my work and also reconnecting with my children. I think I was away too much. Are you a disciplined writer? Before I had children, I would start writing at 10 at night and finish at six in the morning. For the past 10 years, I have written during school hours. It’s a much more truncated and prescribed schedule. Which writers to do you admire? I recently read The Transit of Venus by Shirley Hazzard. It just completely opened me up. It’s so pristine and just beautifully written and so intellectually alive. In some ways, it’s a perfect novel. As soon as I finished it, I started rereading it. Toni Morrison will always be a guiding star for me. I read her at a moment where she just made this enormous impression. I really enjoyed Rachel Cusk’s trilogy. The poetry of Dionne Brand, Patrick Lane, Lorna Crozier – all of these Canadian poets were so formative. Your husband is the poet and novelist Steven Price. What is it like to write with another writer in the house? We read each other’s work. He reads all of my first drafts and I read his. It’s been really crucial. He really gets his hands in there. It wouldn’t look like it does without his editing. • Out of the Sun: Essays at the Crossroads of Race by Esi Edugyan is published by Profile (£16.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyHe’s the designer famed for reviving Savile Row tailoring in the Cool Britannia era of the 90s with his sleek, jewel-coloured suits. Since then, office attire has become less formal and working from home has taken off, yet Ozwald Boateng believes rumours of the death of the suit are greatly exaggerated. As he prepared to show at London fashion week on Monday after a 12-year absence, he told the Observer that he believes the suit will be seen as less an everyday work uniform and more as special occasion wear – but with many of those going into an office just two or three days a week making more of an effort and opting to dress more formally. “During the pandemic, we had two years of re-evaluating everything, and our attitudes to the way we dress changed,” Boateng said. Hybrid working had informed the way we approached suiting up, he added – this time last year, searches for suits had fallen by 34% and there was a rise in smart-casual workwear informed by virtual office meetings. “Now it’s a choice, rather than a uniform. When we go back into the office, you’ll think more about [wearing a suit]. It will be more of an occasion. I think we’re going to make more of an effort,” he said. Despite his absence from London fashion week – he’s been concentrating on other projects, including designing uniforms for British Airways staff – Boateng remains relevant. The conversation about the death of the suit is as current as ever, and diversity and structural racism remain hot topics among the fashion set. Monday’s show will be an immersive celebration of black excellence in the wake of the Black Lives Matter movement, with nods to his Ghanaian heritage. “The George Floyd experience brought a sadness to my heart and made me think that there’s so much more to be done,” he said. “Even though there has been change, there also has to be an acceptance of change. Sometimes, it’s easier to push it away and say ‘can we move on?’. But it still needs to be talked about.” When Boateng opened his shop on Savile Row in the 90s, he was part of the “New Bespoke Movement”: hip young gunslingers who were seen as modernising the area, cutting through the elitism. “In the late 1990s, Cool Britannia was reaching a global audience and Savile Row was ripe for being reinvented,” says Professor Andrew Groves, director of the Westminster Menswear Archive. “Like Tommy Nutter in the 1970s, Ozwald Boateng, along with Richard James, Timothy Everest and Richard Anderson, made it cool to hang out on Savile Row.” But he faced discrimination, too. In his biographical film, A Man’s Story, Boateng said: “You weren’t accepted because you are black,” encapsulating the uneasy tensions that existed. “I came to Savile Row to evolve tradition,” he says now. “I remember André Leon Talley saying, ‘you’re not a tailor, you’re a couturier’. What I was doing was taking traditional values and finding ways of modernising them. That created a uniqueness.” Moving on to become creative director at Givenchy Homme in 2003, Boateng and his trademark look became a favourite of celebrities, including Will Smith, Keanu Reeves, Idris Elba, Jamie Foxx, Spike Lee, Jude Law, Prince Charles and Barack Obama. He was also in demand in Hollywood (Ebony magazine called him “Great Britain’s biggest import since the Beatles”) and has costumed films such as Lock, Stock and Two Smoking Barrels, Black Panther and Stanford Blatch’s character in Sex and the City. Boateng’s appeal was that his tailoring was always edgier than the average suit and, after showing sporadically at Harlem’s Apollo Theatre and in Accra, he’s now back. His show promises to be of epic proportions, featuring 100 creatives, and will focus on the African diaspora. Both thematically and aesthetically, his reappearance chimes with a zeitgeist that seems more open to diverse stories told through fashion. The inspiration behind his current show marks a change from his early days 30 years ago, when he admitted in an interview that “when I first started designing, I never used to reference Africa”. His name is mentioned by young menswear designers, such as Bianca Saunders and Priya Ahluwalia, both of whom use their experience as second-generation immigrants to influence their collection. “It was incredibly inspiring for me as a young black woman to see someone that looks like me become such an industry powerhouse,” said Saunders. “When I started, Ozwald and his team were very supportive and provided me with fabrics for my graduate collection. His arrival on Savile Row and in the fashion industry had huge cultural significance, and he has inspired many others, too. At that point, Ozwald Boateng was one of the few people of colour in the UK fashion industry.” Boateng doesn’t see Monday’s show as a return to showing regularly. “When I have something to say, I’m going to do a show,” he says. But he does see it as a restart of sorts. “In terms of me doing another show next season, I haven’t thought about it,” he says. “Let’s get through Monday and see what happens. I might do another one next week… No, I’m kidding!”Eighty years ago, as anti-Japanese fervor gripped the US, the parents and grandparents of the California congressman Mark Takano were among 120,000 Japanese Americans forcibly removed from their homes and sent to desolate camps scattered across the west. They were allowed to take only what they could carry. Everything else was sold, stored or left behind. Confined by barbed wire fences and armed military guards, their only offense was looking like the enemy. “They were incarcerated without any due process of law, never accused of a crime, never convicted of a crime but in an internment camp strictly because of their racial characteristics,” Takano told the Guardian. Two-thirds of those interned were American citizens, like Takano’s maternal grandparents and paternal grandmother. Many were American-born children, like his parents, far too young to pose a threat to national security, as was the spurious claim. What is remembered as one of the darkest chapters in American history was set in motion on 19 February 1942, 74 days after Japan attacked Pearl Harbor, when Franklin Roosevelt signed Executive Order 9066. On the 80th anniversary of Roosevelt’s order, an occasion marked by events from Hawaii to Idaho that will include many witnesses, Takano is worried. “What I fear we’re in now is a moment of forgetting,” he said. Since the onset of the coronavirus pandemic, the US has witnessed an alarming spike in violence and hate against Asian Americans. Toxic rhetoric and attacks on immigrants and racial and religious minorities have become a routine part of the political discourse in democracies around the world. Takano warned of an “insidious nostalgia” that seeks to whitewash the shameful parts of American history. “It’s a hankering for a flawed America,” he said. “And its premise is that America should never evolve.” It was a dangerous worldview, he said, encapsulated by Donald Trump’s promise to “make America great again”. Those who subscribed to it, he continued, “don’t want America to get better. They don’t want to see a more perfect union.” It is why stories like his family’s are worth retelling and remembering. Takano’s paternal grandfather was a teenager when he arrived in the US from Japan in 1916. He worked and saved until he had enough money to marry. So-called alien land laws prevented him from buying property and precluded him from becoming a citizen. But because his grandmother was a citizen, they were able to buy land in her name. In the late 1930s, they bought a five-acre plot of land in Bellevue, Washington, where they farmed strawberries, chrysanthemums and tomatoes to be sold at Pike’s Place Market in Seattle. When war broke out, they were forced to leave their farm and sent to the Tule Lake internment camp in northern California. Their incarceration lasted until the end of the war, he said. His father bore the physical scars from his internment: burns on his legs from when he fell into an incineration pit. “When he wore short pants, his shins were all discolored,” Takano said. There were emotional scars, too. After their release, Takano said his paternal grandfather wanted to return to Japan. But his paternal grandmother, who was born in America and knew little of Japan, did not want to leave. His grandparents nearly boarded a ship bound for Japan, Takano said, but his grandmother experienced a mental breakdown from which he said she never recovered. “To have all of this intersect at once – they get out of the camps but the woes are not over,” he said. “You can imagine how stressful and traumatic it was.” Robbed of his property and now his wife’s health, his grandfather raised his young children with the help of his extended family and the tight-knit Japanese American community in southern California. When Takano was 10, he boarded a plane for the first time and flew with his grandfather to Washington. Together they visited the property his family had once owned, “the place where he had had a stake in the American dream and lost it”. At the time, Takano said a Holiday Inn occupied part of the land, situated in what is now the heart of the state’s prosperous tech industry. Elsewhere, he remembers seeing remnants of the old greenhouses, vestiges of a dream deferred. In the eight decades since Roosevelt signed the order, the federal government as well as state and local governments have sought to make amends. In 1983, the Federal Commission on Wartime Relocation and Internment of Civilians concluded that the incarceration of Japanese Americans was a “grave injustice” motivated by “racial prejudice, war hysteria and failure of political leadership”. Five years later, the US issued a formal apology and paid Japanese American survivors $20,000 each for violations of their civil liberties and constitutional rights. In 2020, California also formally apologized for the central role it played in the internment of Japanese Americans. Last week, the US Senate passed legislation to create a national historic site on a rural patch of land in south-eastern Colorado known as Camp Amache, where more than 7,000 Japanese Americans and Japanese nationals were imprisoned from 1942 to 1945. In a presidential proclamation commemorating Saturday as a Day of Remembrance, Joe Biden reaffirmed “the Federal Government’s formal apology to Japanese Americans whose lives were irreparably harmed during this dark period of our history, and we solemnly reflect on our collective moral responsibility to ensure that our Nation never again engages in such un-American acts”. “I have always believed that great nations do not ignore their most painful moments – they confront them with honesty and, in doing so, learn from them and grow stronger as a result,” he said. “The incarceration of Japanese Americans 80 years ago is a reminder to us today of the tragic consequences we invite when we allow racism, fear, and xenophobia to fester.” Takano, now chair of the House veterans committee, is particularly proud of his great-uncle, who fought fascism in Europe as part of the US army’s highly decorated 442nd regimental combat team even as his family was interned in the US. “It’s the contradiction of a country that is fighting fascism, but has some of the seeds of it in its own backyard,” he said. His great-uncle died in Italy just weeks before the end of the war in 1945, he said. “I think of my uncle as betting his life on the promise of what America could be and what the world could be,” he said. “And the fact that I’m a member of Congress today I hold out as an example that my uncle won his bet.” But he urged vigilance. “We’re in danger of forgetting and we’re in danger of this nefarious nostalgia,” he said. “These two things put all of that at risk.”Peep peep peeeeep! That’s all for now. You can keep track of the late game between Manchester City and Tottenham here, and tuck into all the day’s Premier League reports below. Arsenal 2-1 Brentford Aston Villa 0-1 Watford Brighton 0-3 Burnley Crystal Palace 0-1 Chelsea Liverpool 3-1 Norwich Southampton 2-0 Everton West Ham 1-1 Newcastle Premier League table - as it stands Mohamed Salah became the second-fastest player in Liverpool history to bring up 150 goals, scoring the Reds’ second in a 3-1 comeback win over Norwich on his 233rd appearance. He’s feeling pretty chuffed: “It feels great,” he told Premier League Productions. “We were struggling in the beginning when we conceded the goal but I think we played good football [in the] first half. The second half, we conceded the goal, so the game became tougher. “But we managed to come back and it’s a great result. Of course I’m happy to score 150. I’m always proud to score for this club, and the most important thing is to win games, which is what we did today.” Let’s check in with Mikel Arteta after Arsenal’s 2-1 win against Brentford. “I think we played really well; the way we attacked, restricted their threats, our fluidity and purpose. Emile [Smith Rowe] was exceptional.” Why did Granit Xhaka appear to refuse the armband after Alexandre Lacazette came off? “Because Kieran [Tierney] was the next in line, that’s why.” Aston Villa were booed off after a home defeat to Watford but Steven Gerrard had no complaints with fans giving his players an earful: “The result’s not good enough. We were booed off today and we deserved that. I need to take whatever’s going to come my way. We haven’t had enough quality in the final third today. For me, it looked like a penalty [Samir on Ings] but if I just look at that incident, I’m clutching at straws because we’ve had 19 shots but only one on target.” News from the Championship: Reading have sacked Veljko Paunović. The Royals won 3-2 at Preston this afternoon but are still hovering above the drop zone. A club statement said: “Owner Mr Dai Yongge wanted to afford Veljko time to turn around a poor recent run of results that now sees us in a battle for second tier survival. However, with nearly a third of the season still remaining and every point now vital in our bid to retain Championship status, the decision has been mutually agreed to make a change.” No more Mr Nice Guy? Here’s Frank Lampard after Everton’s 2-0 defeat at Southampton: “Difficult game. We started really well, then got a bit sloppy, turned over the ball. Really disappointed. It’s not good enough to be good at Goodison but not good away from home. We didn’t show enough to get back in it. I’ve been nice to inject confidence but there were issues today that we have to work on.” Premier League: Chelsea have developed a useful habit of leaving things until the last minute and it needed a late volley from Hakim Ziyech to snatch a victory that was scarcely deserved. Over to Ed Aarons... Premier League: Wout Weghorst fired his first Premier League goal as relegation-threatened Burnley climbed off the bottom of the table with a resounding 3-0 success at Brighton... Premier League: Finally, Watford threw a punch and it landed. When Emmanuel Dennis nodded Ismaïla Sarr’s cross past Emi Martínez, 440 minutes had passed since they last saw their side score - and it could not have been timely, writes Sam Dalling from Villa Park... Kick-off’s looming at the Etihad - and you can follow it all below with Scott Murray. Here’s a quick reminder of the teams... Manchester City: Ederson, Walker, Dias, Laporte, Joao Cancelo, De Bruyne, Rodri, Gundogan, Bernardo Silva, Foden, Sterling. Subs: Stones, Ake, Zinchenko, Fernandinho, Mahrez, Carson, Delap, McAtee, Lavia. Tottenham Hotspur: Lloris, Romero, Dier, Davies, Emerson, Bentancur, Hojbjerg, Sessegnon, Kulusevski, Son, Kane. Subs: Doherty, Sanchez, Winks, Rodon, Gollini, Bergwijn, Lucas Moura, White, Scarlett. Referee: Anthony Taylor (Cheshire). Premier League: Frank Lampard did not return to the dugout for a relegation scrap but Everton are firmly in danger after falling to an insipid defeat at Southampton, says our man at St Mary’s, Ben Fisher... Premier League: Brentford had pummelled Arsenal on that opening night, but Nick Ames says the tone always appeared likely to differ this time... Premier League: Goal by goal, landmark after landmark, Mohamed Salah is establishing his place in Anfield history, helping transform an awkward afternoon for Liverpool into an enjoyable one. Richard Jolly was at Anfield... Hibernian 2-0 Ross County Livingston 1-1 St Mirren Motherwell 1-1 Aberdeen St Johnstone 2-1 Hearts Scottish Premiership table - as it stands Bristol City 2-1 Middlesbrough Cardiff 1-1 Blackpool Coventry 1-0 Barnsley Derby 1-0 Peterborough Luton 2-0 West Brom Preston 2-3 Reading QPR 1-1 Hull Sheffield United 4-0 Swansea Stoke 2-2 Birmingham Fulham 1-2 Huddersfield Blackburn P-P Millwall Championship table - as it stands Arsenal 2-1 Brentford Aston Villa 0-1 Watford Brighton 0-3 Burnley Crystal Palace 0-1 Chelsea Liverpool 3-1 Norwich Southampton 2-0 Everton West Ham 1-1 Newcastle Premier League table - as it stands Premier League: Emmanuel Dennis is the scourge of Stevie G. “Honestly, when will people learn,” rues Niall Mullen. “It just doesn’t work with Lampard and Gerrard in the same mid-table.” Ba-doom-tish. Premier League: A late consolation indeed. Saka’s strike proves decisive for the top four-chasing Gunners. A late consolation, surely... Premier League: He was thwarted a little earlier by VAR but Ziyech popped up again at the death to do for Palace. Premier League: A deserved Saints victory, courtesy of second-half goals from Armstrong and Long. Premier League: An emphatic, Big Wout-inspired win for the visitors. Premier League: Klopp’s boys come from behind as Salah hits another milestone. Rod Wooden pinned his hopes on my ability to cajole a comeback. Sorry, Rod. Peter Oh is purring, though: “Oh my days, what a comeback at Anfield! And oh my Diaz, what a signing by Liverpool!” Championship: Derby lead Peterborough in injury-time! Louie Sibley has struck to give the Great Escapists a further boost... WORLD CHAMPIONS LEAVE IT LATE! Marcos Alonso provides the assist and Ziyech meets it with a crisp side-volley! Scottish update: Simon McMahon (thankfully) is back! “Motherwell have equalised against Aberdeen and St Johnstone have retaken the lead v Hearts. Hibs and Livingston are also ahead. Oh, and Cowdenbeath still lead Elgin 1-0.” Since’s Simon’s bulletin, Livingston have been pegged back and Cowdenbeath have got an injury-time second... Will that do it for Saints? Should do. Horrible defending from Everton as Livramento crosses and Long rises highest. League One goalfest: It’s Wycombe 5-5 Cheltenham! Alfie May has scored four for the visitors! Arsenal have a cushion thanks to a Saka cracker. Thomas Partey sets him up nicely and he lets rip from range... BOOM! Dennis meets a cracking Sarr cross and Watford have the lead! Liverpool are stretching their legs now! This is a cheeky dink from Dias, who’s teed up a treat by Jordan Henderson. Crystal Palace 0-0 Chelsea: The Blues think they have taken the lead through Hakim Ziyech... but it’s been ruled out! The check takes ages but the crosshairs show he went a tad early. Championship: Chris Wilder has galvanised Middlesbrough but they’re 2-0 down now at Bristol City. His former employers, Sheffield United, will leapfrog the Boro into sixth at this rate. The Blades are beating Swansea 3-0, with the damage done in the first half. It’s three! I knew my half-time plea would pay dividends but we’re all winners, apart from Brighton. They’ve been rubbish and Burnley have been brilliant. Lennon’s strike clips the goalframe on its way in, which I always find rather pleasing. Turnaround alert! And it’s Salah’s 150th Liverpool goal! Alisson’s long punt finds the forward, who dips into his box of tricks on edge of the area, then slides it into the net. An acrobatic equaliser at Anfield! Kostas Tsimikas nods the ball across goal from a deep cross and Mane does brilliantly, swivelling to adjust his body shape, before delivering a stylish finish! Crystal Palace 0-0 Chelsea: Ziyech and Pulisic stand over a free-kick in a tasty position after Havertz is upended. Ziyech punts into the wall... then does it again. “I told you so,” says Mystic Paul Merson on Soccer Saturday. Liverpool 0-1 Norwich: On come Divock Origi and Thiago for the hosts, as Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain and Naby Keita make way... Championship: New manager, more West Brom woe. The Baggies are 1-0 down to Luton, Cameron Jerome evading a couple of half-arsed leaps. Liverpool 0-1 Norwich: Rod Wooden reckons Norwich deserve their lead. Jurgen Klopp, who made a raft of changes, looks a bit twitchy. Audible grumbles at Anfield. Aston Villa 0-0 Watford: Steven Gerrard wanted a response but he hasn’t got one. No shots on target yet - against a Watford side still without a goal under Roy Hodgson. Soccer Saturday’s pundit reckons these two “could play until midnight” and still not bother the scoreline. Look what I’ve started! Gomes gaffes and loses possession and Armstrong, teed up by Che Adams, takes a touch to craft a yard and finds the back of the net! And another! Finally, at the 17th attempt, Arsenal make the breakthrough. Smith Rowe shows some chops and curls deliciously into the corner. Southampton 0-0 Everton: Dominic Calvert-Lewin has rippled the net but... NO GOAL! It’s chalked out for offside. Scottish Premiership: Here’s Simon McMahon (doing my job for me - cheers, Simon). “Jim Goodwin takes charge of Aberdeen for the first time today after leaving St Mirren to take over at Pittodrie yesterday. His team lead Motherwell 1-0 at halftime. St Johnstone and Hearts traded early goals and are 1-1 at the break. It’s goalless in the other games. In Scottish League Two a huge clash at the bottom is taking place at Central Park where Cowdenbeath, aka the Blue Brazil, are leading Elgin 1-0. Rangers can expect a harder test than they got in Dortmund on Thursday when they travel to Tannadice to face Dundee United tomorrow.” Here come the goals! Liverpool dominated the first half but Norwich were perky in patches and they’ve shocked Anfield here! It takes a horrible deflection off Joel Matip but the Canaries don’t care! Any chance of some Premier League goals this half? I’m going to regret that, aren’t I... Brighton 0-2 Burnley: It got a bit heated at the Amex just before Burnley’s second... we’ll see shortly if Graham Potter’s lads have released steam by launching half-time oranges and water bottles instead... Bristol City 1-0 Middlesbrough Cardiff 0-1 Blackpool Coventry 0-0 Barnsley Derby 0-0 Peterborough Luton 0-0 West Brom Preston 0-2 Reading QPR 0-1 Hull Sheffield United 3-0 Swansea Stoke 1-1 Birmingham Blackburn P-P Millwall Fulham 1-2 Huddersfield (result) Arsenal 0-0 Brentford Aston Villa 0-0 Watford Brighton 0-2 Burnley Crystal Palace 0-0 Chelsea Liverpool 0-0 Norwich Southampton 0-0 Everton West Ham 1-1 Newcastle (result) Crystal Palace 0-0 Chelsea: It’s an even contest at the Palace but Michael Olise is sparkling against the club he left as a 14-year-old. Tees up Wilfried Zaha for a great chance but there’s not enough meat on his curling effort. We’re getting our goal fix at the Amex this afternoon. Josh Brownhill has been credited with Burnley’s second after Big Wout nods into dangerous territory. He looked pretty surprised about it amid a couple of deflections but it’s no little deserved. Remarkable scenes moments before: Duffy and Sanchez got in each other’s way and started shoving each other, before being hauled apart! Liverpool 0-0 Norwich: Van Dijk has the ball in the net after a spot of pinball involving Oxlade-Chamberlain and Henderson but there’s that pesky offside flag again. Goalless but thoroughly entertaining, this one. Championship: It’s still goalless at Pride Park but Derby have a numerical advantage against Peterborough; Hayden Coulson’s been sent off for two misdemeanours. Derby can pull level on points with Posh if they can take advantage this afternoon. Aston Villa 0-0 Watford: Oof! So close to the opener! Emi Buendia plays a gorgeous ball through for Danny Ings... he’s through! But he clips the outside of the post! Southampton 0-0 Everton: Super stop from Jordan Pickford! James Ward-Prowse mixes things up with a low corner but Tino Livramento’s flick is pushed brilliantly to safety. Arsenal 0-0 Brentford: The Gunners are enjoying the glut of possession - 72% of it so far - but it’s what you do with it of course, and they’re not doing much right now in terms of testing David Raya. Brighton 0-1 Burnley: Big Wout has been brilliant so far, dovetailing with Cornet very nicely, but he’s hobbling after taking a knock to the thigh. He’ll grin and bear it for now. Championship: QPR are top-six hunters, too, but they’ve not won in their last four games and they’re behind here at home to Hull, Marcus Forss on target for the visitors. And now here’s big Wout Weghorst to break the deadlock at the Amex! Connor Roberts tees up the Dutchman for a rifling finish. He’s off the mark for the Clarets and in style. Liverpool 0-0 Norwich: Liverpool are turning the screw as Mo Salah dances through yellow shirts and forces a corner. Up goes big Virgil van Dijk - but it’s cleared off the line! Championship: Sheffield United’s surge has been checked by a couple of recent stalemates but Wolves loanee Morgan Gibbs-White has put them ahead against Swansea. Great move, including a trademark Oliver Norwood ping. Hang on, here’s George Baldock! The Blades are 2-0 up with 17 minutes gone. Liverpool 0-0 Norwich: Norwich are having a right old go at Anfield as Teemu Pukki fires just wide, before Luis Diaz curls over. Really brisk tempo to the opening stages. Arsenal 0-0 Brentford: Alexandre Lacazette has the ball in the net at the Emirates... but celebrations are cut short after a VAR check. He’s offside but the Gunners are getting a lot of joy down Bukayo Saka’s flank. Championship: Play-off chasers Boro trail at Bristol City. Andreas Weimann has the Robins ahead. Crystal Palace 0-0 Chelsea: The hosts are up for this against the world champions... but Chelsea should be ahead! WHAT A SAVE! Rudiger’s long-ranger, swerving this way and that on the wind, forces Guaita into a cracking stop! Southampton 0-0 Everton: Couple of early penalty shouts for Frank Lampard’s Everton - one for a challenge on Anthony Gordon, the other for a potential handball. Nothing doing. Scottish Premiership: Hearts weren’t behind for long. Nathaniel Atkinson has them level at St Johnstone. Arsenal 0-0 Brentford: Mikel Arteta’s side slipped up under the Friday night lights against the new boys on the opening day of term; they’re seeing plenty of the ball in these early stages but it’s harmless stuff so far. Liverpool 0-0 Norwich: The visitors have the ball in the back of the net! Rashica, slipped in by Normann, finds the bottom corner... but, there’s the flag! Scottish Premiership: An early goal - and it’s for rock-bottom St Johnstone against third-placed Hearts! Ali Crawford’s struck in the opening minute. Championship: Huddersfield are up to fourth – for now – after a smash-and-grab win at Fulham. With Storm Eunice putting paid to Bournemouth and Blackburn’s respective games, eyes are on the play-chasers this afternoon, with the likes of QPR, Middlesbrough and Sheffield United all looking to make inroads. Look out for great-escape-bidders Derby, too; they’re up against a Peterborough side just above them in the table … Six of them in the Premier League on a stuffed Saturday schedule, with a tasty meeting between Manchester City and Tottenham to come at 5.30pm. Cheers John. Off we go around the grounds after a reminder there’s no room for racism... Right, taking you through the thrills and spills of the Saturday 3pm action is Kate Burlaga. Over to you, Kate. Simon Mail was our man at the London Stadium to report on that 1-1 draw between West Ham and Newcastle. It’s Brighton v Burnley and Graham Potter has been paying tribute to the opposition, despite them being bottom of the table. He spoke to Sky Sports just now. Recently, you can see how competitive Burnley are; a draw against Manchester United, a narrow defeat against Liverpool where they created chances, and a goalless draw at Arsenal. They are competitive, they are still fighting for everything, they do what they do well and defend as a unit. It’s the Premier League, the margins are quite small, and for different reasons they have been on the wrong end of those, but we need to make sure they stay on the wrong end of those today. “We’ve had a positive week and this is a game we are really looking forward to,” says Steven Gerrard ahead of Aston Villa’s match with Watford. He’s going to let Danny Ings do Danny Ings things by picking the striker. It’s finished 1-1 at the London Stadium, where the two teams failed to deliver much in the second half. It was grim at times, and is a better result for Newcastle than West Ham. That’s six games unbeaten for Newcastle, five points above the bottom three. The Hammers stay in fifth. It’s very wet in North London at Arsenal, where Emile Smith Rowe comes in for Gabriel Martinelli, suspended after his quickfire red card the other week. No Ivan Toney for Brentford. For Chelsea, who will not face Conor Gallagher, who is loaned to Palace, there’s four changes from that Abu Dhabi showpiece. Jorginho replaces Mateo Kovacic Christian Pulisic and Malang Sarr come in for Callum Hudson-Odoi and Cesar Azpilicueta. Mason Mount, out for a while, has been replaced by Hakim Ziyech. The major team news is Liverpool, where Jürgen Klopp has made seven changes. Trent Alexander-Arnold and Andy Robertson are replaced by Joe Gomez and Kostas Tsimikas, with Joel Matip coming for Ibrahim Konate. Naby Keita and Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain team up with Jordan Henderson in midfield, with Luis Diaz replacing the injured Diogo Jota to line up alongside Sadio Mane and Mohamed Salah. Roberto Firmino has a muscle problem. Per PA Media Storm Eunice took its toll on Saturday’s Football League programme as high winds and snow wreaked havoc across the country. Salford’s League Two clash with Crawley on Saturday was postponed because of a waterlogged pitch. The playing surface at the Peninsula Stadium was judged to be unplayable after a second inspection following continued heavy rain. A statement on the cub’s official website read: “The surface passed a preliminary pitch inspection by the match official at 9am, with the officials due to return at 12:30pm. “However rainfall continuously fell throughout the morning, and when we requested that the match referee return earlier to re-assess and he deemed the surface unplayable.” In League One, heavy snow put pay to Fleetwood’s home clash with Lincoln. Shrewsbury’s game with Morecambe at the Montgomery Waters Meadow fell victim to a waterlogged pitch, with Crewe’s match at home to Portsmouth also called off. Harrogate’s League Two showdown with Leyton Orient also fell victim to snow after the Yorkshire club had appealed for volunteers to help clear the pitch. Blackburn’s fixture at home to Millwall got the go ahead after an inspection, with further checks due at other grounds ahead of kick-off. Liverpool: Alisson, Gomez, Matip, van Dijk, Tsimikas, Henderson, Oxlade-Chamberlain, Keita, Salah, Mane, Diaz. Subs: Fabinho, Konate, Thiago, Milner, Minamino, Robertson, Origi, Kelleher, Elliott. Norwich: Gunn, Aarons, Hanley, Gibson, Williams, Gilmour, Normann, McLean, Sargent, Pukki, Rashica. Subs: Byram, Zimmermann, Dowell, Placheta, Kabak, Lees-Melou, Giannoulis, McGovern, Rowe. Referee: Mike Dean (Wirral) Brighton: Sanchez, Lamptey, Veltman, Duffy, Cucurella, Bissouma, Lallana, Mac Allister, Moder, Maupay, Welbeck. Subs: Trossard, Gross, Alzate, March, Steele, Caicedo, Roberts, Leonard, Ferguson. Burnley: Pope, Roberts, Collins, Mee, Pieters, Lennon, Cork, Brownhill, McNeil, Cornet, Weghorst. Subs: Lowton, Barnes, Hennessey, Stephens, Rodriguez, Bardsley, Long, Thomas, Waller. Referee: Kevin Friend (Leicestershire) Aston Villa: Martinez, Cash, Chambers, Mings, Digne, McGinn, Douglas Luiz, Ramsey, Buendia, Ings, Coutinho. Subs: Sanson, Watkins, Young, Olsen, Hause, Bailey, Chukwuemeka, Chrisene, Iroegbunam. Watford: Foster, Femenia, Cathcart, Samir, Kamara, Sarr, Sissoko, Louza, Cleverley, King, Dennis. Subs: Ngakia, Troost-Ekong, Masina, Sema, Bachmann, Kabasele, Kalu, Hernandez, Kayembe. Referee: Robert Jones (Merseyside) Southampton: Forster, Walker-Peters, Bednarek, Salisu, Livramento, Stuart Armstrong, Ward-Prowse, Romeu, Elyounoussi, Broja, Adams. Subs: Stephens, Long, Adam Armstrong, Caballero, Djenepo, Smallbone, Diallo, Walcott, Valery. Everton: Pickford, Coleman, Holgate, Keane, Kenny, Gordon, Allan, van de Beek, Iwobi, Calvert-Lewin, Richarlison. Subs: Patterson, Townsend, Begovic, Mykolenko, Andre Gomes, Branthwaite, Rondon, El Ghazi, Alli. Referee: Andrew Madley (West Yorkshire) Arsenal: Ramsdale, Cedric, White, Gabriel, Tierney, Odegaard, Partey, Xhaka, Saka, Lacazette, Smith Rowe. Subs: Leno, Holding, Tomiyasu, Pepe, Tavares, Sambi Lokonga, Elneny, Nketiah, Hutchinson. Brentford: Raya, Ajer, Jansson, Pinnock, Canos, Jensen, Norgaard, Da Silva, Henry, Mbeumo, Wissa. Subs: Ghoddos, Onyeka, Baptiste, Janelt, Sorensen, Roerslev, Stevens, Fernandez, Young-Coombes. Referee: Jonathan Moss (County Durham) Crystal Palace: Guaita, Clyne, Andersen, Guehi, Mitchell, McArthur, Kouyate, Schlupp, Olise, Ayew, Zaha. Subs: Butland, Milivojevic, Eze, Hughes, Mateta, Benteke, Edouard, Kelly, Adaramola. Chelsea: Mendy, Christensen, Thiago Silva, Rudiger, Ziyech, Kante, Jorginho, Sarr, Havertz, Lukaku, Pulisic. Subs: Arrizabalaga, Alonso, Kovacic, Werner, Loftus-Cheek, Chalobah, Saul, Kenedy, Vale. Referee: David Coote (Nottinghamshire) Shock news: Leyton Orient’s game at Harrogate Town is OFF. Some big talk from Mikel Arteta. Defeats are a big part of that mental toughness,” he said. “They prepare you, they make you tougher. [The team] understand the suffering you go through when you lose a football match and you have critics, when everybody is questioning you. You have to fight against that situation: that is what creates mental toughness as well. Jürg’s been on his hobby horse again, though he talks good sense. “The potential of the boys was not the key for the win at Inter, the key for it was the attitude we showed and the spirit we created on the pitch – that made the difference,” he said. “You have to fight and not think about how good we could be. We are not the Harlem Globetrotters. My opinion is clear: top squad, best I ever had, but it is more important what kind of mood is in the team because you don’t win a Champions League away game against Inter Milan because you are good. You win it because you want it with all you have and that’s what we did.” We’re at full capacity, pretty much, on the 3pm front, with two title contenders playing ahead of Manchester City’s late game with Tottenham among six matches being played in the traditional slot. Liverpool, fresh from beating Inter in midweek, host Norwich, and the expectation is they win and win well, even if Dean Smith has given the Canaries hope of getting clear of the drop zone. World champions Chelsea look to build on their success in Abu Dhabi by winning their London derby trip to Selhurst Park to face Crystal Palace. There’s some relegation action, too. Arsenal’s top-four push continues with a home match against Brentford, in the process of falling like a stone. Aston Villa are not mathematically safe and Steven Gerrard comes up against his old Liverpool and England boss, Roy Hodgson. Burnley need to start winning, and Brighton need to stop drawing, hoping to turn those into victories. And Everton can go some way to pull themselves clear by beating a very dangerous Southampton. All kicking off at 3pm. Join us.Paul Ince has made a shock return to the dugout after agreeing to take interim charge of Reading, the troubled Championship club his son, Tom, joined on loan last month. Ince has not managed since being sacked by Blackpool in January 2014 but will take over from Veljko Paunovic, who took charge of Saturday’s 3-2 win at Preston – their first in 14 matches – while the club search for a new permanent manager. Reading are at risk of relegation to League One, five points and one place above Derby County, who have been administration since September. Reading finished seventh last season but this campaign has been a different story, with Paunovic overseeing eight defeats after the turn of the year, including an embarrassing FA Cup third-round exit at Kidderminster. Paunovic met Reading’s under-fire chief executive, Dayong Pang, on Friday following a 0-0 draw at fellow strugglers Peterborough in midweek, after which he declined to comment on questions about his future. Players expected Paunovic to be sacked before now but the arrival of the former Manchester United midfielder Ince will inevitably raise eyebrows. In a statement on Saturday evening, Pang said: “The board and I will now work diligently to identify the right candidate to take this club forward. This work will be done quickly but without undue haste as we fully appreciate the importance of our decision to appoint a new manager at this crucial stage of the campaign.” Lucas João struck twice in the opening 19 minutes, with John Swift adding a third early in the second half. Daniel Johnson pulled a goal back for the hosts, with Cameron Archer, on loan from Aston Villa, setting up a tense finale with 15 minutes to go, but the Royals held out. Louie Sibley hit a stoppage-time winner as Derby beat relegation rivals Peterborough 1-0, with both sides finishing with 10 men. Posh defender Hayden Coulson was sent off after picking up two cautions in the space of four minutes just after the half-hour mark. Rams captain Tom Lawrence was dismissed for a foul on Nathan Thompson early in the second half, but Sibley had the final say. Bottom club Barnsley lost 1-0 at Coventry, where Dominic Hyam struck in the third minute of stoppage time. Cardiff and Blackpool drew 1-1. Marvin Ekpiteta headed Blackpool into an 11th minute lead, but Joel Bagan had the home side level soon after the restart. Stoke and Birmingham shared four goals at the bet365 Stadium. Jordan James put the Blues ahead in the 12th minute, with Tyrese Campbell equalising before half-time. Campbell struck again seven minutes into the second half, but Gary Gardner squared things up again on the hour. QPR left it late to draw 1-1 at home against Hull and sit fourth, above Huddersfield – 2-1 victors at Fulham – on goal difference. Marcus Forss, on loan from Brentford, fired the Tigers into the lead in the 26th minute. There was a lengthy delay just after the hour when the Hull goalkeeper Matt Ingram needed treatment following a collision with QPR’s Albert Adomah and eventually was taken off on a stretcher. Ilias Chair then struck from close range with 15 minutes left to secure QPR a point. Sheffield United continued their push up the table after sweeping past Swansea 4-0 at Bramall Lane. Morgan Gibbs-White broke the deadlock in the 14th minute and George Baldock soon added a second before Billy Sharp made it 3-0 shortly before half-time. Gibbs-White bagged his second with 12 minutes left as the Blades moved into the top six. Middlesbrough saw their play-off ambitions stall after losing 2-1 at Bristol City. Andreas Weimann gave the hosts an early lead, with Antoine Semenyo wrapping up the points in the second half. Matt Crooks scored a late consolation for Boro, who are seventh and a point behind Sheffield United. West Brom also lost ground on the top six following a 2-0 defeat at Luton. Cameron Jerome headed in from a 55th-minute free-kick and Allan Campbell wrapped up the points with seven minutes left.How would a full-scale invasion work? Exploiting its overwhelming superiority in land, sea and air forces, Russia is expected to attack simultaneously on several fronts, from the north-east, the Donbas and Crimea. Ground troops in Belarus, backed by airstrikes, would spearhead a lightning drive south to seize the capital, Kyiv. Ukraine’s encircled army would be forced, in theory, to surrender. What are the main targets? The primary aim would be the rapid capitulation of Ukraine’s government in Kyiv and the “neutralisation” of its elected leaders. Key targets would include the presidential palace, parliament, ministries, media outlets and the Maidan Nezalezhnosti – the symbolic site of Ukraine’s pro-democracy revolutions. At what cost? The US estimates artillery, missile and bomb strikes and ground clashes could kill 50,000 civilians, a figure that may prove conservative if fighting is prolonged. Hundreds of thousands may flee, presenting Europe with a huge humanitarian and refugee emergency. Gross human rights violations and chemical weapons atrocities, as in Syria, cannot be ruled out. British officials predict “horrendous” suffering. Does Vladimir Putin have a plan B? Analysts say Russia could opt for a more limited, less risky offensive to grab extra territory in eastern Ukraine and the Donbas, while asserting the independence of pro-Moscow breakaway republics there, as in Georgia in 2008. It may also try to seize the major ports of Mariupol on the Sea of Azov and Odessa on the Black Sea, and create a “land bridge” to Crimea. Could it all go wrong? Yes. Ukraine’s armed forces will not be easily vanquished. Civilians may join the fight. The US and UK have not ruled out arming resistance fighters, as during the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan. British ministers predict a long-running “quagmire”, with Russia suffering significant casualties. In such a scenario, Russian public opinion could turn against Putin. What’s the Kremlin’s post-invasion game plan? Putin wants an institutionally weak, dependent Ukraine that is responsive to his will and detached from the west – like Belarus. He can be expected to put pro-Moscow politicians in charge in Kyiv while eliminating opponents and fixing elections (as in Russia). US officials believe the Kremlin has drafted a list of public figures earmarked for arrest or assassination. What will the west do? US forces will not get directly involved now, but military assistance will be swiftly provided by some Nato states, including lethal aid, intelligence-sharing and weapons such as man-portable missiles (as in Afghanistan). If fighting is prolonged and civilian casualties mount, pressure on the west to intervene will grow rapidly. A pariah nation? Unprecedented, supposedly game-changing US and EU sanctions will follow an invasion. They include potentially crippling curbs on Russian banks, corporations, exports, loans and technology transfers, diplomatic isolation and the targeting of Putin’s personal wealth and that of his oligarch cronies. The Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline to Germany will be frozen indefinitely. What will be the wider impact? Global economic and stock market instability will grow. Energy prices will rise further. Basic food supplies in African and Asian countries that depend on Ukraine, the world’s fifth-largest wheat exporter in 2020, will be hit. China’s support for Putin may deepen east-west tensions. Additional, defensive Nato deployments on Russia’s borders could increase the risk of Europe-wide conflagration.Tributes have been paid to an Irish council worker who “died in the line of duty” after being hit by a falling tree during Storm Eunice. Billy Kinsella, 59, from Clonroe in Gorey, was clearing debris from a road close to his home in Co Wexford when he was struck. The father of one was an employee of Wexford county council, and was fatally injured attending the scene of another fallen tree in Ballythomas. Sinn Féin councillor Fionntán Ó Súilleabháin lived close to Kinsella and grew up with his family. He was among the first to pay tribute. “People in the area are devastated. It is such a tragedy for his wife, Rita, and their only child Conor,” he said. “Billy died in the line of duty while out doing council work and attending the scene of a fallen tree. He died round the corner from where we both live and he died in a manner that makes it most tragic. “He comes from a well-respected family and a very hard-working family. He was a quiet family man who was devoted to his son, who he brought to sporting events all over. Conor plays for the under-20s Wexford team and would be heavily involved in GAA, like Billy’s father was before him. People are very shocked.” Fianna Fáil councillor Donal Kenny said Kinsella was a “nice, easy-going fella” and was “one of those lads who got on with his day’s work”. “He was out doing his job to keep the roads clear,” Kenny said. “It is very difficult for his family.” Elsewhere, ESB repair crews worked through the night to restore electricity supplies to more than 70,000 users. On Saturday afternoon, about 7,000 homes and businesses remained without power. “Due to the severity of the damage to the electricity network in the south-west region, some customers in south Kerry and West Cork will again be without power overnight and we apologise for the particular difficulty this causes,” ESB said in a statement. A yellow weather warning for ice stays in place across the Republic and Northern Ireland. Unsettled weather will continue over the weekend, Met Eireann said. A status yellow rain warning is in place for Donegal, Leitrim, Mayo and Sligo until 4pm on Sunday. • This article was amended on 20 February 2022 to correct the spelling of Fionntán Ó Súilleabháin’s name.Goal by goal, landmark after landmark, Mohamed Salah is securing his place in Anfield history. Four years, six months and seven days after his debut, he brought up 150 goals for Liverpool with a strike that combined pace, audacity and importance. “No one could imagine when he scored the first that he could score 149 [more] in such a short period of time,” said a beaming Jürgen Klopp and as Salah became Liverpool’s second quickest player to 150 – faster than Robbie Fowler, speedier than Ian Rush, sooner than Michael Owen, Kenny Dalglish, Steven Gerrard or Billy Liddell – he left a host of greats trailing in his wake and helped transform an awkward afternoon into an enjoyable one. It was about the spectacular as well as the statistical and it was capped by a wonderful first Liverpool goal for Luis Díaz. Their other scorers, Sadio Mané and Salah, have both become centurions and Klopp is encouraged by the precedents. “If Luis could be on a similar journey, it would be cool,” he said. Yet this had threatened to be a historic occasion instead for Norwich. Liverpool’s eighth successive win only came after they trailed. Internazionale had failed to record a shot on target against Klopp’s team. Norwich did and led. For a heady quarter of an hour, they could dream of a first victory here since Jeremy Goss scored the final goal in front of the old Kop in 1994. Then Liverpool’s attackers intervened in three minutes of brutal cruelty for Norwich. That period contained a beauty for Liverpool. Mané’s acrobatics was, Klopp said, “an incredible finish.” When Jordan Henderson floated a cross to the left and Kostas Tsimikas headed it back across the penalty area, Mané reacted with a brilliant overhead kick. Minus the injured Diogo Jota and Roberto Firmino, he had a rare outing as a striker, a role he may play more often if Díaz cements his place in Klopp’s strongest side. This was an auspicious start. For Tsimikas, who twice almost scored in the first half, the assist was a reflection of his influence; as Klopp made seven changes, some of their understudies were underwhelming. Not him. Then Salah plucked Alisson’s long ball out of the air. “A great pass but has travelled 80 yards in the air,” lamented Norwich’s manager, Dean Smith. “An insane touch,” added Klopp. The Egyptian darted away from Angus Gunn and, almost in slow motion, rolled his shot past Norwich’s retreating defenders. “A really cheeky one,” his manager said. Salah’s 150 goals came in just 233 games, and only Roger Hunt has taken fewer for Liverpool. While he would have got there slightly quicker but for a goalline clearance by Mathias Normann, his hunger was reflected as he set off in pursuit of a 151st. A curler went just wide, a long-range drive was parried, a third effort was dragged past the near post. Brandon Williams was tormented. Salah’s strike came courtesy of Alisson; it was the second time the shot-stopper has assisted one of his goals. With Trent Alexander-Arnold rested – Joe Gomez instead laboured on his first league start in 468 days at right-back – Liverpool needed someone to compensate for the creativity of the player with the most assists in the division. Improbably, their goalkeeper obliged. The least meaningful goal for the result may acquire the greatest long-term significance. Liverpool committed £50m for a scorer and, from Henderson’s defence-splitting pass, Díaz dinked a shot over Gunn. “Hendo, wow,” gushed Klopp. Norwich could console themselves with evidence of their improvement. “We can take an awful lot of confidence,” said Smith. They had sieved seven goals at Chelsea and five at Manchester City. There was no hat-trick of humiliations away at the top three and they consigned one unflattering fact to the past. They were yet to score against the top nine this season. Their wait was ended with the unwitting aid of Joël Matip, Milot Rashica’s 20-yard shot taking a telling deflection off the defender to leave Alisson motionless. Fortunate as it was, Norwich could have struck earlier, Teemu Pukki angling the first half’s finest chance past the post. “I have to be a realist and ultimately we got what we deserved: nil points,” added Smith. “But it took a front three of Salah, Mané and Díaz to ultimately take the points away from us.” Yet while Liverpool ended with 29 shots and three wonderful goals, Klopp said: “It was complicated.” If the figures flattered his side on what was not always their most cohesive or convincing performance, Salah again won the numbers game.State-funded infection sampling First reports suggested that this service was going to be withdrawn, but news agency reports on Saturday indicated it was now likely to be maintained. Officials were quoted as saying that the government’s Living with Covid plan would maintain “resilience against any future variants with ongoing surveillance capabilities”. The move comes after senior statisticians argued that some form of the Office for National Statistics’ coronavirus study should remain in place. Sir David Spiegelhalter of Cambridge University told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme that the ONS’s Covid-19 Infection Survey had been vital for monitoring behaviour. “Lots of people are saying how important it is, particularly the statistical community.” This point was backed by Prof Sylvia Richardson, president of the Royal Statistical Society, who said: “Throughout the pandemic, national surveillance studies have provided invaluable information to support decision making.” Self-isolation The legal duty to self-isolate after testing positive for coronavirus is expected to end this week. The prime minister is due to announce the move as part of his “living with Covid” plan, in which all pandemic regulations that restrict public freedoms in England will be terminated. Local authorities will be required to manage outbreaks with existing public health powers, as they would with other diseases. Downing Street said pharmaceutical interventions would “continue to be our first line of defence”, with the vaccine programme remaining “open to anyone who has not yet come forward”. But the change worries many scientists. “Removing the requirement for isolation in the face of high infection levels will inevitably result in increased spread of the virus,” said Prof Lawrence Young, a virologist at Warwick University. “This may give people a false sense of security. We must not let our guard down.” Testing Free home-delivered lateral flow tests for all are likely to be scrapped in the near future. The move will save the government a great deal of money but will make it difficult to maintain mass surveillance of the virus, as scientists have warned. “Even though the pandemic may appear to be ending, it has not yet ended,” said Jonathan Stoye, a virologist at the Francis Crick Institute. “There are no guarantees that new, more pathogenic variants will not emerge. Despite the successes of vaccination, many people are still at risk. Any significant reduction in testing will jeopardise lives and compromise our ability to monitor the appearance of new variants.”When Hannah Reeve tore up the grass on her suburban block in Burnie, Tasmania to make more room for growing vegetables, she faced the problem of what to do with the surplus. Her solution was to create the RavenOak pickup honesty stall out the front of her house, a set of salvaged wooden shelves laden with an ever-changing array of squash, zucchini, spring onions, eggs, beans, cucumber, rainbow chard, warrigal greens, spinach and broccoli. Passersby can pick up the produce for the cost of a few coins, and a few items such as seeds are marked as free. It was four months before Reeve made her first sale, but now that people have gotten used to the idea, business is booming and neighbours are responding in kind, she says. “We’ve had people drop off big bags of lemons, or plums or boxes of rosemary, just free for people to take,” she says. Roadside honesty stalls have always been a feature of Australian country life. But since the pandemic started, more and more are popping up in urban areas as backyard growers who honed their green thumbs during the first lockdown help calm food security fears caused by the latest round of bare supermarket shelves. While there are no hard figures available on the growth of honesty stalls, Grow Free founder Andrew Barker has noted surging interest in “sharing carts”, which allow people to pick up (or leave) homegrown produce and seedlings for free. When Grow Free started 10 years ago, there were only one or two new carts a year. “Now there’s a new cart at least every week … and there’s 320 sharing carts across the country,” he says. Koren Helbig, who launched The Local Yum in Adelaide in September 2020, says she was keen to challenge the notion that city dwellers couldn’t be trusted with the dual temptations of fresh produce and an unattended cashbox. So far, she’s found that people who take her vegetables, seeds, olives, chutney and jam are mostly honest. “Theft is the number one concern of people who are considering creating one of these stalls,” says Helbig, who regularly fields enquiries about how she does it. The questions came up so frequently, she wound up writing a guide for would-be sellers. “We’ve had our stall for 18 months now and in that time we’ve only had a handful of instances of theft or vandalism,” she says. Reeve’s experience is similar. She says she’s only had one instance where someone “wiped out” the contents of her stall. “They took the whole lot – two dozen eggs, some preserves, zucchini,” she says. “That one was hard … but there’s always going to be someone, and who am I to say that they weren’t in need? So instead of reacting, we put a little addition on our sign that said, ‘Free if you can’t afford to pay’,” she says. Rachel Fordyce, who sells home-propagated plants through the Kenmar honesty stall in Brisbane’s Wynnum West, is similarly philosophical about what supermarkets call “shrinkage”. She discourages theft by zip-tying her money tin to the stall shelves, but otherwise doesn’t worry. “There’s probably been a couple of plants gone walkabout, or maybe somebody’s put 20 cents in instead of $1, but that doesn’t really bother me, I figure that’s part and parcel of doing it this way,” she says. Another concern for would-be stallholders is falling foul of local government regulations, which differ depending on where stalls are based. Brisbane City Council, for instance, points out that permits are required to operate a commercial activity on council-owned land; that building approval is required if stalls on private property exceed certain dimensions; and that a food licence is required if fruit or vegetables are cut or peeled. But a spokesperson noted that council had not received any complaints or reports about honesty stalls – and none of the stallholders I spoke to had attracted any attention from authorities. Adelaide’s Jane Copeland, who sells sourdough from a stall, at a location she requested remain undisclosed for privacy reasons, says that when it comes to the legalities involved, ignorance is bliss. “I don’t want to know,” she says. “I don’t even know who would shut it down.” She started the venture in August 2020, after taking early retirement. She mills her own flour, bakes 18 loaves and 10 baguettes four days a week and pops them in a tiny stall hanging from her front fence. Everything sells within an hour of being placed there. “People want to reclaim something that’s simple and honest, good, beautiful and pure,” she explains. “[Bread] is just flour, salt and water.” But the most compelling benefit she’s seen is the strengthening of social bonds. “I’ve met a billion people who live nearby, who I never knew before,” Copeland says. “They all meet each other and bring their dogs and talk to each other and it’s really the most amazing thing.”When Peter Coleman took a rapid antigen test just weeks after recovering from Covid-19, it was partially “for the fun of it”. Peter and his husband first tested positive to the virus on 10 January, during the post-holiday period that saw a spike in cases hit Melbourne and much of Australia. “I was feeling really unwell but I didn’t expect to be positive, I thought I’d just double check,” he says. “I was on the phone with my friend after I took the test, and then I looked over and … I was just like – ‘I have to go’ … like, what the hell?” Peter is one of the unlucky Australians to have been reinfected with Covid-19 after making a full or partial recovery from the virus. No data on Covid-19 reinfections is currently being collated by the federal government. But a spokesperson from the Department of Health says the emergence of Omicron has seen a “significant increase” in the risk of reinfection compared with previous variants. “There is increasing evidence that there is little cross-neutralisation with Omicron,” the spokesperson says. “Whether Omicron infection protects against another Omicron infection is unclear and there remains significant uncertainty about the durability of immunity following infection with the emergence of Omicron.” When Peter first acquired the virus, he was hit by brain fog so bad he forgot how to order food on Uber Eats, along with muscle aches and fatigue. The second time, though, symptoms were very different – more akin to a common cold or flu. Peter, who works from home, says he had “no idea” where he acquired the second infection, only that it happened just outside the 30-day period when he initially tested positive. Fully vaccinated, Peter expects he had been hit by the Omicron strain, but has no way to know for sure. Peter says the second bout was relatively minor. When a nurse rang to check on him, she asked if he was feeling depressed. “I said ‘not depressed, unimpressed’ … Ru Paul’s Drag Race is really helping me through.” ‘You’re less likely to get the same variant again’ The Communicable Disease Network Australia “continues to monitor the evidence on reinfection and whether the definition of reinfection in the national public health guidelines requires review”. If someone is re-exposed to the virus in the 28 days after being released from isolation, they’re exempt from further quarantine – a decision last reviewed on 2 February. A senior research fellow at the Kirby Institute’s infection analytics program, Dr Deborah Cromer, says the likelihood of acquiring a Covid-19 infection twice is partially dependent on the variant and time since vaccination. While two doses of the vaccine provides protection against symptomatic disease upwards of 80% or 90% with Delta, with Omicron it drops to about 70% for mRNA vaccinations and 40-50% for AstraZeneca. Once receiving a booster, though, protection increases to 70-80%. “Very early on when the original strain was circulating, we were asking how much protection someone who has the disease had from getting the disease again,” Deborah says. “The trials show people who’ve had the Pfizer vaccine primary dose have twice as much [immunity] as someone who’s recovered from normal virus. But all vaccines are primarily giving you immunity targeted against the original strain.” Deborah says once someone has acquired the virus, they have specific immunity against that variant, as well as some general immunity against SARS-Cov-2. “You’re less likely to get the same variant again, but you’re certainly not completely protected,” she says. “Nevertheless, we would expect it to be less severe. Protection will grow, like what we see with the flu now.” While Covid-19 has some key differences from the flu, Deborah says similarities exist, as it is possible to have both viruses without symptoms or with mild symptoms, and repeated exposure encourages the body to have good immunity. “That’s probably where [Covid-19] will eventually go,” Deborah says. “Each time you experience a SARS-Cov-2 infection, your immunity will be boosted somewhat, which would mean the next time you’ll still have some immunity remaining.” Clancy Read first tested positive to the virus during Fiji’s second wave in August of last year. Living in Suva, her and her family had lived a relatively Covid-free life until “shit hit the fan” in April. “We were a close contact, and all went and got tested. My daughter, who was two at the time, was the only one who came back positive,” she says. “We were moving houses … it was just a disaster. So we isolated by ourselves, and as soon as we got to the new house, I got really sick. “It was in the chest, in my breathing, I’d be laying there in the middle of the night thinking ‘Oh God, at what point do you say I need to call it and seek medical attention?’” Clancy thinks that if she had been in Australia, she would have admitted herself to hospital – but feared being split from her husband and daughter and getting sicker alone. “The hardest part was not knowing how bad it was going to get,” she says. “The psychological symptoms were just as bad to the physical ones.” Then, after months of slow recovery, the Christmas period arrived and Clancy tested positive again. “We all got sick, and I assume it was Omicron,” she says. “I was flattened for two weeks, but it wasn’t as frightening … I wasn’t in tears in the night thinking ‘Oh my God, am I going to die?’ “Now the families that haven’t had Covid are nervous, they want to get it over and done with, whereas we’re happy to be out and about together … There’s an element of relief.” Deborah says that as the pandemic continued, it wouldn’t be “particularly unlikely” to be reinfected with the virus. “We’ve had a relatively small time window for people to have repeated infections in Australia. It might be unlikely [now] because of that,” she says. “But from a theoretical point of view, having Covid is not special – you get some level of immunity from having had the disease and some from vaccination. Both will boost your immunity.” ‘Getting Covid twice is more than enough’ Eleanor is still suffering from her exposure to the virus. She first tested positive to Covid at the start of January during the Omicron wave, after her housemate contracted the virus. Eleanor, who did not want to use her surname, had a range of symptoms – headaches, diarrhea, shortness of breath, insomnia – which began to subside within a few days. But then her second housemate returned from work out of town weeks later, and tested positive upon his arrival. This time she had different symptoms. “Fever, chills, cough, swollen glands.” Eleanor is normally an active person – she does rock climbing as well as regular workouts with a personal trainer. “Now I have shortness of breath, a racing heart,” she says. “I really struggle with exercise and get puffed really easily … and I have an ongoing cough triggered by laughing. “I get frustrated by people saying it’s a minor cold or flu. I’m a healthy 33-year-old and I’ve had shortness of breath for over a month now. Getting Covid twice is more than enough.”Rachel Coghlan first witnessed death as a four-year-old when she watched her grandfather collapse and die in front of her. Later, as a physiotherapy student working as a carer in a nursing home, she found a woman dead in her bed. A nurse taught her not to recoil and instead showed her how to bathe and dress the body. Later again, working as a physiotherapist in London, she watched as a man from Sudan struggled to weigh up a diabolical choice between staying in the UK to access treatment, or returning home to his family but with no prospect of healthcare. He chose his family. All three deaths laid the pathway for Coghlan’s decision to work in and research palliative care. After working in public health and research for more than a decade, she decided to return to hands-on work as a clinical palliative care physiotherapist in early 2020. “I figured I had a lot to give in that area. I wanted to find out what matters most to people and then support them on that journey.” Then the pandemic hit. For more than two years now, Covid has provided a daily reminder of a very specific picture of death; a death experienced alone save for medical staff armoured in PPE, family’s faces shining off an iPad. A disproportionate number of those lonely deaths have been in aged care. Earlier this month, federal health minister Greg Hunt was admonished as “disrespectful” after he pointed out that “approximately 60% of those that have agonisingly passed have been in palliative care ... The definition is that they have passed with Covid, and they are absolutely rightly counted as a national loss. But approximately 60% of those that have passed were in palliative care.” Hunt’s figures were later disputed, but palliative care professionals speaking to the Guardian interpret the distinction as a subtle inference that somehow these deaths are less important, and are concerned that such labels fuel a common misconception about palliative care treatment itself: that it is exclusively for people who are on the verge of death. The sector is already under resourced, struggling with fatigue and grappling with the fallout from witnessing immense loss, not just in terms of the number of deaths but of what people have ultimately been denied as a result of this pandemic – a decent death. Misunderstanding and denial “Palliative care is about helping someone to live as well as possible for as long as possible,” says Coghlan. She is also a board director for Palliative Care Australia (PCA), whose 2021 annual survey found only four in 10 Australians know that a person can ask for palliative care when they are first diagnosed with a terminal, chronic or degenerative illness. Three-quarters of Australians will likely utilise palliative care but many don’t understand the type of service it offers, partly because as a discipline it’s still not embedded across western medical practice, either at an institutional or educational level. Coghlan remembers the absence of the subject of death while training as a physiotherapist. “We didn’t talk about it. Even if you were on a hospital ward and a patient that you were treating died overnight, it was kind of just brushed over,” she says. “Palliative care wasn’t something that we were trained in or taught about. It never ever really crossed my mind.” “Almost no one who starts off in medical school gravitates to this area of medicine,” agrees Dr Helen Farrell, who’s worked as a palliative care physician across community- and hospital-based care for Barwon Health in Victoria for more than a decade. “Certainly as a med student I saw palliative care as largely pillow fluffing and hand holding.” Farrell had been working towards the field of gastroenterology. “I was seeing young people, primarily with liver disease, who were dying terribly. The focus was on trying to keep them alive rather than to keep them living as well as they could be. They were viewed as a liver rather than a whole person.” During a relieving term, Helen was allocated a covering position in palliative care. Suddenly she was introduced to “a field of medicine where the focus is on the person themselves, they’re the most important feature, rather than the disease process they happen to be living with.” Fundamentals of good death disrupted It is palliative care’s intricate and personalised model – involving families, specialist health workers and volunteers – that has been disproportionally impacted by Covid. “We had to pivot to telehealth almost as soon as I returned to working as a palliative care physio,” says Coghlan. “And that has meant that some of our patients may have gone two years without having in-person contact with a health professional. It really affected the ability to build trust with a patient, build rapport with them and their family – and to be able to sit quietly with them, if they’re feeling upset or they are suffering.” Anna Nicholas, a clinical nurse consultant in palliative care at the Royal Hobart Hospital who’s worked in the field for more than 21 years, says: “Our bread and butter is about providing a rich service full of compassion, dignity, and making it individualised, and all of a sudden, all of that has been thrown up in the air and we have to see what we can catch as it comes down. “At the heart of palliative care, it is about caring. It’s about supporting families. It’s about providing one-on-one attention. So all of a sudden we’ve stripped back how many family members can come. Then we’ve stripped back essential people that are important in our service, such as allied health; so less contact with physiotherapists or occupational therapists, really important people like pastoral care and volunteers that are really integral to our service.” Nurses like Nicholas have not only had to fill the gaps left by these services, as well as cater to an increasing demand for in-home care due to patients’ reluctance to go to hospital, they’ve also had to help families grapple with unimaginable choices such as how to limit the numbers of loved ones allowed by the bed. “How does a family member pick who gets to come and say goodbye?” And although Tasmania may have been comparatively sheltered from the direct effects of Covid, it has shut its borders. “And a lot of people … finish university and everyone flies off and don’t come back and then we have to call them to say, ‘your mum or dad’s dying’, or your sister or your brother. And they’ve been unable to come back to Tasmania. “We don’t know the long-term consequences yet of these grief and loss issues.” Palliative care is often a “hard area of medicine to work in,” admits Farrell. “We see the best in people, but quite often we also witness families in terrible distress. Usually we get to counter that level of distress by getting to do the good things. Firstly, we can help them feel as good as they can in order to do the things they want to be doing, to help them tick off their bucket list, and then we can help them return to their home town, or spend time with loved ones, or go to the theatre. “The joy of this job comes from enabling people to do those meaningful things. And then, when those things are just not allowed, it’s distressing to watch these people being denied … their last wishes.” Coghlan remembers treating a man who had terminal cancer. “We had this big, intense family meeting and everyone agreed to try to get him home. I helped him walk back to his room. He spoke very little English. As I went to help him to sit down in his chair, he grabbed me and drew me into a bear hug. We didn’t talk. And then his wife joined in the hug. Within an hour we found out that he had been a close Covid contact and he was put into isolation and he died the next day without getting home. “I had the last hug,” says Coghlan. “There’s countless stories like that – health professionals having to hold people’s hands because the family can’t be there. We just don’t know the fallout of those things yet.” The value of a decent death For Nicholas, the past two years of deprivation has highlighted how integral palliative care should be in health considerations. “It’s so important to refer early to palliative care. It’s an incredibly important specialty, just like cardiology or paediatric medicine. Palliative care is a very strong entity and specialty in itself that underpins lots of other areas of medicine and nursing.” The Lancet Commission on the Value of Death report, released last month, echoes Nicholas’s sentiments. The commission proposes “that our relationship with death and dying has become unbalanced, and we advocate a rebalancing. At the core of this rebalancing must be relationships and partnerships between people who are dying, families, communities, health and social care systems, and wider civic society.” The Lancet commissioners began work well before the pandemic, but then wondered if writing a report on death as Covid ravaged the globe would be welcomed or even informative. In fact, they argue, the Covid lens on dying in such a lonely, medicalised way has only served to illuminate the value of a good death. “Death and dying must be recognised as not only normal, but valuable. Care of the dying and grieving must be rebalanced, and we call on people throughout society to respond to this challenge.” “Working in palliative care is a privilege – it can make such a difference,” says Nicholas. “Just as it’s important to get the way we come into the world right – to have a good birth – it’s absolutely critical that we get death and dying right. Because it’s about what you leave for your family and friends, and that’s what people are going to remember.”There are transformative moments in politics when the opposition gets gifted the political agenda. In the 1970s, it was the power of trade unions and inflation that gave the Tories control of the narrative, just as after 2008, it was the aftermath of the financial crisis. Today, Covid and Brexit have combined to make the condition of the people the number one political issue. The question of how to react to this threatens to overwhelm a Tory party that is divided between its libertarian wing and its one-nation advocates and whose leader is self-evidently unfit for high office. It is a new transformative moment. The news last week that January inflation hit a 30-year high of 5.5% to produce the biggest cost of living squeeze for 60 years is the backdrop to a mounting social crisis. The pressure is reflected in a falling birth rate and stagnating, even declining life expectancy, desperately unfair life chances, disempowerment, justified post-Brexit economic pessimism and social neglect, all alongside phenomenal private wealth. Labour, for the first time in 15 years, has the chance to command the agenda and do to its opponents what was once done to it. “Levelling up” is the talismanic policy that brings all this together. Boris Johnson, for all his glaring deficiencies, had the wit to see that. It was not his alleged campaigning genius or what the deluded Europhobes think is the compelling case for Brexit that won the 2016 referendum and 2019 general election. Rather, it was the massive disaffection of millions of working-class voters with the status quo. There had to be change and levelling up, whose need is reinforced by the lethal unfairness of Covid, represents his personal commitment to deliver the change. Except, as the recent white paper on levelling up reveals in a way its drafters never imagined, this Conservative party cannot deliver. The first two-thirds of this at once intellectually exciting but finally disappointing document is among the best government analyses of Britain’s economic and social failings I have read. It is hard not to be impressed by the scrupulous marshalling of devastating data, ranging from the slow travel to work times to the disastrously higher prevalence of obesity in left-behind Britain – social science at its best. It recognises that the many self-reinforcing causes of this cruel inequality require numerous self-reinforcing responses. If the foundational framework it outlines is followed through, it could deliver, as the paper says, a generational £2.5tn increase in national output over and above whatever growth Britain might have otherwise expected. It is a fabulous national prize – except the last third of the paper demonstrates how far away such mobilisation is and the thinness of the government’s planned response. For some time, economic theory has been moving away from the simplistic “market is magic” doctrines that defined the past 40 years, but the white paper’s opening chapter marks the first decisive official rupture with that orthodoxy. The new consensus is to focus on how the state must mobilise and integrate the six capitals – human, financial, intangible, physical, institutional and social – that together constitute the “six-cylinder” model driving growth and, in particular, catalysing the growth serendipities available in densely populated cities. This is the “Medici” effect, so called because of the growth of the culturally and economically vibrant city states of the Italian Renaissance. It is combining these “agglomeration effects” with the right amounts of the varying capitals, brought together by empowered, self-confident local leaders, which is the alchemy of self-amplifying growth. No great economy can be built on a weak society; no great society can be built with a weak economy – and both need inspired local leadership. None of this is rocket science, even if it is a breakthrough for a Tory government, but it does require system change. Chapter two calls for just that. It is scathing about the consequences of too much political centralisation, the constant chopping and changing of Westminster-driven policies – 40 policies between 1975 and 2015 to promote regional growth – and the bewildering plethora of at least 100 sub-scale mini funds and pots of money for which local authorities have to bid, often with wholly different criteria. Instead, it argues there needs to be consistency over time, a massive streamlining of all the varying funds and a national consensus over interconnecting “missions” behind which the country can mobilise. It suggests 12, ranging from spreading out the national research and development budget more fairly to targets for improved life expectancy. Progress must be regularly and publicly reported. Above all, by 2030, every citizen should have the opportunity of being led by a local, empowered mayor to make these missions happen. So far, so good, then you hit the chapter on policy. The suffocating veto of Rishi Sunak’s Treasury is all too obvious. The imagination and verve disappear. Instead of streamlining all those sub-scale pots of money, the white paper boasts about them. Build up the British business and infrastructure banks to support local enterprise? Forget it. Serious transport investment so that journey times and frequencies match those of London? A joke. Search in vain for serious investment in the social infrastructure. New or repurposed institutions that might be decentralised to support the six-cylinder capitals’ growth model in all our localities? Conspicuous by their absence. The aim of creating one globally competitive city in each of our regions is noble – but over Sunak’s dead body. Nor is there any recognition that British capitalism itself is sorely in need of a makeover if it is to deliver its part. This is where Labour could pick up the thread. The country is ready to rally behind genuine levelling up. Money? Issue 100-year or even perpetual bonds to finance the vital capital spending. Create the institutions that will work with newly empowered mayors to revitalise our economy and society. Around the drive to net-zero, England from the Tyne to the Humber could reindustrialise around manufacturing windfarms, turbines, electric cars and batteries. Get back into the single market and export those green manufactures into the EU. Economic prospects for the next few years are dire: a shrinking working population, diminished trade, squeezed demand and stagnating investment together with the risk of falling house prices as interest rates rise. Against that outlook, Britain cannot let that potential £2.5tn of extra output go begging. The narrative, the foundational framework and the prize are there for the taking. All that is required is the chutzpah and vision to go for it. • Will Hutton is an Observer columnistIn a vibrant liberal democracy, contestability of ideas is the lifeblood of the parliamentary system. Since federation, such debates have been crucial to the effective formulation, adjustment and refinement of draft legislation affecting the nation. The sometimes bruising exchange of such ideas has been described in gladiatorial terms – winner takes all. For the most part, however, it has allowed for both sides of politics to modify their positions, taking into account proposed amendments drawn from suggestions coming from both sides of parliament. The system is not perfect, but as Winston Churchill once asserted, “democracy is the worst form of government … apart from all the others”. For more than a century, major issues of national security have been debated in Australia’s parliament this way and, on occasion, issues have been highlighted with a rhetorical flourish for dramatic effect in an attempt to wedge the other side. Sometimes that has worked well, and at other times it has backfired spectacularly. History is replete with examples of wedge national security issues coming back to haunt those who tried to use them. Billy McMahon’s excoriation of Gough Whitlam for travelling to Mao’s China in mid-1971 is one example, when it soon became clear that the US government of Richard Nixon was close on his heels, visiting China for a rapprochement. McMahon never recovered politically from the humiliating exposure of being out of touch. For some time the national security arena has been gathering steam and heat. President Xi’s exercise of wolf warrior diplomacy and sharp power has seen Australia become increasingly wary and uneasy about Chinese initiatives at home and abroad. That unease resulted in the blockage of Chinese telco Huawei from establishing its 5G communications infrastructure in Australia. Sensing a wider political and security risk in the Pacific, the Australian government has worked to prevent Chinese telecommunications infrastructure being installed in places like Solomon Islands as well. That was exacerbated, in Chinese eyes, by calls for transparency over the origins of the virus first detected in Wuhan. China presented a list of 14 demands which, if agreed to, would have amounted to a humiliating backdown the likes of which no Australian politician could contemplate without compromising their electoral prospects. Along the way, ALP leader Anthony Albanese and his team have assiduously avoided giving the impression that they would take a softer line on China should they win office this year. They have even distanced themselves from prominent former Labor leaders Paul Keating and Bob Carr, who have taken a softer angle on China’s sharp power. When combined with poor polling results and suggestions Keating and Carr’s views may be a more accurate representation of closely held ALP views, the Coalition has taken to the offensive to convince the electorate that national security is most safely left in their hands. The government latched on to a piece written by Bruce Haigh, a staunch government critic seen as sympathetic to China, which was published in the Chinese Communist party’s tabloid the Global Times on Monday. The piece, headlined “Weak Australian leadership inhibits potential relationship reset with China” seems to have hit a raw nerve in the Coalition and perhaps pointed to a deeper fear – that by winning the election, the ALP may be able to reset relations with China by virtue of not being Morrison and his government, without necessarily making a substantial policy change. Fearing such an outcome, it appears, they have picked up the issue like a cudgel to wield against Albanese and the federal parliamentary opposition. In doing so, some caution is called for. The Coalition has sensed the ALP’s willingness to use the election as a policy inflection point. An ALP election victory could allow for a not-unreasonable policy reset. Such a reset conceivably could be used to try to re-establish more normal relations in a face-saving way that avoids demeaning backdowns by Australia over the 14 points, or by China over Xi’s gratuitous wolf warrior sanctions. Such a use of diplomacy could serve the interests of both sides. After all, China is still Australia’s largest trading partner and it still needs what we have. It is worth remembering: China doesn’t buy from Australia because it likes our liberal democratic model, it does so because it is the best deal it can find. We retain some leverage. The Coalition appears eager to avoid allowing the ALP to claim credit for that outcome and to make the ALP look weak on national security. This fight is being led, it seems, by defence minister Peter Dutton. Prime minister Scott Morrison, eager to burnish his own national security credentials, has been trying, it seems, to keep up with him. They should proceed with considerable caution as the rhetorical sword they wish to wield against the ALP is double-edged. It could harm them more, and most likely will cause some harm to our body politic. Already there is growing unease and distrust of government exaggeration and efforts to control: over vaccines, over lockdowns and over a range of related issues. Many are frustrated and some want to lash out. The director general of security, Mike Burgess, has called on both sides, in effect, to back off, declaring this does not help him and his staff in Asio to counter the surge in foreign intervention and cyber-attacks, let alone politically and religiously motivated extremism. Debate is healthy and important in a democracy. It should be encouraged, but within accepted and recognised bounds. Issues should be addressed through extant parliamentary and governmental mechanisms like the foreign investment review board, the parliamentary joint committee on intelligence and security and the joint parliamentary standing committee on foreign affairs, defence and trade. The stakes are higher than they have been in generations, with a spike in great power contestation generating uncertainty and insecurity and which overlaps with a spectrum of governance challenges (terrorism, organised and transnational crime) and looming environmental crises (including climate change and pandemics). Combined, these challenges demand a sensible, level-headed consideration of the national interest and the long-term interests of the nation. Short-term politicking should proceed while firmly keeping these concerns in mind. • John Blaxland is professor of international security and intelligence studies in the Strategic and Defence Studies Centre, Coral Bell School of Asia and Pacific Affairs, College of Asia and the Pacific, at the Australian National UniversityRice farmers and ecologists in south-west New South Wales are weaving new partnerships between agriculture and wildlife conservation in efforts to rescue a little-known waterbird with a mysterious story. But pressure from the water market, crop competition and, ironically, increasing water efficiency, could pose a threat to their efforts. Third generation rice farmer Wayne Andreazza remembers when he first started hearing the foghorn-like call of the “bunyip” bird in the early mornings and evenings at his property in Griffith, NSW. “I didn’t really know what it was,” he said. “I’d be doing my watering and I’d hear this loud booming sound – it was amazing. I always wondered what it was.” Andreazza has been part of the Bitterns in Rice project for three years. The program’s aim is to ensure the survival of the Australasian bittern and is funded by the Riverina Local Land Services (LLS) through the National Landcare Program. “Male bitterns make deep, booming calls when searching for mates,” project ecologist Matt Herring said. “It’s believed Aboriginal Australians heard the calls and connected them to the myths of the bunyip, which is how it got the nickname.” The mythical bunyip was said to lurk in swamps, marshlands and riverbeds waiting to pounce and eat wandering children or oblivious adults. There are differing stories of the origins of the bunyip. Some say it was a punisher of evil against the environment and wildlife. Others say it was a blood-thirsty killer. But the reports of the booming or roaring calls of the bunyip right before it would attack were most likely those of the stealthy bittern hiding in the grass. With fewer than 2000 birds left across Australia, New Zealand and parts of New Caledonia, about 750 of these endangered waterbirds call the rice fields of the Riverina home. Twelve years ago, with the help of Herring, farmers began to investigate how the elusive birds were using rice fields as nesting grounds to fledge their young. Herring began approaching individual farmers who were willing to make their land inviting for bitterns to nest. This meant conserving grassy banks for the birds to hide in, controlling predators and putting on early season permanent water. “We developed an incentive program to bring together all the rice farmers who already had a rapport with the bitterns,” senior land services officer Anna Wilson said. “What we ask is a few simple things to do to tweak the environment to suit bitterns. The main thing is early permanent water, because without it the whole program falls apart. The bitterns need 140 days of water [a year].” While many rice growers have now moved away from permanent ponding to grow rice, Andreazza and his family continue to farm traditionally. In October they flood their rice with water for roughly five months to accommodate the bitterns nesting and fledging period. “You are basically mimicking a wetland,” he said. “We grow 1500 acres of rice and we do it on all the farms.” Thanks to farmer enthusiasm and good rains from La Niña, the past three years have been the most successful for the project to date, with 1885ha of land made available for bitterns to nest in the 2021-22 season. But Herring said while this is good news for bitterns now, external pressures on growers to transition to less water-intensive methods of farming threaten the long-term survival of the birds. “Water-saving growing methods have an insufficient ponding period for the bitterns to breed successfully,” he said. “This is a real threat to the species. “We are doing everything we can to at least maintain some proportion of the rice area having early ponding … but to expect the entire rice growing area to farm in a bittern-friendly way now is unrealistic. “The water is worth just too much money and there is too much competition with cotton and almonds and other crops.” Sign up to receive Guardian Australia’s fortnightly Rural Network email newsletter Herring said the bitterns project is proof that agriculture and conservation can work together for mutual benefit, and people should be open to supporting it with their hip pocket. “In the long term, it’s the consumer that ought to pay for bittern-friendly rice,” he said. “I like the idea of the public voting with their spending. If we want to see conservation efforts in farming, we need to pay for it. People do it with coffee and tuna so why not the bittern?” Andreazza says the collaboration has not only been beneficial to the bitterns. “Every kind of duck and bird and frog comes in and it’s hard to put into words how it feels … Unless you experience it for yourself, it’s just unbelievable.” Kat Vella is a Griffith-based freelance journalist. Sign up for the Rural Network email newsletter Join the Rural Network group on Facebook to be part of the communityOn Boxing Day 2020, a small group of people concerned about the closure of Perth’s homelessness services over Christmas set up a camp kitchen in a Fremantle park. They half expected nobody to turn up and to be packing up their trestle tables by mid-morning. Instead, an entire community bloomed. The Fremantle tent city at Pioneer Park became a political flashpoint: a month-long, inescapable presence that reminded the Western Australian public of the most vulnerable among them. It’s been more than 12 months since police cleared Pioneer Park in late January 2021. Officers also dismantled another, less visible, camp at the Lord Street overpass in Perth. Campers were herded on to buses and taken to city hotels requisitioned as “emergency” accommodation. But the tent city had put the homelessness crisis in WA back on the state’s political agenda. The Labor premier, Mark McGowan, facing down a state election, initially promised $49m for “targeted homelessness packages”. Later, he announced a new 100-bed hostel for Aboriginal people living homeless in Perth, followed by $884m for housing and homelessness measures, including 3,300 new houses, in the September state budget. But those houses have yet to materialise and an inquiry this week revealed the hostel is less than half-full. So more than a year on, how much has actually changed for the state’s homeless? On the numbers alone, things appear to be worsening. In December 2021 there were 1,001 people known to be living homeless in Perth and Fremantle, according to the Zero Project – the same as a year prior. There were 15,700 households on the state’s social housing waitlist at the start of 2021; there are now 18,388 and wait times average two years, according to Shelter WA. The McGowan Labor government inherited a waitlist of 17,000 when it first took office in 2017 and appears to be back where it started. People are still falling through the cracks. Some of them have made headlines – in particular, a number of Aboriginal women who died homeless on Perth streets last winter. A vigil held at parliament house for one of them, Alana Garlett, resulted in another camp-out, which was cleared within days. Desmond Blurton-Cuiamara, a Ballardong Noongar man, was one of those campers. “All it was, was a little Band-Aid,” he says. “They took just us to hostels. It was all short term.” Blurton-Cuiamara has been homeless for eight years and is currently on the waitlist for housing. His story echoes that of many: eviction from public housing after the death of a parent who held the tenancy; a large debt accrued to the housing authority; time in prison; caring responsibilities; periods of couch-surfing in the overcrowded homes of those lucky enough to still have a tenancy. “We need to start looking after our own because the system is failing,” Blurton-Cuiamara says. “Our spirits are being broken severely because we don’t have a home on our own land. So how do we conduct ourselves? How do we start living?” Many of those involved in the tent city remain upset at the way campers were treated. McGowan blamed “anarchists” and “professional protesters”, saying they had taken advantage of and made “false promises to vulnerable people in order to cause disruption and trouble”. Those involved with the street kitchen say they were working with the homeless community to provide a necessary service – but it was positioned to raise public awareness. They wanted the crisis to be seen, not swept under the carpet, an objective they say was perfectly legitimate. Then there were the insinuations made about the camp’s residents. Upon announcing their intention to clear the camp, WA police associated it with a string of local crimes. But advocates say they there was no evidence the crimes had anything to do with the people sleeping at the park. “The premier lied about people being lured to the camp from accommodation that didn’t exist and made false claims about what happened there,” Jesse Noakes, the House the Homeless WA spokesperson who was an organiser at the camp, says. “He [McGowan] smeared and slandered a vulnerable community to get out of a political crisis the government created. The new housing and accommodation, including a new hostel for Aboriginal people, only exists because [that community] called for it and won.” A state government spokesperson said there had been “clear evidence of antisocial behaviour at the camp”, and that the government was “committed to providing genuine support for people experiencing homelessness – with more than $150m being invested this financial year on a range of critical services and programs including crisis and transitional accommodation for rough sleepers, and the operation of Western Australia’s first medical respite centre for homeless people”. WA Police declined to comment. A number of campers did receive housing afterwards. A team of homelessness services, led by Fremantle not-for-profit St Patrick’s on the instruction of the Department of Communities, was asked to respond. The department said this week that the response team had housed 72 of the 111 people they were working with. Guardian Australia understands they were mostly people from the tent city, the Lord Street camp and the subsequent parliament vigil. Charmaine Mourish, 49, was one of them. She had been homeless for 15 years after losing her public housing due to a stint in prison, and accruing a debilitating debt on her tenancy that prevented her from getting another – until she was picked up by the tent city response service. “I was [at the emergency accommodation] for a couple of weeks and then I got a place. I couldn’t get a place before that,” Mourish says. She is grateful for the house but says she knows others who received accommodation that was inappropriate and were back on the streets soon after. “I think they set us up to fail. They should put us in a place where there are people we can get on with,” she says. A spokesperson from the WA communities department said that at 31 January, there were more than 600 social housing properties “under construction or contract across Western Australia”. The 100-bed hostel in Perth, the spokesperson said, needed to take into account residents with very complex needs, and its maximum capacity would fluctuate accordingly. After the WA election, then housing minister Peter Tinley lost the portfolio. The homelessness brief – which sat separately with community services – was taken away from Simone McGurk in a cabinet reshuffle. Both of these responsibilities are now with minister John Carey, who so far has been well received by homelessness organisations. This week, the first hearings were held for a parliamentary inquiry into the financial administration of homelessness services in the state. Noakes credits the homeless community’s willingness to share their stories for the positive changes. “It’s not enough, of course, and comes too little too late for more than 100 people who have died homeless in Perth since the start of the pandemic, but it’s better than nothing, which is what we started with,” he says. “Most importantly, if most people who were at these camps have housing one year later, it makes the tent city the most effective strategy to end homelessness that WA has seen.”At the end of two torrid days in the witness box, the questions came relentlessly, rapidly at Emma Roberts. Asked to recount the moments and months when her marriage to decorated war veteran Ben Roberts-Smith slowly eroded, and then, suddenly, fell apart, she remained composed. She told the court calmly of her growing suspicions her husband was having an affair, of the secret phone that would occasionally buzz in their bedroom, of his absences, his burying of secret items in the backyard. And finally, she detailed the arrival on her doorstep of the woman her husband had promised did not exist. Roberts, however stoic, was a reluctant witness, appearing for the newspapers her ex-husband is suing for defamation under force of a subpoena. Roberts-Smith’s lawyer, Bruce McClintock SC, however, put it to Roberts time and time again during cross-examination that she had taken the stand in order to destroy her ex-husband and the reputation he had earned. It was put to her that her testimony about her ex-husband’s affair was untrue; that nothing was ever buried in her backyard, as her ex-husband has told the court; that she “was quite prepared to lie” to discredit the man sitting impassively in the far corner of the courtroom. Over and over it was asserted she was lying to harm Roberts-Smith. “I bet you’re here to inflict as much damage upon him as you can,” McClintock said. “No,” Roberts said. “I hope Ben survives this nightmare.” The defamation trial brought by Roberts-Smith resumed early this month after more than half a year in abeyance because of Covid travel restrictions and shutdowns. Roberts-Smith, the recipient of the Victoria Cross, is suing the Age, the Sydney Morning Herald and the Canberra Times for defamation over a series of reports he alleges are defamatory and portray him as committing war crimes, including murder, as well as acts of bullying and domestic violence. The newspapers are pleading a defence of truth. Roberts-Smith denies wrongdoing. These three weeks of the trial have been focused on the evidence of witnesses subpoenaed by the newspapers, seeking to back up the allegations made in a series of reports in 2018. These are the key elements since the hearing resumed this month. ‘The most beautiful thing I’ve ever seen’ The court heard from an army medic, known to the court as Person 16, who served alongside Roberts-Smith during an operation in Fasil, in southern Uruzgan province, in November 2012. “Outside the wire” on their last operation before returning home to Australia, Person 16 testified he and another soldier trained their weapons on an approaching Toyota Hilux ute and waved it to a stop. Person 16 told the court he took into custody and handcuffed two of the four men inside the vehicle: an older man with a full beard and a younger man. “I made him out to be late teens … not a full beard, a bit chubby, and shaking in terror,” he said. “He appeared extremely nervous and trembling uncontrollably.” Neither man was armed, Person 16 testified, but components for an improvised explosive device were found inside the vehicle. He said both were handcuffed and taken to a nearby compound for tactical questioning. Person 16 handed both prisoners over to Roberts-Smith, he told the court, and did not see the two men again. Person 16 said that about 15 minutes after handing over the two men he heard Roberts-Smith say over the troops’ radio “two EKIA”. EKIA is a military initialism for “enemy killed in action”. In the days after the mission, Person 16 told the court he crossed paths with Roberts-Smith in their accommodation lines at the SAS’s Camp Russell within Australia’s Tarin Kot base. He said he asked Roberts-Smith: “What happened to that young fella who was shaking like a leaf?” Person 16 told the court Roberts-Smith replied: “I shot that cunt in the head. Person 15 told me not to kill anyone on the last job. So I pulled out my 9mm, shot the cunt in the side of the head, blew his brains out. It was the most beautiful thing I’ve ever seen.” Giving his evidence-in-chief, Person 16 was shown pictures of a dead Afghan male who he identified as the teenager he had taken into custody. The body was photographed with an AK-47 variant beside it. Person 16 said the young man was not armed when he handcuffed him. Under cross-examination, Person 16 was challenged by Roberts-Smith’s lawyers that the later barrack-room conversation about the alleged murder was a fabrication, “something you have imagined”. “I am 100% certain beyond any doubt that that conversation took place,” Person 16 responded. “His reply shocked me to the core, and that’s why I remembered it.” Asked whether he could confidently identify the body in the photographs he’d been shown as the teenager he had taken into custody, Person 16 told the court: “The more I think about it, the more I’m confident this was the person that was in the Toyota Hilux.” In his evidence to the court last year, Roberts-Smith was asked about the alleged killing of the Afghan teenager. He said the account was “baseless”, that he never said those words, and that the event could not have happened, because he never fired his pistol in combat while on deployment in Afghanistan. “I never had to engage with my pistol,” he told the court. In his previous testimony, Roberts-Smith also rejected assertions he ever engaged in the practice of using “throw-downs” – compromising equipment, such as a radio or weapon, carried by soldiers and placed on the bodies of victims as a post-facto justification for their killing. Roberts-Smith has consistently maintained all of his actions in Afghanistan abided by the Australian troops’ rules of engagement. Emma Roberts and the USBs Emma Roberts is the only witness the court has actually seen over these three weeks. The courtroom is closed to visitors, and vision of the hearing is sent out over a limited live stream because of national security concerns. Every other witness has been anonymised before the court, and not shown on camera. Roberts told the court she had suspected for months her husband was having an affair – which he denied – before she was confronted by her husband’s lover on the doorstep of her own home in April 2018. Roberts said the woman, referred to in court as Person 17, appeared at her home unannounced, and with a black eye. The newspapers allege it was caused by Roberts-Smith striking her. He denies that and has told the court she fell down the stairs, intoxicated, at a function at Parliament House. Person 17 will appear as a witness for the newspapers later this trial. In her testimony, Roberts said with news of the affair set to become public, Roberts-Smith told his wife that she would lose access to their children if she didn’t lie and claim they had been separated. “Ben had suggested that the only way we would survive that [was] if we said we were separated, that I was to lie,” Roberts said. “I didn’t want to lie. There were enough lies.” Roberts told the court: “He [Roberts-Smith] pointed to our children sitting in the lounge room, and he said ‘if you don’t lie you will lose them’.” Roberts told the court she was coerced into posing for a photograph to accompany a front-page story in the Australian newspaper the next day, saying the couple had been separated. She said the story was false. Roberts also told the court she had suspected her husband was secretly burying cash around their Sunshine Coast home as their relationship faltered, and ultimately broke down. She said she dug under a “very obvious” spot beneath a hose reel to find, not money, but a cache of six USBs secreted in a child’s lunchbox. Roberts told the court a friend downloaded the contents of the USBs, and that she told her friend: “I do not want to see what’s on them.” While the USBs are not, themselves, evidence in the defamation hearing, the court has previously heard they contained operational reports from SAS missions in Afghanistan, drone footage of military operations, classified images and hundreds of photos of SAS soldiers drinking in the Fat Ladies Arms, an unofficial bar at the Australian military base in Afghanistan. Under cross-examination, lawyers for Roberts-Smith asserted Roberts had fabricated her evidence about the USBs and that nothing was found buried in the family backyard. Roberts told the court she stood by her testimony. Lawyers put to Roberts she was motivated by malice, embittered by the end of her marriage to Roberts-Smith, citing acrimonious text messages written to friends during their breakup that described the former soldier as a “lying cheating cunt” and his career as the Titanic – that is, destined to sink. “You did come to loathe him didn’t you?,” Roberts was asked. “Not loathe him, no, but I was very angry.” Roberts was accused of “fabrication” of her evidence about her marriage and home life, saying her testimony was “an exercise in rank hypocrisy”. “No,” Roberts replied. Whiskey 108 Evidence this month has also focused on events at a compound called Whiskey 108 in the village of Kakarak, a known insurgent stronghold in Uruzgan province. The newspapers allege that during an SAS operation there in 2009, two men were discovered in a secret tunnel inside Whiskey 108, an elderly man and another man with a prosthetic leg. The court heard this week the men were captive, compliant and unarmed, but the newspapers have alleged Roberts-Smith ordered another soldier to execute the elderly man, before forcibly marching the disabled man outside the compound, throwing him to the ground and shooting him dead with his machine gun. The man’s prosthetic leg was later kept by another soldier and used as a drinking vessel at the Australian soldiers’ unofficial bar on base, the court has heard. In evidence for the newspapers this week, one soldier, Person 41, told the court Roberts-Smith and another soldier borrowed his suppressor, which he believes was then used in the execution of the elderly man. Person 41 also testified he later saw Roberts-Smith “frogmarch” the man with a prosthetic leg outside the compound, throw him to the ground and machine-gun him to death. Under cross-examination, Person 41 was questioned why he hadn’t reported what he’d seen to his commanders. “I just wanted to keep quiet about the whole thing,” he told the court. “I was a new trooper, on my very first trip with the SAS, I just wanted to toe the line. It’s the unwritten rule – you go along with whatever happens.” Arthur Moses SC, acting for Roberts-Smith, alleged Person 41 was lying about the killing. “You can’t tell the difference between fact and fiction,” he said in a heated exchange. “Incorrect,” Person 41 replied. Another soldier at Whiskey 108, Person 14, gave evidence for the newspapers’ defence that he saw an Australian soldier carrying a distinctive weapon, a Minimi machine gun, throw a human-shaped object to the ground and fire a burst of bullets into it. He told the court he later saw Roberts-Smith carrying a Minimi during that mission. A third soldier, Person 42, also gave evidence for the newspapers that he helped pull “at least two” men out of the tunnel. He handed them over to other soldiers and never saw them again. Moses, for Roberts-Smith, put it to Person 42 that his evidence was not true “because you weren’t there”. “That is not true,” the soldier replied. Person 14’s account was similarly challenged. “It didn’t happen did it?” Moses asked. “It 100% happened,” Person 14 said. “You have come here to throw Mr Roberts-Smith under the bus any way you can, haven’t you?” Moses said. “No,” Person 14 replied. Roberts-Smith has consistently denied the newspapers’ version of events at Whiskey 108, describing them as “completely false”. In his evidence last year, he said he never ordered an elderly man shot, and he killed the man with a prosthetic leg outside Whiskey 108 because the man was a legitimate target, armed and running away, and was killed in accordance with troops’ rules of engagement. He said no people were taken out of the tunnel in the compound. “There were no people in the tunnel at Whiskey 108,” he told the court. ‘A target on my back’ Much of the cross-examination of these witnesses by Roberts-Smith’s legal team has focused on the uncompromising, cliquey nature of the tightknit SAS regiment, its hierarchies – official and unofficial – and its personality clashes. It has been put to witnesses that other soldiers, less effective in battle than Roberts-Smith, were motivated to tear him down, resentful of his success, his decorations and his apparent fearlessness. Soldiers called to appear by subpoena have been questioned on their attitudes to Roberts-Smith, asked if they were jealous of him, or suffering an envy frustrated by their own shortcomings. Long-serving soldiers have had their own service records pored over, their reprimands examined, their mental health questioned in open court. Some have spent a bare few hours in the witness box. Others have been days on the stand, asked to recount over and over some of the most difficult, intense and frightening moments of their careers. Last year, Roberts-Smith told the court that following his investiture with the Victoria Cross – won for gallantry at Tizak in 2010 – attitudes of other soldiers towards him changed dramatically. “For all the good it [the VC] has brought me and enabled me to do, it is unfortunately the case, in my instance particularly, that it has also brought me a lot of misfortune and pain. “It put a target on my back.” ‘Why doesn’t Dad smile anymore?’ This has been a brutal and uncompromising trial. It has many weeks to run: the newspapers have called barely a third of their 30-strong witness list. Roberts-Smith has flagged he may call up to 18 witnesses-in-reply. But the shockwaves from the allegations and this subsequent trial have reverberated far beyond the dusty battlefields of Afghanistan and the close-confines world of the SAS. For Emma Roberts, the hardest moment came when she was asked about the impact on her family, and how the allegations against her former husband had affected their young twin daughters. She broke down recounting how one of her children had asked, amid the accusations and counter-claims, the secrecy and the stress: “Why doesn’t Dad smile any more?”Sea lion in the surf I’m not sure where Ōtepoti Dunedin’s Middle Beach ends and St Kilda begins but we park close to the muralled surf club, on the road that was closed for a month in 2021 so a mother sea lion and her pup could have safe passage from the golf course to the beach. We head right, away from the glitz, the groynes, the sand sausages, the coffee shop chic and the actual good surfers at St Clair beach. Our New Zealand sea lions/pakake are a protected species, a taonga. Hunted in the 1800s, slow to recover, but the one we met in the surf was on the hunt for some fun. A mocha flash through the blue of the wave. Two of us thought it was a dolphin. One of us was already on the way to the shore, chased there. She left her friend’s surfboard in the shallows and we watched as the teenage sea lion nudged, nuzzled and mounted it for twenty minutes while we begged the bystanders for copies of their videos and photos. Pics or it didn’t happen. It did. Liz Breslin Inked on my arm My favourite wild place is Castlepoint, Wairarapa. I live 30 minutes away and have been taking closeup photos of the shore for the past five years, even committing some of my favourites to my left arm as tattoos. The imposing Castle Rock looms over the sturdy, wind-blasted lighthouse and looks out to the Pacific: an impossible variety of blues and greens stitched together with white-crested waves. But I love to look down at my feet when on the beaches that stretch out from Castlepoint. The variety of miniature worlds on view is stunning. Close to the small Castlepoint settlement, the beach is gold to muddy orange with flecks of glittering black volcanic grains marking the edges of channels like veins on the back of an ancient hand or the exposed roots of trees threatening to twist your ankle on a bush path. Heading north along the shore you walk over sensuous, shockingly nude rocks in mutual embraces. Then lumps of pitted boulders shining with pink algae, green weed and tiny mussels clustered like seeds in a halved papaya. To reach farther north there’s a turnoff just after the golf course and it climbs steeply through solemn, dusky pines. On your left, convoluted folds of strata peak through soil and sand. Then as the road descends these same strata are revealed: sliced by the waves into perfectly straight lines of tombstones stretching out into a sometimes treacherous sea. And the sandscapes continue: lakes of snowy broken shells; collapsing dunes; wind-sculptured miniature canyons; braided kelp; fractal deltas – always changing, always fascinating. Ian Andrews ‘After steady scrambling we would finally break free’ My favourite place is a grassy knoll high on a ridge. To the west, the Tasman Sea, a becalmed Kapiti Island, and at my back the corrugated bush clad tangle of the Tararua Range. Behind the farm where father spent his youth lies a hilly backdrop, a bushy finger. The family name for this finger was the Fifty. On its southern side the Oriwa Ridge, a muddle of broken trees downed by a devastating hurricane in the 1930s. The route to the clearing was through a knotted skein of debris with the Oriwa ridge on the right and the Fifty on the left. There were no paths, no fence line, only a labyrinth of contours and an instinctive tack through tangled undergrowth, supplejacks, tree ferns, bush lawyer and uprooted trees. After steady scrambling we would finally break free on to the summit clearing. A fire lit, a newspaper screw of tea produced, a special tin of condensed milk, billy boiled and a mug of tea to savour. Snug in sleeping bag protected by a weatherproof cover and the ground softened with a fern bed, the southern cross overhead, the sound of a distant train lulled me into blissful sleep. Harley Stratton Chased by a wild bull Since I could walk I’ve always loved the outdoors. I grew up in the Mangamuka Gorge in Hokianga in the late 80s. Me and mum n’ dad, we stayed in a tin roof shack with a small water tank and a gas bottle was used to do the cooking. The long drop was a good five minute walk in the dark with a hurricane lantern and sleep was always heralded by the call of the morepork owl. We had a dog named Brownie and a horse named Dooley. We used to eat the cat’s eye snails from the mangroves with garlic butter and I’d race my toboggan cut from an old plastic drum down the steep banks in the bush. I remember getting chased by a wild bull in the forest and hiding in the long grass outside the bush knowing it couldn’t spot me. Man those were the days. Since then I’ve become fond of so many beautiful places it’s a hard pick at best, so I’ll throw a quick shout out to a new place. Just recently I was at Stingray Bay in Coromandel. God it was so nice to finally leave Auckland after not having left the city in well over a year. I spotted three stingray while swimming in the pristine clear waters. I gotta say Aotearoa is and always will be a beautiful country. Jesse Williams This magical stretch of water For seven years in the 1990s, I could see the Mātakitaki River from my kitchen window and hear the rumble of river stones rolling under Horse Terrace Bridge at night. Today, the Mātakitaki is still my awa. In 1985 I left the coffee-coloured waters of the River Thames behind, and in 1994 found myself living beside a river so clear and blue that my daughter and I could cross on horseback and watch the riverbed ghosting by beneath our horses’ hooves. We heard the calls of ruru, kea and kākā and didn’t understand their peril. Recently I’ve spent more time in and on this river than any other in Aotearoa or England. It terrifies me – learning white-water kayaking in your 50s is not for the faint-hearted – but it uplifts, energises and washes me clean. I’m a new person after a paddle on the ‘taki. Kayaking became my way to be with this river, with my past, and with my son who grew up learning to roll and ferry and eddy on this magical stretch of water. Mātakitaki means to observe, to watch. I’ve watched this river for 27 years, and I still can’t take my eyes off it. Caroline Crick A wild hillside with imaginary creatures We could’ve been sisters except she turned six just two months earlier. Our pre-television New Zealand childhood was conducted outdoors in Te-Whanganui-a-Tara/ Wellington – at my place in the bush behind the henhouse, or on the freesia embankment. I preferred playing on the enchanted hillside behind her house. There we’d slide on shiny strappy flax leaves and tall grasses that bent flat as we passed down to rocks swathed in lichen with creviced dips where insects and dew gathered – tiny pools that varied with cloud, sunlight and tree-shade. We populated our wild hillside with imaginary creatures. Where the track forked we always took the left path on the shadowy side with the child-high weeds. At home I was mama’s helper with younger siblings. On our hillside, chore-free in school holidays, my chosen sister and I were adventurers in our own wilderness that remains close to my adult heart. Along with my Irish ancestry, it’s why I feel right at home on any hill on the west coast of Ireland. That numinous hillside now resembles a forgotten scrubby slope wedged behind suburban streets. Yet its gateway magic meant later travel was sometimes a half-familiar journey of return with hints of freedom I’d experienced at age six. Margaret RangerRaisa Malashenko was trundling her rusty bicycle, laden with bags of food, through the centre of Stanytsia Luhanska on Saturday afternoon. The 81-year-old did not flinch as booms of artillery sounded in the distance. Her five children have all left this frontline town, some for Russia and others for safer parts of Ukraine. “It’s just me and my cow now,” she said mournfully. Like many older people in eastern Ukraine, Malashenko said she missed the Soviet period, and said she blamed the Ukrainian army and Kyiv’s western backers for the current escalation. But she also said she was terrified of a Russian invasion. “God forbid the Russians come, and then with them their Cossacks and Chechen fighters will come. Imagine what a hell it will be then,” she said, a tear glistening in one of her eyes. Over eight years of war, residents close to the frontlines here have become used to the idea that at any time their lives could be altered by a bullet or shell. They even refer to the booms as “badminton” – the sporadic exchanges of fire across the line of control. In the past week, however, the explosions have been more intense than any time in the past few years, and the targets have apparently been residential areas and even schools. There are approximately 2 million people living within 12 miles of the frontline, aid organisations estimate, and if the spark for escalation comes in east Ukraine, a new conflict would hit them first. Stanytsia Luhanska was formerly a suburb of the city of Luhansk, but since the war in 2014 has been cut off from the rest of the city by a frontline. On the other side is the so-called Luhansk People’s Republic – one of two Russia-backed proxy states where Moscow appears to be looking for a pretext to begin military action against Ukraine. There, authorities called for an evacuation to Russia on Friday – supposedly in advance of a Ukrainian attack but more likely as a pretext for Russia to launch a strike. Serhiy Haidai, the governor of Luhansk region, said on Saturday plans had been drawn up for the evacuation of women and children on the Ukrainian side of the border too. “Maybe in the coming days we will order an evacuation, if there is an escalation. But if we do it too quickly it will cause panic,” he told the Observer. In one of many incidents that Ukrainian officials say shows a major escalation from Russia, the Fairy Tale kindergarten in Stanytsia Luhanska was hit by fire on Thursday, injuring two people. On Saturday, the Ukrainian military flew a group of journalists into the town to help dispel what it said was a false Russian narrative that the Ukrainian army has been behind the recent uptick in violence. Two ageing Mi-8 helicopters took off from an aerodrome in Kramatorsk and travelled east along the line of control for an hour. The juddering choppers flew low over the barren, brownish east Ukraine landscape, where an unseasonably warm February has melted all but a few isolated patches of winter snow. Inside the kindergarten, a pile of rubble was still scattered on the floor, incongruous alongside the cartoons and drawings plastering the walls. “It’s very important for everyone to understand that it’s the Russian Federation that’s behind this. We have no offensive plans … and Ukraine does not want a war,” said Ukraine’s deputy prime minister Iryna Vereschuk, who addressed journalists from inside the kindergarten on Thursday. Nobody is more fearful of a new war than the locals here, who despite their outward stoicism have suffered terribly during the past years. “Everyone who lives in the zone near the front has problems with their nerves and almost everyone has serious health problems,” said Larisa Grytsenko, who runs a humanitarian relief centre in the town of Zolote, close to the frontline. On Friday, her employees were helping 72-year-old Valentyna Melnychenko, whose home in the town of Vrubivka was hit on Thursday morning, destroying her kitchen annexe. Melnychenko wept as she surveyed the damage. Her pension, she said, was 2,800 hrivnya (£73). She was terrified of renewed hostilities, she said, but had no choice but to stay in her home, where she has lived since 1974 and which is now draughty and damp after the windows were blown out. “What am I supposed to do, where am I supposed to go?” she asked, wiping away tears. “I’ve lost my husband and my son in the past four years. I have nobody, I’m all alone.”Harry Kane always believed he would have a say in the destination of the Premier League title. It was just that he thought he would be helping Manchester City towards it rather than standing in their way. The Tottenham striker’s desire to join City last summer has been well-documented. His employer simply said no. Here, despite the inevitable protestations to the contrary, Kane appeared determined to show City what they were missing. Kane was irrepressible from start to finish, producing one of the finest individual displays of the season, a fusion of hard work, creativity and ruthlessness in front of goal. Time and again, the England captain dropped deep to pick sumptuous passes, the first to set in train Dejan Kulusevski’s early opener. After City had hit back to equalise through Ilkay Gündogan – the midfielder capitalising upon an error by Hugo Lloris – Kane would make it 2-1 midway through the second half, having driven the move at the outset. It was the prompt for a crazy finale, coloured by VAR interventions that twice nobbled Spurs and, deep into stoppage time, a final dose of Kane magic. Kane and his teammates had celebrated in the 73rd minute when he jinked inside to slam a low shot past Ederson. It looked to be 3-1 and, possibly, game over until the VAR lines came out to spot that Kulusevski had strayed fractionally offside in the buildup. Worse was to follow for Spurs. The 90 minutes were almost up when Bernardo Silva hammered a ball across the face of goal and watched it strike the arm of Cristian Romero, who had excelled in the Spurs back three. Romero had thrown himself into an attempted block and the arm was not in a natural position. Riyad Mahrez, City’s top scorer, who had entered as a substitute, smashed the penalty into the roof of the net for his club’s 100th goal in all competitions this season and the escape act seemed on. “Heartbreaking,” Kane called it. But there would be more from him. Deep into stoppage time. In scarcely believable fashion. Kulusevski, the January signing from Juventus, who had a full Premier League debut to remember, collected a fine pass from Rodrigo Bentancur, the other new boy from Juventus, to cross from the right and Kane, charging in front of Kyle Walker, rose to direct a header into the bottom corner. After three straight league defeats and the sense that Antonio Conte’s Spurs honeymoon was over, the manager had the statement victory he had craved and it was one to fire the club’s hopes of a top-four finish. City were stunned. They had dominated the ball and the shot count while one statistic showed they had enjoyed 62 touches in the opposition penalty area to Spurs’ seven. Another revealed City had played 104 passes into the final third – a record under Pep Guardiola. City could not suppress Kane and, with Liverpool beating Norwich earlier in the day, they saw their lead at the top of the table cut to six points – this a first league defeat in 16 matches, 14 of them wins. Liverpool have a game in hand. City’s position remains healthy and it is surely not one to be traded but Guardiola and his players know that they have to give a response at Everton next Saturday. Kulusevski had swept home nervelessly from Son Heung-min’s square ball but the first goal of a genuine thriller was mainly about Kane’s pre-assist – a first-time, around-the-corner pass on halfway. It highlighted the instinctive understanding between him and Son and it would be far from an isolated example. City explode in flurries, flying at opponents from all angles, creating openings and they had one from the 17th minute. João Cancelo was the catalyst. Playing high up the left flank, a full-back in name only, he tricked past two white shirts to curl wide; almost combined with Raheem Sterling and also lashed a rising drive off target. In among it all, Gündogan got the better of Pierre-Emile Højbjerg but curled the ball against the far post. Spurs defended valiantly in the first half, Ben Davies making one vital block; Emerson Royal two more. Which was why the manner of the equaliser was so difficult for them to stomach. Kevin De Bruyne had lunged to try to reach a Sterling cross and perhaps this is what unnerved Lloris. But really there was no excuse for the veteran goalkeeper’s fumble. Gündogan blasted home the loose ball. Spurs wanted a foul on Ryan Sessegnon by Walker in the buildup but it was debatable and many phases beforehand. Rúben Dias had needed to be alert to snap into a tackle on Kane in the 39th minute and Spurs continued to believe that they could hurt City on the break in the second half. Kane threatened to connect with Son and Kulusevski before he turned the game on its head. He dropped off to play yet another pass and, when City could not clear, Sessegnon found Son and he crossed for Kane, who had continued his run. The close-range finish was clinical. Kane blew a one-on-one with Ederson shortly afterwards following another Son ball while Lloris would save brilliantly to keep out a Gündogan curler before the VAR dramas and the last-gasp winner. Conte, who deals only in brutal realism, had described City as “almost perfect” and on a “different level” to his team. Kane would bring the fantasy.Andrew Garfield has opened up about the grief of losing his mother to pancreatic cancer, saying it left him in “precise agony” and struggling to make sense of the world around him. The actor, 38, who was recently nominated for an Oscar for his role in Netflix biography Tick, Tick… Boom!, started filming just after Lynn Garfield, a teacher from Essex, died in 2019. “It is very, very difficult, I think with a loss like that the world gets rearranged and I say that knowing I am not unique in that experience,” he told Jackie Long on Channel 4. “It’s so strange because it feels very unique when it is happening, it feels like, ‘oh my God, I’m the only person that’s ever lost their mother’, because it does feel so lonely and precise. “It feels just like a precise agony and for a period of time I didn’t want to, and I wasn’t able to, do anything. I was kind of wasted and the world didn’t make sense, and it still doesn’t, because I miss her greatly, and I hope it never makes sense because I always want to miss her.” Garfield plays Jonathan Larson in the biography, the lyricist and composer of the musical Rent who died on the day it opened. It is the directorial debut of Hamilton creator Lin-Manuel Miranda, and tells of the challenges Larson faced attempting to break into the industry by writing a new musical. Garfield has already been recognised for the role, winning best actor in a musical/comedy film at the Golden Globes – something he believes his mother would have been proud of. “She was proud of my achievements but she was much more proud of how I treated someone in Sainsbury’s or Asda that was checking us out with our groceries. She was someone that was about the small kindnesses in life,” he said. “If I’m short-tempered with someone, if I’m having a rough day and someone walks past me and they’re nice to me and I’m gruff, I will feel a little hand on my shoulder. It will be my mother’s hand, and I hear her say, ‘Andrew …’, and I’ll go back and I’ll say, ‘Hey, sorry, that was a bit rude of me.’ “I hope she never takes a hand off my shoulder in that way.” Garfield previously spoke to Variety about his mother’s death, saying he had only just learned of her diagnosis before he went to North Carolina to shoot The Eyes of Tammy Faye. He said his mother encouraged him to go, and agreed to let him know when it was time to come home. He travelled back to England to be by her side in late 2019. “It was the best possible version,” Garfield told the Guardian in November. “Me losing her rather than her losing me.” It was she who nudged him towards acting when he was having a tough time at school. “What a dangerous, bold, loving, soulful thing to do,” he continued. “She knew I probably wouldn’t make any money from it, but she saw her son was having trouble and was not feeling a sense of joy about being alive. And it turned out to be the best worst decision she ever made, because now I’m talking to you about her and she’s embarrassed somewhere.” Speaking to GQ, Garfield said there remained “nothing left unsaid” between them. “We had all the quality time we could possibly have while she was here,” he said. “And those last two weeks I got to be with her were probably the most profound two weeks of my life. “To be with her and my dad and my brother, all of her friends, my nephews. It was full of grace in the midst of the terrible tragedy.”Marcelo Bielsa would have made an awful politician. One of his more refreshingly idiosyncratic traits is his habit of never pointing the finger of blame at somebody else when he can point it at himself. There are times when this appetite for self-criticism takes on an almost monastic hue: a live Zoom flagellation, a reminder that no external judgment on Bielsa could ever be as scathing or searching as his own. Injuries, individual errors, referees, fixture pile-ups, financial disparities: in the world of Bielsa none of this really seems to register. “The position of [Mateusz] Klich was an error on my part,” he said after last Saturday’s 3-0 crushing at Everton, after an appalling performance by the Pole in midfield. On Friday, he was asked about the misfiring Tyler Roberts, who has attracted some criticism from Leeds fans. “It is necessary that I take on more responsibility,” Bielsa said sagely. In a sense Bielsa’s self-incrimination is a kind of protective shield around his players and staff, a reassurance that ultimately the buck stops with him. It is also a recognition no other Premier League manager enjoys his level of unquestioned authority. And yet it is a stance that often obscures as much as it reveals. After all, when you are 15th in the table before this weekend’s matches after conceding more goals per 90 minutes, excluding penalties, than any other team and have no recognised senior striker, the problems clearly go beyond one maverick coach. Leeds face Manchester United on Sunday in an unusually precarious position. They have a six-point cushion on 18th place but tough fixtures – Liverpool, Tottenham, Leicester and Aston Villa – to follow. Beneath them, Everton and Newcastle are buoyant under new management. Watford should improve under Roy Hodgson. Norwich have already improved under Dean Smith. Burnley have two games in hand. For the first time in six seasons, Leeds are looking down rather than up. To a fanbase still high on the giddy joyride of promotion, still accustoming itself to the tactile thrill of Premier League football after 16 years and a pandemic, relegation remains the great unspeakable. Nobody has the faintest clue whether Bielsa will commit to a fifth season. Nobody knows when Patrick Bamford, last season’s top scorer, will return from injury. A transfer window that ended with no signings has only heightened the sense of drama, an acute discomfort you suspect will pursue Leeds all the way to summer. Leeds did try to do a little business in the window. There was a persistent approach for the midfielder Brenden Aaronson, persistently rebuffed by RB Leipzig. There was some tentative interest in Kenedy at Chelsea. By all accounts, the funds were available if the right target emerged. But nor did you ever get the sense that Leeds were desperate to reinforce, even with an injury crisis to negotiate and survival in the balance. So what, exactly, is the strategy here? It is a frequent trope of punditry and commentary that signings are analogous with ambition, that by investing in the playing squad a club is showing its support for a manager. At Leeds, weirdly, the reverse seems to be true: that in refusing to sign players that do not fit the broader plan the club is demonstrating its commitment to Bielsa’s vision. Ambition, meanwhile, is defined not in material outlay but in the urge to redefine expectations, to push the current squad to the very limits of its own ability. At which point, a pertinent question presents itself. What if those limits have already been reached? Leeds have the 19th biggest wage bill in the league and the bulk of a squad that came up with them from the Championship. What if, after lavishly overachieving for the past three seasons, there are no more marginal improvements to be mined? What if there is no beyond? What if the well of miracles has finally run dry? Certainly, the baseline numbers suggest a sharp decline from last season’s ninth-place finish. But the really interesting part is which areas have declined and which have not. Shots on target – for and against – are largely similar to last season. Their passing statistics – completion rate, progression, passes into the final third – are down, but not by much. According to FBref.com they still top the Premier League in defensive pressures, tackles and interceptions per 90 minutes, which suggests the furious workrate that has defined all Bielsa teams has not markedly dropped. But the most dramatic changes have been at either end of the pitch. Last season, Leeds were fourth in the league for shot accuracy per 90 minutes; this season they are 18th. They were second in save percentage match; now they are 16th. What this suggests is that the fundamentals of this Leeds side remain sound: from penalty area to penalty area, they are almost as good as they were. The difference is that last season Bamford was reliably putting away his chances and Illan Meslier was reliably stopping them. Now, for various reasons, neither is doing so. Perhaps Leeds are convinced that their injuries will clear up, Bamford will return, Meslier will find his form and Leeds will soon be heading up the table. But there are no guarantees of any of this. Nobody can say how a fourth-season Bielsa team will cope late in the season because none of his previous jobs got that far. Everyone here – from the fans to the club hierarchy to Bielsa – is in largely unknown territory. The future of Bielsa will not be resolved before the summer, with talk that the former RB Leipzig coach Jesse Marsch is being sought as a replacement. All of which merely underlines the courage required to commit so fully to a vision and a philosophy that may not even be around in a few months’ time. But in many ways the defining quality of the Bielsa era at Leeds has been a certain faith: faith in the process, faith in the system, faith in the squad, faith in the man himself. The coming weeks, you feel, will see that faith tested like never before.There was a rumour this past week that Brendan Rodgers had been sacked as manager of Leicester City. It turned out not to be true, but the fact it seemed so believable was telling. The improved performance against West Ham – when they were denied victory only by a late equaliser that prompted one of football’s increasingly frequent epistemological debates: what is a hand? – has perhaps calmed the situation before Sunday’s game against Wolves, but the pressure is real enough. Rodgers may have twice taken Leicester to fifth in the Premier League (with the ninth-highest wage bill) and won the FA Cup only last season, but the discontent at the King Power has been palpable. It was this week five years ago that Leicester sacked Claudio Ranieri, who had led them to the title the season before. Then perhaps a change could be justified as a sad necessity to head off the threat of relegation. But that is not a realistic possibility this season, even if Leicester’s run without a domestic win now extends to five games, including that humiliating FA Cup defeat by Nottingham Forest. This is modern football. One season’s achievement becomes the next season’s expectation. Credit in the bank is burned so quickly as to be largely notional. There are no second chances: as soon as anything goes wrong the automatic call is for the dismissal of the manager; one bad month can obliterate years of development and achievement. Yet it’s an open secret that Rodgers has been under consideration by Manchester City to succeed Pep Guardiola when he finally leaves the club, and that his interest in that position was one of the reasons he wasn’t offered the Tottenham job in the summer. Rodgers plays the right sort of football. He is one of only four managers ever to win silverware with Leicester (and only two if you exclude the League Cup). He won every possible domestic trophy with Celtic. He took Liverpool closer to the league title than they had been in 24 years. He took Swansea to promotion. He has a record of developing young players. But that presents a paradox: how can Rodgers have last year been a candidate to take over the serial league champions and yet now be apparently on the brink at Leicester? There is a theory that Rodgers is peculiarly susceptible to Bela Guttmann’s dictum that the third year is fatal, that after two seasons players begin to tire of his methods. And it probably is true that there is a natural shelf-life to some of the guru-gimmicks that were exposed in the Being Liverpool TV documentary. But evidence to back that up is slim to nonexistent. Rodgers was at Swansea for only two seasons. It’s true his third season at Liverpool saw a drop-off from 2.21 points per game to 1.63. But then that may simply have been the result of the sale of Luis Suárez to Barcelona coupled with regression to the mean after an exceptional season and a sense of emotional exhaustion having come so close to winning the Premier League. When Rodgers left Celtic in the February of his third season, they were picking up 2.33 points per game, as opposed to 2.15 in his second. Still, the idea that managers have a natural cycle of about three years is one that has been persistent for at least half a century. When Jack Charlton took the Middlesbrough job in 1973, he was warned by Jock Stein about the need to alleviate staleness at all costs, either by moving on himself or shaking up the team. But then, as Rodgers himself acknowledged this week, at a club of Leicester’s stature, that process of renewal is built in as better players look to move on: in recent years no English side has been so successful at identifying relatively inexpensive young talent, nurturing it and selling it on. Youri Tielemans, who has been linked with Chelsea, Liverpool and Manchester United, looks likely to be the next Leicester star to be sold. But, more fundamentally, it’s impossible to assess Leicester this season without taking into account the players they have been without. Wesley Fofana has missed 23 league games with injury, James Justin 19, Nampalys Mendy 14, Jonny Evans 13, Ricardo Pereira 10, Timothy Castagne six and Jamie Vardy and Tielemans each four. Kelechi Iheanacho, Wilfred Ndidi and Mendy were all away at the Africa Cup of Nations. It’s not just that that’s a lot of players missing a lot of games, it’s that so many of them are concentrated at the back, where they have coincided with (and possibly contributed to) Caglar Soyuncu suffering a post-Euros loss of form. That may explain in part, although only in part, why they have let in 11 goals from corners this season, more than any other Premier League side and a remarkable 27% of their total goals conceded. But Leicester also let in 11 from corners last season, which was the joint worst in the division; this is a continuing problem. Rodgers switched to a man-marking system from set plays after the win over Liverpool before New Year but without obvious improvement. Rodgers has come dangerously close to blaming his players, saying: “You can go zonal, you can block, you can go man to man, but in defending a corner you have to have that will to head it.” To an extent he’s right, and when better defenders return and confidence improves, Leicester probably will be more decisive. But that doesn’t explain why this is such a long-term issue. So that is an obvious concern, a problem that requires a solution. It may be that Rodgers is unable to find it, that some form of third (full) season syndrome has afflicted him and that the situation is irrecoverable. But the injuries offer just as reasonable an explanation. There are times when a manager is clearly stagnating and change is necessary but, even with all the absences, Leicester went into the weekend only two places below where their wage bill suggests they should be (with two games in hand). Football is an impatient sport, but this surely is a time for Leicester to hold their nerve.David Hytner was our man at the Etihad tonight. Here’s his report. Thanks for reading this MBM. Nighty night! Antonio Conte talks to Sky Sports. “It was an emotional game for sure. It was an exciting game. A good game. We followed a plan. We knew for sure Manchester City would keep possession of the ball for 65 to 70 minutes. We had to be good tactically in a defensive way. At the same time, when we were defending, the first thought was how to attack. We created chances to score other goals against a fantastic team. A good win for us. It will give us more confidence. It wasn’t simple to play Manchester City after three losses in a row, but it’s a process. We are working very hard to improve every aspect, and this type of game gives us confidence to trust the work we are doing. We will continue to give our best. I hate to lose! If I tell you it was good to have three losses, then no. I hate to lose. But it was important to have a reaction. The Premier League is very difficult. I am enjoying working with this group of players. They are fantastic, one of the best group I have worked with in my career. We have space for improvement and many young players. We have a lot of work to do, but we are not scared to work!” Pep Guardiola speaks to Sky. “It was a good game. It was difficult, they defend so deep and so narrow, and they have a lot of quality. We tried many things. They had good counter attacks. They are really good up front. We always had the feeling they were dangerous, we knew their style. The problem was they had five at the back, six at the back, and with the quality they have, it is not easy. It’s always difficult. Brentford was like this. It is difficult. But we had the chances. Unfortunately we could not score them. They were clinical, and the crosses we could not defend. We had the momentum, but Joao loses the ball, Kyle lost the ball when he was alone, they had a few passes, they arrived at the byline and we defended badly at the back post. People say it cannot happen, but football can happen! It happens. I don’t need to lose a game to know it is difficult to win the Premier League. There are many, many games to play and people will drop points. We have a long week, we’re going to enjoy the Champions League at home and train for our next game.” We’re yet to hear from the managers. The views of Guardiola and Conte coming up soon, so don’t close us down yet. In the meantime, why not crack open another tab and peruse David Hytner’s match report for the Observer? “There’s still ample time for City to win this.” Aw, come on, cut the MBM some slack, that’s what most of us were thinking when Mahrez roofed that penalty, right? Huh? But not Iain Gamble! Seconds before Kane’s header flew past Ederson, he emailed: “Yeah, and for the sake of balance… also for Spurs to win this?!” Good call ... and more fool me, looking back, given what Spurs pulled off at Leicester during injury time exactly one month ago. They’re making a habit of this. Harry Kane, unquestionably man of the match, talks to Sky Sports. “Crazy game! We worked so hard for so long, being 2-1 ahead for quite a lot of the second half, so to concede a penalty in the last minute was so heartbreaking. But credit to the boys, we managed to find another chance at the end, and thankfully I could put it away. That’s what the Premier League is all about. A great game for the neutral and obviously for our fans as well. They’ll go happy today! We had to find a way to get our season back on track, so to grind out that result was really special. Everyone was outstanding, and for bouncing back after a tough week. Hopefully we can build on this now.” Some new ground broken on the involuntary yelping front in Sky commentary tonight, incidentally. Volume up! As for City ... well, they’re still in the box seat and will remain favourites to win the title. But they’ve given second-placed Liverpool some renewed hope. They’re still six points in front, but have now played one game more, and they still have to welcome Jurgen Klopp’s side to the Etihad. Should Liverpool beat Leeds during the week, closing the gap to three points, City’s trip next weekend to Everton suddenly looks a little more daunting than it did at 5.29pm today. But hey, this wild and wonderful match illustrates that there’s no point any of us predicting anything. Let’s just sit back and enjoy the ride. OK, first things first: that’s a huge result for Tottenham Hotspur. Few expected them to take anything from this fixture, having lost their last two games miserably, but they’ve completed the double over Manchester City, and this gives their faltering top-four bid fresh impetus. No wonder they celebrate wildly ... though it was such a dramatic match, the clock nearly ticking into the 100th minute, that it’s worth a wild cavort in and of itself! What a performance. The first big statement of the Antonio Conte era. Football, eh? Bloody hell! Looks like we might have a title race after all. 90 min +8: Hojbjerg brings down De Bruyne. A hail-mary free kick is flung into the box. Sanchez hooks clear from his six-yard box. Bedlam! 90 min +7: Lloris claims a high ball and falls to the floor theatrically. Tick, tock. 90 min +6: When that goal went in, Guardiola sunk to his knees while Conte raced off in a semi-circle, shades of the way Ray Wilkins celebrated his goal in the 1983 FA Cup final. City can’t find a third equaliser, can they? Forget astonishing! Forget sensational! This is truly psychedelic! Kulusevski is sent scampering into space down the right. He’s onside this time. He reaches the byline and dinks across for Kane, who rises highest and batters a downward header into the bottom right! 90 min +4: City snatched all three points in injury time against Arsenal. Can they repeat the feat against their north London rivals? 90 min +3: Before the restart, Sessegnon is replaced by Sanchez. Mahrez pauses during his run-up, then lashes an unstoppable shot into the top right! Lloris went the right way, yet had no chance ... and there’s still ample time for City to win this! 90 min +1: Mahrez prepares to take. Before he can, City harangue the referee. Romero is already on a yellow card, and they want the award of a second one. They don’t get their wish. 90 min: VAR asks the referee to take a look at the monitor. There will be seven extra minutes. 89 min: A brouhaha in the Spurs box. Silva crosses from the left. Romero slides across, the ball clattering into his forearm. Romero was attempting to withdraw his arm, but it was over his head. City claim a penalty. They may well get one. 88 min: Now Laporte is down, having jarred his knee in a contest with Doherty. He grimaces. A lot of pain, but it looks like it subsides quickly, as he’s up and about in short order. 87 min: Dier goes down and requires treatment. He’s up again soon enough. The referee performatively taps his watch. Expect a fair bit of added time. 85 min: Walker flashes across the face of goal from the right. Foden attempts a cute backflick, six yards out. He doesn’t get enough on it. Cancelo recycles on the left flank. He loops long. Romero heads out for a corner. City take it short, play it back, and De Bruyne wedges harmlessly out for a goal kick. Spurs still hanging on. What they’d give for that third goal to have stood! 84 min: City continue to pin Spurs back. No way through. Yet. 83 min: Doherty comes on for Royal. 82 min: Kane is down in the centre circle, holding his back, having been nudged by Rodri. No foul, play on. City refuse to put the ball out, as is their right. Eventually Lloris claims possession and stops the game. On come the physios. 80 min: Son is replaced by Moura. Then before Lloris restarts the game, he’s booked for time wasting. This is going to be quite the dramatic denouement. 79 min: Spurs can’t get out of their own box. City swing in crosses from both wings. The pressure’s on. Then it’s off as De Bruyne, betraying his frustration, steps across Royal and concedes a free kick. 77 min: Nothing comes of this corner either. “After such a disappointing AFCON with Algeria, I’m sure the City substitute will be eager to prove that there is life in Mahrez.” Our old pal Peter Oh, ladies and gentlemen. He’s here all week. Try the black-pudding-based scotch egg. 76 min: Romero is booked before another corner, having tested the referee’s patience with too much pushing and shoving. 75 min: That’s given City a new spring in their step. They respond by pushing Spurs back and winning a couple of corners. Spurs scramble clear. 73 min: Kane has the ball in the net again. Forget simply astonishing. This is extraordinary! Kulusevski romps down the right. He cuts in and shoots. The ball deflects across to Kane, who spins on a sixpence and threads a shot into the bottom left. Bedlam! But VAR catches Kulusevski inches offside, and it’s a reprieve for the Premier League leaders! 71 min: Sessegnon gives the ball away, then tugs Mahrez to the ground in a panic. A free kick out on the City right. Everyone lines up on the edge of the box. De Bruyne curls in ... to nobody in particular. Uncharacteristically poor from the genius midfielder. City recycle possession, though, and De Bruyne tries again from the right. This diagonal ball is much, much better ... but from a tight angle, Silva lashes a wild volley deep into the stand behind. 69 min: Cancelo whips a cross in from the left. Gundogan flicks on at the near post. The ball cannons off the chest of Davies and into the grateful arms of Lloris. 68 min: City make their first change, the in-form Mahrez coming on for the similarly in-form Sterling. Some squad City have, huh. 67 min: Nothing comes of the resulting corner. Spurs look to counter through Hojbjerg but is clattered by Walker, who is lucky not to see yellow. 66 min: Lloris owed Spurs one after his cock-up for the City goal, and he settles his account here. Gundogan curls powerfully towards the top right. It’s heading for the postage stamp, but Lloris somehow extends fully and tips round the post, stopping a certain goal. What a save! 64 min: Silva flicks into the side netting from a tight angle on the left. Spurs go up the other end, Son curling towards Kane from the left again. Kane’s one on one with Ederson! He looks to slot into the bottom right, but Ederson spreads himself and blocks. What a save! That was surely going to give Spurs a two-goal cushion. City break, and Hojbjerg hauls De Bruyne back at the cost of a yellow card. This is breathless. High drama! 63 min: Spurs are suddenly a little more comfortable on the ball. Not much more comfortable, admittedly, but a few passes are sticking now. Before Kane struck, they could barely string two together. 61 min: City claimed for offside, but Kane had timed his run perfectly. A huge gap in the middle of that City defence. “He’s one of our own,” sing the away fans, in a more pointed manner than usual. This is astonishing. It’s been all City since the restart, but the man they wanted to sign last summer has put Spurs ahead again! Some space for Son to the left of the City D. He drops a shoulder and curls in for Kane, who breaks into space on the penalty spot and guides a sensational first-time strike into the top right! 58 min: Kane is Tottenham’s only hope. Like that’s breaking news. When he drops deep and looks to pick a pass, City panic a little. He nearly releases Kulusevski again, quarterbacking in the centre circle, but overhits his pass this time, Ederson claiming on the edge of his box. The Spurs full debutant would surely have been flagged offside anyway. 57 min: City have enjoyed 90 percent possession during the last ten minutes. 55 min: Space for Sterling down the left. He cuts back for Silva, free on the penalty spot. The ball flies inches behind him. Spurs blooter clear. The visitors are hanging on here. 54 min: City have taken 33 touches in the opposition box to Tottenham’s one ... and yet they could be behind again. Kane sprays a long pass down the right for Son, who wants to break into the box but is held up by the last man Walker. Son still makes enough space to open his body to send a sidefoot towards the bottom left. Ederson is all over it. 53 min: Some more tussling, this time between Laporte and Davies. The ref gets both captains together and offers some beneficial advice, in the rugby-union style. Eventually the corner comes in. Dias, at the near post, flicks out a leg and sends the ball flying across the face of goal. The slightest touch and it’s in. But there are no City men there. Spurs escape by the skin of their teeth. 51 min: De Bruyne strolls down the inside-right channel and dinks diagonally. The ball’s deflected out on the left for yet another City corner. Before it can be taken, Laporte and Dier are read the riot act by the referee for some wrestling-infused nonsense. 49 min: A couple of City corners lead to nothing much. The hosts and champions have picked up where they left off in the first half: utterly on top, pushing Spurs further and further back. 47 min: Now it’s Sessegnon’s turn to be caught snoozing. Dias wedges down the right, over the static and unaware Spurs left-back, towards Walker, who has broken clear into the box. Spurs are very lucky that Dias overhits the pass and Walker can’t control. 46 min: Cancelo nips in ahead of a dozing Kulusevski and romps down the left. Kulusevski, chasing back, clips his opponent and is fortunate not to go into the book. City get the ball rolling for the second half. There have been no half-time changes. During the build-up to City’s equaliser, Walker brazenly shoved Sessegnon off the pitch. It was probably a foul ... but far enough back in the move to render VAR impotent, and you could make a case for it being a reasonable challenge in a contact sport anyway. Kane wasn’t happy about it at all, though the incident was on the halfway line, and Spurs still had ample opportunity to stop City doing what they did. It certainly wasn’t a clear and obvious outrage, but there it is anyway, for the record. Half-time truism. The bookies always win. City have been the better team by some distance. Spurs will be happy enough regardless, the risible error from their goalkeeper apart. 45 min +1: Sterling skins Royal down the left with ease. The much more competent Romero comes across to get in between Sterling and the ball, before the City man can shoot. He shepherds out for a goal kick. 45 min: There will be two bonus first-half minutes. 44 min: Laporte sends a simple pass down the left channel sailing out for a goal kick. Most unCitylike. 43 min: De Bruyne crosses in from the right for Silva, who comes off second best in an aerial challenge with Dier. Silva wants a penalty, but come along. The ref is quite correctly not interested. 42 min: Walker fires a low cross in from the right. The ball makes it through to Sterling, racing in from the other side. He shoots, but Royal bravely blocks, and takes a whack upside his head for his trouble. He goes down, and the whistle goes so the physio can come on. 40 min: City push Spurs back. Sterling probes down the left, De Bruyne down the right. Tottenham’s back line creaks, but just about holds firm. There’s no out-ball, though. 38 min: After a confident start, Spurs are now all over the show. Bentancur is easily dispossessed allowing the hosts to launch yet another attack. Royal and Romero pair up to ensure De Bruyne doesn’t break clear down the left. They manage it, but it’s a hell of a battle. 37 min: De Bruyne crosses deep from the right. There’s no danger at the far stick, but Royal’s dismal clearing header lands at the feet of Cancelo, who drives wide left from the edge of the box. Goal kick, though City claim the shot took a nick and it should have been a corner. 35 min: That’s another one for Lloris’s ever-increasing blooper reel. The Spurs keeper was awful against Wolves last weekend, and that’s not going to improve his standing with Antonio Conte, who quietly fumes on the touchline. This has been coming. A ball curled in low from the left by Sterling. Lloris goes down to claim but, under pressure from De Bruyne, lets the ball slip from his grasp. It breaks to Gundogan, who slams home! 32 min: Cancelo is getting a lot of joy down the left flank. He drifts inside after a long dribble and looks for a team-mate in the box. He passes down the channel but there’s nobody there. Lloris claims. 30 min: Rodri crosses from the right. Gundogan, the ball behind him, attempts a scorpion kick from 12 yards. The ball sails harmlessly wide left. Full marks for artistic endeavour, though. 29 min: Foden leaves Sessegnon behind with absurd ease, and crosses from the right. Cancelo prepares to shoot. Royal slides in, a bold move in his own penalty box. His block is timed perfectly, and City are forced to turn tail. Just for a second, Spurs were exposed. 28 min: Hojbjerg is good to continue. We go again. 27 min: Hojbjerg is down, a problem with his left foot. A pause. 25 min: This match is wide open and very exciting. Sterling has a whack from distance at one end; Lloris smothers. Royal romps up the other end along the right wing. He cuts infield and sends an ambitious effort over the bar. In the middle, Kane, in space but ignored, seethes quietly. 23 min: City don’t look too comfortable at the back. They push up high again. Kane should send Son clear on goal but plays the ball behind his partner, forcing him to bend his run. Son crosses. Laporte’s loose attempt at a clearing header nearly falls to Kane on the edge of the box. Kane can’t quite control, and a big chance passes Spurs by. 22 min: Corner for City out on the right. It’s chested down on the edge of the box by Gundogan, teeing up Cancelo for a vicious larrup at goal. The ball sails inches wide right at warp speed. The City we know so well have finally turned up. 21 min: Sterling has a run down the inside-left channel and feeds Gundogan in the middle. Gundogan opens his body and curls a shot towards the top right. The ball twangs off the outside of the post. 19 min: City put together their finest move of the match so far, Cancelo and Sterling combining cutely down the left, the former racing free towards the corner of the six-yard box. Lloris blocks, then the flag goes up for offside, almost certainly incorrectly. Had Cancelo put the ball in the net, VAR would have ruled him onside. 18 min: Kane, perhaps with a point to prove after the transfer fiasco of the summer, looks well up for this tonight. He’s dropping deep and making most of the play for Spurs. The visitors are looking confident, testament to Antonio Conte’s powers of persuasion given their recent form. 17 min: Cancelo dribbles in from the left, sits Royal down, and curls for the top right. Inches wide. Lloris wasn’t getting there had it been on target. 16 min: Sterling drops a shoulder in the hope of tearing past Sessegnon down the left, but the Spurs defender holds firm. The door slams shut. 14 min: City win another corner, this time out left. After a brief game of pinball, Silva squirts a shot harmlessly wide left. 13 min: Kane sends Royal romping down the right into acres of space with a glorious diagonal sweep. Royal lumps it towards Sessegnon, just to the left of the City goal. Sessegnon does his level best to keep the ball in play, but he’d have to be an Olympic-standard gymnast to succeed. Royal’s cross wildly overhit. That was a great opportunity. 11 min: Dias with another long pass straight through to Lloris. City and their supporters are a little subdued at the minute. A long time to sort things out, of course. 9 min: The Spurs fans are in full voice, and no wonder. Their team have come out in a mega-positive mood. Sterling is dispossessed and for a second it looks as though Hojbjerg will launch another speedy counter. He can’t pick a pass, though, and the chance to launch a three on three is gone. 8 min: De Bruyne crosses diagonally from a deep position on the right. There are three City shirts at the far stick, but the ball somehow evades them all, and Lloris is able to sort. 7 min: Corner for City down the right. Can they strike back immediately? Nope. Foden’s delivery is too long, Cancelo is ponderous, Kulusevski nicks the ball away, and the pressure is released. 6 min: Well that’s put the cat among the pigeons, and what an instant impact by Kulusevski, making his first start for Tottenham tonight! Kane, his back to goal on the halfway line, plays an instant reverse pass down the left wing for Son, who is sent clear in the City half! Dias playing an absurdly high line. Son romps into the box, draws Ederson, thinks about shooting himself, but instead rolls across the face of the box to Kulusevski, who slots into an empty net! 4 min: A little space for Cancelo down the left. He loops long, hoping to find Sterling at the far post, but the cross is too high and floats out for a goal kick. And then ... 2 min: Son scampers down the left wing, but the flag pops up for offside. Both teams with an early speculative punt. 1 min: City snaffle possession in double-quick time, then Dias attempts to release Sterling down the inside-right channel. Lloris comes to the edge of his box to claim. Spurs get the ball rolling ... but only after everyone takes a knee. There’s no room for racism. The teams are out! City are in their sky blue, while Spurs wear lilywhite. Anticipation crackles around the City of Manchester Stadium. A quick one-two blast of Hey Jude and Blue Moon coming up. Kick off just a few na-na-nas away. Antonio Conte talks to Sky. “Lucas Moura has played three games in eight days, so it was important for me to make the rotation with Kulusevski, and give him some rest. We know that we have to improve, and we are ready to play this game.” Pep Guardiola speaks to Sky Sports. “Conte’s teams always resilience and character. They never give up. They are a fantastic counter-attacking team. The guys who played in Portugal deserved to play, so it was difficult to drop John and Riyad.” Some big results in the 3pms. Liverpool beat Norwich 3-1 to close the gap at the top to six points; Chelsea leave it late to win 1-0 at Palace, keeping their very slim hopes of the title alive, 13 points off the pace; and Arsenal avenge their opening-day defeat at Brentford, winning 2-1 to edge to within a point of the promised land of the top four. Spurs are suddenly a little bit adrift. Someone’s been at debutant Dejan’s Wikipedia entry. Own up, was it you? Dejan Kulusevski (Macedonian: Дејан Кулушевски, romanized: Dejan Kuluševski; born 25 April 2000) is a professional footballer who plays as a winger or midfielder for Premier League club Tottenham Hotspur, on loan from Serie A club Juventus, and the Sweden national team &amp; he will score 2 goals today againts Manchester City . Two changes to the Manchester City starting XI from the team sent out to thrash Sporting Lisbon. Kyle Walker replaces John Stones, while Ilkay Gundogan takes the place of Riyad Mahrez. Tottenham make four changes to the side that lost at home to Wolverhampton Wanderers last weekend. Dejan Kulusevski, on loan from Juventus, makes his first start for Spurs, while Eric Dier, Emerson Royal and Pierre-Emile Hojbjerg return. Matt Doherty, Davinson Sanchez, Harry Winks and Lucas Moura are all benched. Manchester City: Ederson, Walker, Dias, Laporte, Joao Cancelo, De Bruyne, Rodri, Gundogan, Bernardo Silva, Foden, Sterling. Subs: Stones, Ake, Zinchenko, Fernandinho, Mahrez, Carson, Delap, McAtee, Lavia. Tottenham Hotspur: Lloris, Romero, Dier, Davies, Emerson, Bentancur, Hojbjerg, Sessegnon, Kulusevski, Son, Kane. Subs: Doherty, Sanchez, Winks, Rodon, Gollini, Bergwijn, Lucas Moura, White, Scarlett. Referee: Anthony Taylor (Cheshire). Tottenham Hotspur beat Manchester City in the first round of fixtures this season. That seems a long time ago now. City are miles clear at the top of the table, while Tottenham, having defenestrated Nuno Espirito Santo and replaced him with Antonio Conte, have lost two in a row, in miserable fashion as well, to slip to eighth. With City flying, a home victory looks a shoo-in, but Spurs will take succour from their recent record against the Citizens, having won three of the last four league meetings … albeit all in north London. With the prospect of Champions League football next year slipping away, they could really do with an applecart-upsetting result here. City meanwhile plan to take another casual step closer to their fourth title in five seasons. Kick off is at 5.30pm GMT. It’s on!London’s transport authority could declare bankruptcy in a matter of days if the government fails to provide continued financial support. Transport for London (TfL) saw its income severely reduced during the Covid-19 pandemic because of the sudden lack of passengers travelling on the network. The government bolstered the public body, which relies on fare revenue to fund its operations, with a series of short-term funding deals. However, the latest ran out at midnight on Friday, and an extension is yet to be agreed. It is understood that the mayor of London, Sadiq Khan, remained locked in negotiations through most of Saturday to secure a new deal. “It’s vital that the government provides TfL with the long-term funding deal it needs to properly maintain vital transport services in the capital,” a spokesperson for the mayor said. “Some 43,000 jobs outside London depend on TfL’s investment. If the government refuses to deliver the funding TfL needs, it could impact TfL’s UK-wide supply chain, hitting jobs and growth and holding back the economic recovery in London and across the UK.” The spokesperson added that without a clear indication of government support “in a matter of days”, TfL with not be able to fulfil its legal requirement to offer certainty as to whether it can balance its budget. One of the options network bosses will have to consider includes issuing a report under section 114 of the Local Government Finance Act 1988, which would in effect declare TfL bankrupt. On Saturday, a TfL spokesperson said: “There is no UK recovery from the pandemic without a London recovery and there is no London recovery without a properly funded transport network in the capital. We hope these discussions can be concluded successfully soon.” A TfL statement released earlier this month suggested that the network could enter a period of “managed decline” over the coming years if the government continued to refuse to offer long-term funding. However, the government said it was the mayor’s job to reduce costs across the network to provide financial stability. A spokesperson for the Department for Transport said: “We have repeatedly shown our commitment to supporting London’s transport network throughout the pandemic, providing over £4.5bn in emergency funding to Transport for London and pledging a further billion pounds of capital investment every year up until at least 2024/25 – all at a time of significant pressure on the national finances. “We’re aware that TfL are still feeling the aftereffects of the pandemic, but it is the mayor’s responsibility to accelerate overdue reforms that will ensure TfL becomes financially sustainable in a way that is fair to taxpayers.” The number of people using TfL services remains far below pre-pandemic levels. New figures show Tube passenger levels are at 59%, while bus usage is about 75%.Pep Guardiola insisted Manchester City did not need to lose to understand how hard defending the title will be after a 3-2 defeat to Tottenham let Liverpool firmly back into the race. The reverse at home means the champions remain on 63 points, six ahead of the Merseyside club, having played one more match than Jürgen Klopp’s team, who are City’s visitors on 9 April. Guardiola said: “We didn’t need to lose a game to know how hard it is [to win the league]. There are many, many games still to play. I said a few weeks ago that we needed a lot of points and that it was going to be so difficult because the teams we are playing are fighting for the Champions League or the Europa League or not to be relegated. “There are still a lot of games to go and a lot of points to play for and we know how difficult it is. We know what we need to do to be there [at the end]. Now we must recover. It will be good to understand how difficult it is [to win the title]. We are now going to train and prepare for the next games. “Every goal they scored was different, but the third goal we defended badly at the back post and we lost the game.” Tottenham’s most impressive player was Harry Kane, who created their opener and scored twice, claiming the three points with a 95th-minute winner. Guardiola was asked if the centre-forward’s display showed why he wished to buy the 28-year-old in the summer window. “He didn’t have to score those goals today to show his quality,” Guardiola said. “All of the UK knows how good he is.” Spurs’ victory ended a run of three consecutive losses in the competition and lifts them to seventh place on 39 points, four behind Manchester United in fourth, with two matches in hand. Their manager, Antonio Conte, said: “This win will give us more confidence. It wasn’t simple to play Manchester City after three losses in a row. But this is a process, we are working very hard to improve every aspect. This type of game gives us confidence. “First of all I hate to lose. Our reaction was important. The Premier League is very difficult. Every game you have to fight a lot. We are continuing to improve everything and every level we work very hard on. Only one win is not good enough. Don’t forget we are coming off three losses. But a win against Manchester City is very good. We have a lot of space for improvement. This is one of the hardest working teams I have managed in my career.” Kane said: “For me it was [about ending] three losses in a row and we had to find a way of getting our season back on track. To get the result we did was really, really special. The boys worked their socks off today. To get the goals was obviously nice.”About an hour before kick-off at the Etihad Stadium a member of staff walks around handing out puzzles. At most grounds they are more popularly known as “team sheets”, but ever since Pep Guardiola arrived at Manchester City the exercise of deciphering his starting XI has become almost as absorbing as watching it. Brows are furrowed. Heads are scratched. Is that Bernardo Silva as a false 9? João Cancelo in midfield? That can’t be an 8, or a 7, and the 5 goes there, so … Ederson at centre-half? The real trick, of course, is realising that at Guardiola’s City, formations and starting points are largely an irrelevance. Roles switch every 10 minutes. Positions switch every 10 seconds. What matters is the situation, of which no two are ever the same. City’s equalising goal came from a Raheem Sterling cross, attacked by Kevin De Bruyne at the near post, bundled home by Ilkay Gündogan. But you could swap any of those three names around and still picture exactly what happened. Guardiola loves players who can do it all, which brings us neatly to the protagonist in this enthralling, physical, warp-speed game. The fact that it was Harry Kane who undid City on Saturday provided the obvious narrative hook. But as the home side pounded away in the second half, swapping positions, picking and rolling, weaving their customary triangles, there was also a certain footballing irony at work here. What made Kane’s performance one of the greatest by a Tottenham player in the last 30 years was its multiple levels of excellence. Yes, Lucas Moura scored a hat-trick in a Champions League semi-final and Gareth Bale destroyed Internazionale on his own. But Kane did more than score and create. He was essential in restricting the service to Rodri in the City midfield. He helped marshal the defence at set pieces. He kept possession when he needed to, played rough when he needed to. He brought others into the game. Kane made 22 touches in the first 59 minutes. About half of them had been exquisite. One was the sumptuous first-time through ball around the corner that created Dejan Kulusevski’s opening goal. And the vast majority had come in a little midfield band 10 yards either side of the halfway line. Not a single touch was in the penalty area. This was playmaker Kane, the deep-lying springboard, the platform-layer. This evolution over the last two or three seasons has been well-documented. But what exactly is Kane now, almost a decade after his Premier League debut? A 9½? A striker who drops deep? A No 10-cum-quarterback? What feels absolutely certain is that playing Kane as a simple meat-and-two-veg centre-forward is pretty much the least interesting thing you can do with him these days. Yet as the hour mark dawned Kane was yet to make his mark in the City box. Characteristically, the move that produced his first goal began with his own diagonal pass to Son Heung-min. As Son regathered the ball and looked for a cross, Kane suddenly charged forward. It was as if some old ley line of memory, some vision of a former life, had twitched awake in him. And yet this was not really a Kane-type tap-in at all: rather it brought to mind a midfield poacher such as Frank Lampard or Bryan Robson, or even Gündogan. And so came the agonising finish: the swinging crosses, the desperate defensive rearguard, the mesmerising whirl of blue shirts, the inevitable City equaliser via a VAR penalty. But in the fifth minute of injury time, as City roused themselves for one last push, Kane rose highest to nod in Kulusevski’s cross and burgle a spectacular winning goal. Pressing midfielder, playmaker, false forward: and yet here at the very end was a reminder that for the many masks Kane wore here, the original remains the best. The obvious question in the short term is what Kane, now bubbling to a peak after an indifferent autumn, can do for Tottenham. Great moments do not necessarily presage a change in the weather: the great robbery of Leicester a few weeks ago was not the new dawn it felt like at the time. The home form remains a real concern. But Champions League qualification and perhaps even an FA Cup tilt no longer feels like a distant ambition. The more intriguing question is what City might have done for Kane, had that summer transfer flirtation been consummated. The old assumption was that Kane would simply be the fairy on Guardiola’s Christmas tree, banging in 40 tap-ins a season and finally solving their penalty problem. But as this game showed, Kane can be so much more. In a strange way, he already feels like a Guardiola player in his appreciation of space, his hybrid instincts, his ability to flick through roles in an instant. Idle conjecture for now. But maybe not for too much longer.There is a certain symmetry in Wales being the visitors for England’s first home match of this year’s Six Nations on 26 February.. It could be the first major international sporting event staged in England after all Covid-19 restrictions have been lifted and it will be the first Six Nations match England have played at Twickenham in front of spectators for almost two years – since, as fate would have it, Wales were the visitors in 2020. In many ways that match feels like a lifetime ago. The pandemic was taking hold, England’s following fixture against Italy had already been postponed but 80,000-plus supporters piled into Twickenham regardless. The government had evidently not grasped the seriousness of the situation, to the extent that Boris Johnson was a guest of honour at Twickenham that day – something that was subsequently held up as a reason for Cheltenham Festival going ahead a few days later. It was hardly the last days of Rome but there was a febrile air around Twickenham, a sense that with growing uncertainty around the corner, a known unknown on the horizon, a certain wildness was taking hold. That was reflected on the pitch, too, as England eked out a 33-30 victory in what would have been remembered as one of the more dramatic Six Nations matches in recent history, but for the pandemic swiftly putting things into perspective. As is often the case in these fixtures, England romped into a sizeable 20-6 lead at half-time but Wales came roaring back, inspired by a stunning Justin Tipuric try. England finished the contest with 13 men after Manu Tuilagi was sent off with Ellis Genge already in the sin-bin and Wales would surely have prevailed had there been another couple of minutes. It was the match when Joe Marler earned himself a 10-week ban for grabbing Alun Wyn Jones’s genitals and Eddie Jones a fine for his post-match comments about the referee, Ben O’Keeffe. If Saturday is half as eventful it is not to be missed but as this fixture bookends an unprecedented two‑year period – the obvious caveat that the lifting of restrictions does not mean the end to the pandemic – it is worth considering England’s development in those 24 months. There are mitigating factors – the empty stadiums being chief among them – but while England won the 2020 Autumn Nations Cup there was little cause for excitement. Perhaps that triumph papered over cracks because they were desperate in last year’s Six Nations before Jones began his “New England” overhaul in the summer, continuing it in the autumn and across this campaign. Senior figures were jettisoned, the Saracens-centric leadership group was replaced and perhaps most significantly England have had to learn to cope without Owen Farrell for all but 68 minutes since last March’s heavy defeat by Ireland. Last week’s victory in Italy told us little other than that Marcus Smith can be electric when afforded time, space and front-foot ball and if there seems to be an obsession with the Harlequins fly-half it is largely because this England project and its progress are hard to gauge. There were positives against Scotland but familiar failings in the final quarter and inevitable periods of tedium against Italy. It is the forthcoming back-to-back matches at Twickenham against Wales and Ireland, then, that will shape the campaign. Maro Itoje talks about a revitalisation taking place and in terms of personnel, against Wales you would expect about 50% turnover from the side who won the fixture in 2020. More than that, though, England seem re-energised and no longer suffering from the bubble fatigue of 12 months ago. “There’s been a change of personnel within the squad, coaches, and I guess a bit of a revitalisation of the squad and environment since before lockdown,” says Itoje. “We probably made a step in the direction, in terms of style, in how we want to play the game. We want to attack and want to be a bit more attacking focused than we were in previous years, following on from the theme of the autumn. “Set piece, defence and kicking will always be a strong part of the game, they are the pillars that will win Test matches, but we do want to add this attacking dynamism to our game as well.” That last point will please a crowd eager to see England on the attack, having been sent home with a spring in their step by the dramatic victory over South Africa to bring the curtain down on the autumn campaign. It cannot be a coincidence that by this stage last year there had been three away victories, discounting matches against Italy, but this time, with supporters back en masse, there have been none. Perhaps Jones had a point when raising concerns over his players’ arousal levels a year ago in the absence of supporters. “Twickenham, a packed house, against Wales – it will be amazing,” says Itoje. “These are the moments. These are the games that you desperately want to be a part of. These are the games you shouldn’t take for granted because they are truly special atmospheres. They are always intense, tough games. “There is a lot of passion, a lot of pride on both sides of the field. They tend to be enjoyable, high‑pressure. These are the games that you want to play.”Richard Kilty says he will never forgive his teammate CJ Ujah for his “sloppy and reckless” behaviour that led to Britain’s 4x100m relay team being stripped of their Tokyo Olympic silver medal. Kilty also admitted that he is yet to work out how to tell his five-year-old son, Richard Jr, that his medal will have to be returned after Ujah’s failed drugs test was confirmed by the court of arbitration for sport. “To finally reach the pinnacle and win an Olympic medal, and then to lose it because one person has just been sloppy and reckless with what’s gone into their body, is heartbreaking,” said Kilty. “Now he’s made that mistake I don’t think I’ll ever be able to forgive him because me, Zharnel Hughes and Nethaneel Mitchell-Blake have lost a medal at the hands of his mistakes.” His anguish was shared by his relay teammate Mitchell-Blake who said he was “heartbroken”. “I was happy that some news came out so we can actually get the process going,” said the 27-year-old sprinter. “But then it’s a nail in the coffin saying you’re getting stripped of your Olympic silver medal. It hasn’t really 100% sunk in yet, but when you say it and repeat it and think about it, it’s not a nice feeling. We’re all heartbroken by it. It’s gutting for us, the nation, everybody.” Ujah said in a statement on Friday he had “unknowingly consumed a contaminated supplement” and apologised to his “teammates, their families and support teams”. However, Kilty revealed that Ujah had admitted to his teammates in a Zoom call that he had been taking supplements that were not protected by being batch-tested by Informed Sport – meaning he had no defence when his banned test was revealed. “We do a 45-minute workshop before we go to the Olympic Games,” said Kilty. “You have to do it. It’s mandatory. And it explains only take Informed Sports supplements.” Britain were stripped of their silver after Ujah was found to have two banned drugs, ostarine and S23, in a urine sample taken at the Games. “If you break the rules, you’ve got to live with the consequences,” said Kilty. “We know the rules. The rules are this – if you take drugs, you get banned. You’re cheating. I’m not calling out CJ. I’m not saying that the guy purposely went out and took drugs. Only he knows if he has or hasn’t. Could he look me in the eye and tell the truth? That is the question. Only he knows the truth.” Kilty said that he had spoken to Ujah six or seven weeks ago, and he had told him that he had not used an Informed Sport batch of supplements – meaning he had no protection when he tested positive. “For the last 20 years of my career – the same as the other two lads – we have worked our asses off. We have followed the rules, in and out. I know for a fact that I’m never going to fail a drug test for two reasons. One, I don’t take drugs. Two, every supplement and everything that I put into my body, that’s on me and I make sure whatever goes into my body is checked. My supplements are checked. And I know for a fact I’m never going to fail a drug test because I’m not a drug cheat and I follow the rules.” Kilty also revealed he never had the chance to let his son take his silver medal into school due to Ujah’s failed drugs test – and now had to work out how to tell him that he would have to send it back. “When I finally brought the medal home my son was so proud of it,” he said. “I think he’ll probably understand it more in a year or two, when I can explain to him. “But this case has also got to be an example to every young athlete in the country who comes on to the British athletics team who wants to be an Olympian. You are accountable for what goes into your body. Please check your supplements for yourself. For your teammates. Please follow the rules. Because me, Nethaneel and Zharnel have been burned by a teammate. It’s really important that we as a team now, you know, really impress that to the next generation of young athletes that this is what happens.”US golf courses owned by Donald Trump could host events in a hugely controversial new league funded by Saudi Arabia, the Washington Post reported on Saturday. Citing three anonymous sources, the newspaper said courses in Bedminster, New Jersey, and Doral, Florida, could host events after discussions between the Trump Organization and LIV Golf Investments, a body funded by the Saudis. One source, the Post said, indicated Trump had spoken to Greg Norman, the Australian two-time British Open champion and longtime Trump friend who heads LIV Golf Investments. Events at Trump properties would prove hugely controversial, not just because the Saudi plans have riven world golf due to Riyadh’s abysmal record on human rights. Trump remains a hugely divisive force in US life. He was impeached twice as president, the second time for inciting the deadly attack on the US Capitol on 6 January 2021, in service of his lie that his defeat by Joe Biden was the result of electoral fraud. Free to run for office again, he remains the favourite to win the Republican nomination in 2024, prompting some observers to warn of likely civil unrest. Trump’s golf courses are also caught up in investigations of his business affairs, concerning whether property valuations were manipulated for tax purposes. The Guardian reported on affairs at one course, Briarcliff Manor in New York, as long ago as 2016, under the headline: “How Trump’s $50m golf club became $1.4m when it came time to pay tax.” Trump denies wrongdoing but a judge ruled this week that he and two of his children, Donald Jr and Ivanka, must cooperate with the New York state attorney general, Letitia James, in her civil investigation. Amid heavy pressure on Trump’s business empire, his golf properties have been widely reported to be in financial difficulty, among them those in Scotland. Trump courses no longer hold events on the PGA Tour, after the US governing body pulled out of partnerships because of Trump’s political campaigning before and after the Capitol attack. The Saudi golf gambit has stirred huge controversy given Riyadh’s record on human rights, particularly regarding the murder, dismemberment and disposal of the dissident Jamal Khashoggi, a Washington Post columnist, in 2018. The Saudi crown prince, Mohammed bin Salman, is widely held to have ordered the murder. But he is also a key US ally close to Jared Kushner, Trump’s son-in-law and adviser. In 2020, Trump told the Post reporter Bob Woodward he had “saved [the prince’s] ass” and “was able to get Congress to leave him alone. I was able to get them to stop.” Representatives for the Trump Organization, the Saudi government and LIV Golf Investments did not comment to the Post. A spokesman for Trump, Taylor Budowich, said: “It certainly sounds possible given the fact that President Trump owns some of the most beautiful and renowned golf courses in the world – from the cliffs of Rancho Palos Verdes, to the majestic rolling hills of Bedminster and, of course, the iconic Doral property.” Elsewhere, it was reported this week that the US golfer Phil Mickelson, a former world No 1, called the Saudis “scary motherfuckers” but said the new league would offer a chance to reshape world golf. “They’re scary motherfuckers to get involved with,” Alan Shipnuck, the author of a forthcoming unauthorized biography of Mickelson, quoted the golfer as saying. “We know they killed Khashoggi and have a horrible record on human rights. They execute people over there for being gay. “Knowing all of this, why would I even consider it? Because this is a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to reshape how the PGA Tour operates … The Saudi money has finally given us leverage. I’m not sure I even want [the Saudi league] to succeed, but just the idea of it is allowing us to get things done with the [PGA] Tour.”The avocado ban is toast. US officials announced on Friday that imports from Mexico had resumed, following a temporary ban that stemmed from a threat against an American agricultural inspector. The US Department of Agriculture Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (Aphis) said avocado inspections in Michoacán, Mexico, had restarted, allowing imports to follow. US officials said the threat was made on 11 February. The Mexican agriculture department said an inspector received a menacing message on his phone. Aphis said inspection officials were now “working closely” with a security officer at the US embassy, the Mexican national plant protection organization and the Association of Avocado Producers and Packers Exporters of Mexico. It added that it had “enacted additional measures that enhance safety for … inspectors working in the field”. “The safety of USDA employees simply doing their jobs is of paramount importance,” the agency said. “USDA is appreciative of the positive, collaborative relationship between the United States and Mexico that made resolution of this issue possible in a timely manner.” Michoacán is the only state in Mexico that has a permit to export avocados to the US. Mexican growers and packers say they are frequently targeted with violence and threats from organized crime. In 2021, the US imported $3bn in avocados, with $2.8bn originating from Mexico. That equates to 1.2m metric tons of the buttery fruit, 1.1m tons from Mexico. Mexico’s avocado exports total $3.2bn. About 80% of these exports go to the US. “Mexico and the United States will continue working together to fortify the strong bilateral supply chains that promote economic growth and prosperity in both countries,” US officials said.Look at Wolves go. They are this season’s most unlikely contenders for a top-four finish and could boost their chances on Sunday by winning at home to Leicester. Bruno Lage deserves high praise. So does the manager’s little brother. Luis Nascimento, at 42 three years younger than his more prominent sibling, was one of the six backroom staff members brought to Molineux after Lage’s appointment in June. Lage had collaborated with each of them before but had never worked directly with his brother, whose career has largely mirrored his own. Nascimento’s official title is Wolves’ senior professional development coach but he is nicknamed “Il Capitano” after Capitano Nascimento, the lead character of the 2007 Brazilian movie Tropa de Elite, about a no-nonsense policeman tasked with cleaning Rio de Janeiro of drug gangs before a visit by the pope. “He is different to me, he is more serious,” says the jovial Lage, explaining the tag was coined by Carlos Carvalhal, under whom they served as assistant manager: Lage at Swansea and Sheffield Wednesday between 2015 and 2018 and then, in 2019, Nascimento at Rio Ave in Portgual. “He has had the same pathway as me,” says Lage about his brother. “I went to Benfica in 2004, he went in 2005. We worked together but not in the same teams. When I was at the under-15s, he was working with the under-11s. But the good thing is we shared experiences between us. Then, after I went to Dubai [in 2012], and then also with Carlos, if I was doing something new – a new exercise or idea – I would share with him and he would try it with the kids. Similarly, he would share experiences with me. After I left Carlos’s staff, Carlos invited him and it was very good. He is a top professional. When I came to Wolves I thought: ‘I need one more person to work with me because I want to control everything.’” He may want to control everything but Lage seems to take genuine pleasure in talking about the contribution others have made to Wolves’ success this season. He does not feel threatened by the expertise of others; he thrives off it. “All my staff, not just Luis, know they have the freedom to do their work. I have specialists and they understand the way I want to work. I have Luis doing some things, I have Alex [Silva, assistant head coach] doing some things, Carlos [Cachada, fitness coach] doing things and Tony [Roberts] doing the work I want to do with the goalkeeper and I have two analysts (Jhony Conceição and Diogo Camacho]. Then I receive all the information from them to take the best decisions. “We control everything. In some things they are better than me, that’s why I invited them to be here with me. There are too many things to know, I need top guys with me to be a better manager.” Nascimento’s role is to prepare training sessions. “This is the big responsibility he has,” says Lage. “To try to look at all the information on the opponent. Like how can Leicester play against us with three or two midfielders. We try to create scenarios and prepare those things. It’s teamwork. I’m just one of them. I’m the manager, I have the big salary but they are the same level as me.” Leicester beat Wolves 1-0 on the opening day of the season but the teams have gone in opposite directions since then. That is partly because of injuries – Leicester will be without their entire first-choice defence again on Sunday whereas Wolves will be at full strength for the first time this season. But it is also because Wolves have grown slicker and tighter. They still need to improve their finishing but they could hardly defend better, since only Manchester City have conceded fewer goals in the Premier League this season. When opponents have managed to pierce Wolves’ defence, they usually been thwarted by José Sá, who has the best shots-to-save ratio of any goalkeeper who has played regularly in the league this season. Again, Lage is quick to hail the people who work with him. “In modern football the goalkeeper has a massive influence and José gives us that,” he says. “When you start buildups from the back, you need to take the best decisions with where you pass the ball. Also, when you want to try to press more high it’s important that the keeper comes out of the box to control the space behind the defenders. The way Tony Roberts works with him is improving those skills. I’ve known José since he was 16-17 and he has the same mentality. His career is about steps and he conquers with the right work. He is in a good moment and he needs to continue.” That is the message Lage keeps drumming into the whole squad with talk of a top-four challenge. “My ambition is for the team to play in the next 15 games with the character we played against Tottenham,” he says of last Sunday’s 2-0 win. “I want that solid personality. That’s the only thing we can control. Don’t relax with what we have.”Abolishing free Covid tests for those who look after the vulnerable will amount to a “tax on caring” that would cost them more than £500 a year, ministers have been warned. All remaining domestic Covid regulations that restrict public freedoms are expected to end this week, with Boris Johnson expected to announce a move away from government intervention to “personal responsibility”. However, the scale of free testing to be retained is still being thrashed out within government this weekend amid a dispute between chancellor Rishi Sunak and health secretary Sajid Javid over the costs. There is also growing anxiety among scientists over the future of the main survey used to monitor Covid in Britain. Current data suggests that nearly 4 million people take regular Covid tests, including those who visit and help vulnerable relatives. That number also includes vulnerable people who work in settings that could put them at greater risk, where they have face-to-face contact with others. Research based on the average cost of tests internationally, compiled by the Liberal Democrats, suggests that people who take two tests a week face an average bill of £534 a year. It comes after the government’s own scientific advisers have warned that removing free testing will “increase anxiety” and limit the “social participation outside the home” of those who are clinically vulnerable or who live with someone in that position. “Charging people for the tests they need to safely see vulnerable loved ones is a tax on caring that risks leaving millions of people in lockdown by stealth,” said Ed Davey, the Lib Dem leader. “It means vulnerable people will see fewer loved ones and will be able to enjoy less of their lives. It is unfair and unjust. Ministers need to scrap these plans to stop a ‘cost of living with Covid’ crisis. Throughout the pandemic, people have been trying hard to do the right thing and keep others safe. The government should not be making that harder.” Professor Graham Medley, Sage’s chief Covid modeller, said that it was a “good time to take stock” on what might be needed to help the country in another pandemic or Covid wave. “The main purpose of making tests for infection freely available to the UK population is so that people can make individual decisions about their risks to themselves and others,” he said. “If we deprive people of testing then the population will not be able to make informed choices.” He also warned against scrapping the Office for National Statistics (ONS) survey that monitors Covid infections: “The Covid-19 Infection Survey (CIS) surveillance is the best way we have of knowing what the virus is doing in the community – if this is removed then we will largely be ‘flying blind’. Governments have to make decisions from multiple perspectives. Testing and the CIS are expensive. But we will need them again at some point in the future and need to be able to restart them quickly.” Johnson, who is facing pressure from the right of his party over his leadership and the continuation of coronavirus restrictions, said that while Covid would not disappear, “we need to learn to live with this virus and continue to protect ourselves without restricting our freedoms. “We’ve built up strong protections against this virus over the past two years through the vaccine rollouts, tests, new treatments and the best scientific understanding of what this virus can do,” he said. “Thanks to our successful vaccination programme and the sheer magnitude of people who have come forward to be jabbed, we are now in a position to set out our plan for living with Covid this week.” The chief executive of NHS Providers, Chris Hopson, said ministers should think hard before abandoning the Covid surveillance measures that have been “key parts of our defence”.“One of the distinguishing features of the pandemic has been our inability to predict its course,” he said. “While NHS trust leaders recognise the ongoing cost of [testing and surveillance] regimes, they are clear that the government should err strongly on the side of caution before dismantling or scaling them back.” Government pressure to dismantle the Covid surveillance system is already taking a toll on local authorities. The national contact tracing service may also be abolished and responsibility for tracing contacts of infected people will lie solely with local authorities. That work was funded by the £400m Contain Outbreak Management Fund, which is due to end next month and the Treasury appears unlikely to renew. The lack of secure funding means some councils have already let staff go. If no further money becomes available, vital services are under threat including contact tracing, testing for care homes and schools and surge testing for new variants. Business leaders are also worried that getting rid of testing and Covid self-isolation measures will create more tension and disputes in workplaces. HR directors taking part last week in a focus group run by the CIPD, the association of HR professionals, said they were concerned that if free testing ends, employees who only receive the statutory sick pay of £96.35 a week – among the lowest rates in Europe – will go to work while infectious. Lower-paid workers and those vital for supply chains are often only entitled to the minimum statutory sick pay. Ben Willmott, CIPD’s head of public policy, said: “There are real costs, hidden costs of not paying statutory sick pay at a reasonable rate. People can’t afford to live on £96 a week so they end up falling out of employment. The onus is likely to shift to employers to decide how best to manage the risk of Covid in the workplace. There is a lot of desire for clarity [from government] and it would be useful to have updated guidance from the Department of Health and Social Care.”They can seem more Manchester Disunited than Manchester United: an underachieving club with a mismatched group of players, capable of squandering a colossal budget and letting points slip through their grasp. An interim manager halfway through a temporary reign that has taken on an underwhelming feel denying he will remove the captaincy from Harry Maguire and reject reports of dressing room divides. But Ralf Rangnick delivered a staunch defence of his tenure, arguing performances are on an upward graph and that if United continue at their current rate of progress they are likely to qualify for the Champions League, and pointing to the difficulties with his inheritance. Rangnick argued he is more solution than problem; that, incrementally, his methods are working. They have drawn three of their past four matches, but he has taken encouragement. “We have won six [league] games, drawn four and had one defeat against Wolves; that was one of the worst games we played,” he said. “Since then it’s obvious that the team has developed, that we control, not for 90 minutes, but for larger parts of the game. We are dominating and controlling games.” If Brighton were dominant and in control for the opening 45 minutes on Tuesday, United nevertheless won 2-0 and although a 90-minute performance remains their holy grail, Rangnick detects a rise in belief. “To me, it’s obvious speaking regularly to the players that they feel confident and strong on the pitch as a team. We have shown some improvement in the weeks and months, but there is still space for more in the future.” If he made his name with a high-pressing blueprint, he believes he has built from the back. United conceded 21 goals in 12 league games under Ole Gunnar Solskjær – when only Norwich and Newcastle had worse records – and eight in Rangnick’s 11. “We had to reduce the number of goals conceded, which we did,” he said. That is in part because David de Gea has made the most saves in the division. “I would love to be with a team that has allowed the fewest amount of shots on our goal but that is not the case,” Rangnick said. If De Gea’s season has amounted to a damage-limitation exercise, perhaps Rangnick’s salvage job has certain similarities. In each case, it may be rendered tougher by the personnel around them. “The challenge for me was in coming mid-season at a time when the team was lacking confidence and not doing well,” he said. “And to work with a group that was not put together by me; that’s not alibis or excuses, just a mere fact.” United’s false start to the season has left them playing catch-up. Rangnick was a voice of caution. “Everybody wants to play in the Champions League every season, but we have to be realistic,” he said. “I think when I came we were eighth in the table, trailing by quite a few points.” They were 10th before the caretaker Michael Carrick’s parting gift, victory over Arsenal, lifted them to seventh. Rangnick has taken them higher again, procuring 22 points from 11 matches. “If you win two points [per game] on average in the whole season you are probably finishing in the top four and qualifying for the Champions League,” he said. “Right now, we have played 11 games, we have another 13 left and if you ask me now if I would be happy with another two points on average in those 13 games, I would probably say yes.” Two points a match from hereon would take United to 69 and if Rangnick applied a caveat – that football “is not mathematics” – there is another. The fixture list may have made his record flattering. Those 11 matches have not pitched United against any of the so-called big six. March brings three such meetings. The stakes are about to get higher, the opponents tougher, the need for United to excel from first to last whistle much greater. “One thing is to know the gameplan, the other is to transform it and translate it on to the pitch,” Rangnick said. “Hopefully we can do for that for more than 45 minutes or 60 minutes; for the whole game.”The prime minister is to announce the end of the legal duty to self-isolate after testing positive for Covid-19 next week. Downing Street said Boris Johnson will lay out his intentions to repeal all pandemic regulations that restrict public freedoms in England as part of his “living with Covid” plan on Monday. Johnson will also tell MPs returning to parliament after February recess that the country can rely on the vaccine programme, testing, and new treatments to keep people safe. The prime minister said: “Covid will not suddenly disappear, and we need to learn to live with this virus and continue to protect ourselves without restricting our freedoms. We’ve built up strong protections against this virus over the past two years through the vaccine rollouts, tests, new treatments, and the best scientific understanding of what this virus can do. “Thanks to our successful vaccination programme and the sheer magnitude of people who have come forward to be jabbed, we are now in a position to set out our plan for living with Covid this week.” By the end of the week, local authorities will be required to manage outbreaks with pre-existing public health powers. Pharmaceutical interventions will “continue to be our first line of defence”, with the vaccine programme remaining “open to anyone who has not yet come forward”, Downing Street added. Sir David Spiegelhalter, a professor at Cambridge University, argued that some form of the Office for National Statistics (ONS) study on coronavirus should remain in place regardless of other changes. “It has been absolutely so important as we have gone along,” the non-executive director for the ONS and chairman of the advisory board for the Covid Infection Survey told Radio 4’s Today programme on Saturday. “It has been running since April 2020, and so, as I said, I do have a bias here but it is not just me – I think lots of people are saying how important it is, particularly the statistical community.” Meanwhile, the scale of free testing to be retained is still being thrashed out within government this weekend amid a dispute between chancellor Rishi Sunak and health secretary Sajid Javid over the costs. Current data suggests that nearly 4 million people take regular Covid tests, including those who visit and help vulnerable relatives. That number also includes vulnerable people who work in settings that could put them at greater risk, where they have face-to-face contact with others. Research based on the average cost of tests internationally, compiled by the Liberal Democrats, suggests that people who take two tests a week face an average bill of £534 a year. The shadow health secretary, Wes Streeting, said: “Boris Johnson is declaring victory before the war is over, in an attempt to distract from the police knocking at his door. “Labour doesn’t want to see restrictions in place any longer than they need to be. The government should publish the evidence behind this decision, so the public can have faith that it is being made in the national interest. Now is not the time to start charging for tests or weaken sick pay, when people are still being asked to behave responsibly.”The Fox News host Tucker Carlson attacked Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez on Friday night, claiming the US congresswoman was not a woman of colour. “She’s a rich entitled white lady,” he said. In return, the New York Democrat, popularly known as AOC, said: “This is the type of stuff you say when your name starts with a P and ends with dejo.” Dictionary.com defines pendejo as “a mildly vulgar insult for ‘asshole’ or ‘idiot’ in Spanish”. “Once again,” Ocasio-Cortez added, “the existence of a wife or daughters doesn’t make a man good. And this one is basura.” Basura is Spanish for “trash”. She also accused Carlson of sexual harassment. Ocasio-Cortez’s mother is from Puerto Rico, her father from the Bronx. She has described herself as a woman of colour. Carlson said: “No one ever dares to challenge that description, but every honest person knows it is hilariously absurd. “There is no place on Earth outside of American colleges and newsrooms where Sandy Cortez” – Carlson’s derisory nickname for the New York congresswoman – “would be recognized as a quote, woman of color, because she’s not! “She’s a rich entitled white lady. She’s the pampered obnoxious ski bunny in the matching snowsuit who tells you to pull up your mask while you’re standing in the lift line at Jackson Hole. They’re all the same. It doesn’t matter what shade they are.” The leading provocateur in Fox News’s evening line-up was discussing a book about Ocasio-Cortez, Take Up Space: The Unprecedented AOC, by Lisa Miller, a reporter at New York magazine. Carlson said Miller’s book was “like a box of Fig Newtons. You know it’s wrong to open it, but the temptation is strong, and so we did.” As the media watchdog Mediate put it, several of the passages Carlson read were “fawning in nature and weave mundane videos AOC has posted online – such as her assembling Ikea furniture – into a grand narrative about her life”. In one passage, Carlson said, the congresswoman is described as “pointedly” saying into a camera, “I’m alone today”. “Is it just us or does that sound like an invitation to a booty call?” Carlson said. “Maybe one step from ‘What are you wearing?’ Either way it’s a little strange. It’s definitely over-sharing and yet, according to the book, over-sharing is the key to Sandy Cortez’s success.” Ocasio-Cortez wrote: “Remember when the right wing had a meltdown when I suggested they exhibit obsessive impulses around young women? Well now Tucker Carlson is wishing for … this on national TV. “You’re a creep, bro. If you’re this easy with sexual harassment on air, how are you treating your staff?” On Saturday, Ocasio-Cortez returned to the subject on Twitter. Echoing Hillary Clinton, who this week said Fox News was “awfully close to actual malice” in its reporting on her, the Democrat wrote: “I genuinely want to know why Tucker Carlson is allowed/paid to engage in clear, targeted, libelous harassment that endangers people and drives so many violent threats that people have to fundraise for their own safety. “Why should they have to pay for his harassment? Make it make sense. “It’s not within the realm of political commentary, and it’s not just me. He regularly targets people that do not have access to resources for protection. Once he gets to fantasizing about ‘booty calls’ of women on national TV I cease to see the political value outside of incitement.”For SS22, the runways were awash with oversized blazers and tailoring, from Stella McCartney’s bold saturated colour suiting and Valentino’s crisp minimal white tailoring to Prada’s leather take on the trend. Whether you’re looking for chic neutrals, classic black, checks or a pop of colour, the high street has a great choice. For an everyday oversized blazer in a beige, try Arket (£135). M&amp;S’s versatile, black, single-breasted blazer (£39.50) can be worn for evenings out over an LBD or jumpsuit. Or pick up a Celine-inspired houndstooth at Mango (£79.99) or Massimo Dutti’s version (3, below) Follow Maggie Gyllenhaal’s lead and choose a neutral tone, such as Asos’s charcoal blazer (£52). River Island’s buff style (£65) works perfectly with a cosy knit and leather trousers, or go head-to-toe in faux leather with H&amp;M’s blazer and matching trousers (4, below), à la Bella Hadid. Style hack: search the men’s section of charity or vintage shops for an oversized fit. If you are more of a fan of bold colour, then this is your season. Maje’s pink, loose-fitting jacket (£399) will instantly brighten your wardrobe. Style with a simple white T-shirt and trainers. &amp; Other Stories’ vibrant orange corduroy jacket (£120) is a really versatile piece: switch it up and pair with a knitted dress or skirt instead. Jigsaw’s vivid lime leopard-print option (£230) is a show-stopper. Team with this season’s mini skirt or trade in your skinny jeans for wide-leg trousers with a high waist: ideal with an oversized jacket and a fitted top. Style up your look with some simple jewellery. 1. Textured, £59.99, zara.com 2. Khaki, £340, essentiel-antwerp.com 3. Houndstooth, £149, massimodutti.com 4. Leather, £229.99, hm.com 5. Chestnut, £247.50, alexachung.comTwenty years since they first met in the ring as amateurs, and after more than a decade of simmering animosity between them, Kell Brook finally gained the sweet vindication he has craved for so long when he stopped Amir Khan in the sixth round on Saturday night in Manchester. Brook reacted to his crushing victory with euphoria while Khan looked dazed and broken after he was helped to his corner. The end, when it came, was as predictable as it was bleak for Khan. He protested meekly to the referee, Victor Loughlin, but he had suffered heavy punishment and, backed up helplessly against the ropes as Brook pummelled him, there could be only one outcome. One last uppercut, which followed percussive combinations, rocked Khan’s head back and, thankfully, Loughlin called a halt to the contest 51 seconds into round six. Khan had come out fast and thrown some flashy combinations before the true pattern of the fight was established. Brook nailed him with a stiff left hand which made Khan stagger backwards. Despite the shake of his head, it was clear that Khan had been hurt. They had to be separated at the bell but Brook had the look of a man who knew that he was about to dominate the rival he had despised for over a decade. It seemed as if Brook hurt Khan every time he landed with real intent. Khan has always been an immensely brave fighter, however, and he fought back and tagged Brook occasionally with his fast hands. But Brook went downstairs to the body in the fourth round before, with calm deliberation, he began to really open up in the fifth. Khan tried to backpedal away but he could not stem the dark surge of trouble that finally engulfed him. It was a relief when it was all over. Their grudge match had always been bitterly personal to Brook who believed Khan had continually ignored or disrespected him. “Kell’s always been very obsessed with my career, like a fanboy,” Khan said this week. “I’ve been living in his head for such a long time.” He then fuelled the acrimony by saying: “I’m worried about Kell’s health after the beating I’m giving him.” Brook brutally exposed the hubris of Khan. His pleasure in almost certainly ending the career of the man who had been his nemesis for so long will be deep and sustained for Brook has long harboured an intense dislike of Khan. The only danger for Brook is that he will believe overwhelming a faded Khan is a sign that he should campaign again at a far higher level against much younger and far more threatening men. Brook has suffered three crushing defeats over the years and this immensely satisfying win cannot obscure the damage he suffered against far superior fighters in Gennady Golovkin, Errol Spence and Terence Crawford – who stopped him in his previous fight. It would be an uplifting end to the Sheffield fighter’s near 17 years in the professional ring if he could walk away with his health intact at the age of 35. Khan is also 35 and, before he stepped into the ring against Brook, he had said: “If either of us lose, it’s something that will haunt us for a very long time. That’s the reason I’ve trained so hard. I’ve done everything I’ve needed to because I know I can’t lose this fight.” Boxing is a harsh and unforgiving business and so Khan’s bold words were swept aside by the concussive fists of his fierce rival. He will have to learn how to overcome the haunting memories of this painful defeat. It would help if their grudge could be buried now for both men should look to a life beyond the boxing. Khan showed as much courage outside the ring when, long past midnight, he joined Brook for a shared press conference. It took heart and class for him to congratulate Brook. Speaking in a low voice, but with wit and insight, he admitted that he will talk to his family about his future. Khan insisted that he was still glad to have fought in the most electric atmosphere either he or Brook had ever experienced. Brook also praised Khan and showed similar respect in a heartening antidote to all the previous vehemence. Before they parted they wrapped their arms around each other’s shoulders and posed for one last photograph. Of course, Brook will almost certainly box on and said recently that he would like to fight Conor Benn next. The son of Nigel Benn is 10 years younger than Brook and he would bring the violent danger to the ring that is now beyond Khan. So, for a while at least, Brook should savour his victory over Khan because this was one of the most glorious nights of his boxing life. In the main preliminary bout, Natasha Jonas, who is 37, finally won the world title which she has pursued for so long. She had to move up three weight divisions but she boxed with commanding authority to stop Chris Namus, from Uruguay, in the second round to become the new WBO super-welterweight champion. Jonas unleashed a bludgeoning series of combinations to knock down her hapless opponent in the first round. Namus was fortunate to hear the bell but, within 28 seconds of round two, she was sent crashing to the canvas again before the referee brought the one-sided contest to a merciful end. Nine months ago, Jonas fought with grit and skill to nearly beat Katie Taylor, the undisputed lightweight champion who is ranked as the best female fighter in the world. Her admirable performance meant it became even more difficult for Jonas to find meaningful bouts as so many prospective opponents were wary of her. But her desperation to win a world title at the third attempt was fulfilled at last against Namus – who stepped in as a late replacement to fight for the WBO’s vacant championship just eight days ago. An ecstatic Jonas, understandably, did not care about the dubious calibre of Namus as she celebrated her victory with moving emotion.