Stonehenge is a place you just have to go and see. An exhibition inspired by it is surely doomed to fail – the mystery killed by cases of broken beakers. But The World of Stonehenge is as magical as a great barrow full of glinting treasure. It hooks you with a wooden trident (two of these are on display) and plunges you into primal waters of the imagination. It is a knockout epic. It can’t include Stonehenge, of course, but it does have Seahenge. This monument is made of wood and had to be removed from its seashore home to preserve it – so here it returns from the past. Gnarled wooden columns stand in the twilight. You go up to the semicircle and stare closer into their ridged brown surfaces. Maybe you glimpse a face, an eye, a shadowy form. You know these are not just old posts but the embodiment of ancient powers whose names we have forgotten, for now. Seahenge is the physical and emotional heart of the British Museum’s moving journey to the lost world of European prehistory. It was erected by the shore in Norfolk in 2049BC (according to tree ring analysis), around 500 years after the main construction of Stonehenge. It brings the outdoors inside, and holds you mystified. But if you are not already in a pretty woozy state by the time you reach this installation, you haven’t paid attention. Even the stone axes astound, arranged in a wall of smooth jade forms whose similarity becomes an asset. In front of the axes are finds from Avalon Marsh. This is not a new folk festival but a bog outside Glastonbury whose name associates it with King Arthur. The ancient wooden track reassembled here helped people keep their feet dry crossing this wetland nearly 6,000 years ago. Also from Avalon Marsh is a rough wooden idol that’s contemporary with Stonehenge. It has “male and female attributes”, says the catalogue: breasts and a phallus. Was it thrown in the marsh deliberately? Like Arthur getting his sword from the Lady of the Lake, ancient people seem to have seen magic in water and cached gods and weapons there. Seahenge is surely the expression of a reverence for the grey waters of the North Sea. The centre of the belief system that built Stonehenge, however, was the sun. You meet it right at the start of this exhibition on a standing stone from Italy that has drawings scratched on its front. Human figures and herds of animals scurry about under a huge round flaming sun engraved at the summit of the stone. The sun also glows in gold against a blue bronze sky on the Nebra Sky Disc, from Germany, a stunning map of the night sky made about 3,600 years ago: the Pleiades twinkle between the sun and a crescent moon, apparently showing a juxtaposition that was later used by Babylonian astronomers to calculate leap years. There is also a boat on the Sky Disc – the boat of the sun. This is a reminder that Stonehenge was built when the pyramids were being raised in Egypt. Next to the Great Pyramid at Giza survives the Solar Boat of Khufu, a full-sized ship for him to sail through the sky with the sun god. It’s customary to look down on the people who created Stonehenge, compared with the ancient Egyptians and Mesopotamians: they were after all illiterate. But this exhibition turns that upside down. The world unveiled here is remote but not “primitive”. Stonehenge and other monuments in the British landscape are cleverly, exactly aligned to sunrise on the winter solstice, so people could gather there at the dawn of the shortest day to propitiate the sun to renew their crops. It worked: they had a hearty lifestyle. This is shown by the cosy domesticity of Skara Brae, Orkney, where people lived in snug houses with stone shelf units – it was like The Flintstones. This is a fiercely emotional exhibition, full of love for the people of the distant past. It even wants us to learn from them. The early agriculturalists who built the henges were communal, sharing feasts at a camp called Durrington Walls near Stonehenge. There are even remains from a party when early farmers and the last hunter-gatherers ate together, the hunters cooking venison they caught, the farmers serving beef from their herd. Soon after the lintels were placed across the sarsens at Stonehenge, evidence of inequality and power intrudes on the hippy days of collectivism. The landscape around Stonehenge is dotted with barrows where notables were buried with rich grave goods. Trade was on a new scale. So was war. The exhibition culminates in glory and horror, with astonishing evidence of a Europe where combat was king. There are shattered human remains from a German battlefield, stunningly sophisticated Bronze Age armour and a man buried on Salisbury Plain with arrow heads in his spine. This is up there with the British Museum’s legendary shows on the Terracotta Army and Aztecs. It uncovers a rich and strange world under our own feet. You almost agree with the William Blake prints at the end that Stonehenge is the temple of lost Albion, a better Britain before our dark satanic mills. The World of Stonehenge is at the British Museum, London, from 17 February to 17 JulyHere’s a recap of all the international Covid developments: Brazil has registered 473 new Covid-19 deaths and 58,540 new cases, the health ministry said. Canadian prime minister Justin Trudeau invokes emergency measures to tackle the ongoing protests. Plans to delay Covid jabs for UK children aged five to 11 have been criticised. Boris Johnson is expected to deny wrongdoing over No 10 lockdown parties. All remaining Covid-19 legal restrictions are to be lifted in Northern Ireland from 15 February and replaced with guidance. UK ministers press ahead with plan to wind down Covid testing. Israelis mount their own Covid-19 ‘Freedom Convoy’. Italy has reported a rise in daily Covid-19 related deaths with 281 registered, the health ministry said. This compares with 191, the previous day. A further 28,630 Covid-19 daily related cases were recorded. Kuwait’s cabinet has lifted many Covid-19 restrictions including a ban on foreign travel About 500 cars and campervans have arrived in Brussels, mainly from France, in a convoy to protest against Covid-19 restrictions. The vehicles were barred from the city. Police directed them to a parking place on the outskirts of Brussels, from where protesters continued on foot to a square in the city centre and the area housing European Union institutions. The UK recorded 41,648 new Covid cases on Monday, government figures showed, and a further 35 deaths within 28 days of a positive coronavirus test. That is compared with 41,270 infections and 52 fatalities in the 24 hours prior More than 60 charities, campaigners and non-governmental organisations have accused Moderna of attempting to derail World Health Organization (WHO) plans to manufacture more Covid-19 vaccines in Africa. In an open letter, they urged Moderna to “act in the interests of people, not profits” by withdrawing patents and patent applications in South Africa. The Duchess of Cornwall, 74, is self-isolating after testing positive for coronavirus. The announcement by Clarence House comes after it announced on Thursday that Prince Charles, 73, had tested positive for the virus. Covid restrictions in Germany are set to end as case numbers have dropped slightly, according to a draft official plan seen by Agence France-Presse. The plan is expected to be approved by the German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, and the heads of the federal states on Wednesday. Hong Kong’s leader, Carrie Lam, has said an “onslaught” of Covid-19 infections has dealt a heavy blow and overwhelmed capacity to deal with the virus. Daily infections have multiplied by a factor of 13 over the past two weeks, from about 100 cases at the start of February to a record 2,071 on 14 February. The busiest US-Canada border crossing has reopened after protests against Covid restrictions closed it for almost a week. The Sunday night reopening of the Ambassador Bridge between Windsor, Ontario and Detroit, Michigan came as Canadian officials held back from a crackdown on a larger protest in the capital, Ottawa. A court in Bologna has temporarily stripped the parental rights of a couple after they refused blood from Covid-vaccinated donors for their son in need of an urgent blood transfusion before undergoing delicate heart surgery. The couple had reportedly requested non-vaccinated blood for “religious reasons”. Families bereaved by Covid in the UK want Boris Johnson to relinquish control over which issues will be investigated in the pandemic public inquiry, alleging he is compromised by allegations of lockdown-breaking at Downing Street. New Zealand’s prime minister has said protesters who oppose coronavirus mandates were using “intimidation and harassment”, as authorities appeared to take a harsher stance toward the convoy of demonstrators that has disrupted the capital of Wellington for nearly a week. Taiwan aims to ease its strict Covid quarantine policy from next month as it needs to gradually resume normal life and reopen to the world, the government said on Monday. South Korea will begin giving out fourth doses of Covid vaccines this month and supply millions of additional home test kits to ease shortages amid a surge in Omicron infections, authorities confirmed on Monday. Here is some more information on the Emergencies Act invoked by Canadian prime minister Justin Trudeau to tackle the “Freedom Convoy” protests. The Emergencies Act was passed in 1988 and gives the government added powers for 30 days in times of national crisis. Under the Act, the government could: bar travel to or from specific areas order the evacuation of people and personal property from certain areas direct individuals and companies to provide essential services There is no indication Trudeau would seek military intervention. On Friday he said: “We are a long way from having to call in the military.” Reuters reports that Trudeau will activate the emergency measures which include cutting off the financing. The Canadian Parliament would have to approve the use of the emergency measures within seven days. It also has the power to revoke them. Some more reaction to the news that Canadian prime minister Justin Trudeau is to invoke emergency measures (see stories at 18.26, 19.38 and 21.52) to tackle the “Freedom Convoy” protests. Reuters reports that Jack Lindsay, department chair for applied disaster and emergency studies at Brandon University in Manitoba said: It seems that they’re mostly going to focus on orders and regulations relating to finance... and that’s a fairly effective tool. They can certainly do things quicker, which is certainly the intention of these orders and regulations under the Emergencies Act... I imagine this will start a week full of political discourse over whether the government overstepped or not. Lori Williams, Politics professor at Mount Royal University, Calgary, warned invoking the act “could create more problems” adding: That’s why this has to be done with the cooperation of premiers and if they don’t want help, then the federal government needs to hang back. It has to be very targeted, very strategic and very restrained, because these are enormous powers that are being implemented. Meanwhile, Ontario premier Doug Ford said he would support the federal government and “any proposals they have to bring law and order back to our province”. He added it was vital “to make sure we stabilise our businesses and trade around the world as the world is watching us right now, wondering if it’s a stable environment to open up businesses and expand businesses”. He said: These occupiers, they’re doing the total opposite what they say they’re there to do. They’re hurting hundreds of thousands of families, millions of jobs across the province. Brazil has registered 473 new Covid-19 deaths and 58,540 new cases, the health ministry said. As trailed earlier, (see stories at 18.26 and 19.38) Canadian prime minister Justin Trudeau said the government had invoked special measures allowing him to tackle protests that have shut some border crossings and paralysed downtown Ottawa. According to Reuters Trudeau told a news conference: The blockades are harming our economy and endangering public safety. We cannot and will not allow illegal and dangerous activities to continue. US biotech company Novavax Inc said it has received interim authorisation from the Singapore Health Sciences Authority for its Covid-19 vaccine in adults, reports Reuters. Nicola Davis and Rowena Mason write: Plans to offer Covid vaccinations to all children aged five to 11 have been delayed by the government because the jabs have not been deemed urgent. The Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI) decided more than a week ago to expand the Covid vaccination programme to all those aged five to 11 and handed its advice to ministers. However, the government has not publicly declared whether it will go ahead with the offer and is still “reviewing” the evidence for another week, which is a break with its previous moves to accept JCVI advice straight away. The decision is now expected to be announced on 21 February, when a long-term strategy for “living with Covid” is to be outlined by Boris Johnson. It is understood any vaccination programme for this age group would not start until Easter at the earliest. JCVI members told the Guardian they were in the dark as to reasons for the delay. But the hold-up appears, at least in part, to be down to the JCVI advice that the jabs are non-urgent. Read the full story here. Following the earlier story (see 18.27), Canadian prime minister Justin Trudeau is facing pushback on reports that he is to invoke rarely used emergency measures to tackle the ongoing so-called “Freedom Convoy”. The premiers of Alberta, Quebed, Manitoba and Saskatchewan said they oppose Trudeau’s plan to invoke Canada’s Emergencies Act to deal with protests that have shut down some border crossings and paralysed the capital, Ottawa. Jason Kenney, the premier of Alberta, told a news conference: We would prefer that the Emergencies Act not be invoked, but if it is we would very much prefer that it not be applied to Alberta. Quebec premier Francois Legault said that imposing the act risks “putting oil on the fire” and said: I think we don’t need it. I think that at this moment it would not help the social climate. Manitoba premier Heather Stefanson warned of “unintended negative consequences” of invoking the act, adding that its use would not be “constructive” in Manitoba. She said: While the situation is very different in Ontario, this ultimate federal legislation should only be considered on a measured and proportional basis, in locations where it is truly needed. Saskatchewan premier Scott Moe said that while the illegal blockades “must end”, police “already have sufficient tools to enforce the law and clear the blockades”. Boris Johnson is expected to deny wrongdoing to the police by arguing that his presence at Downing Street gatherings in lockdown was part of his working day, though No 10 said his official response to the Met would remain private. The prime minister has until Friday to answer a questionnaire sent by the Met police which may lead them to issue a fixed penalty notice or conclude there is no case to answer. He is expected to reject the allegation that he broke any laws prohibiting gatherings, but No 10 said it would not make his defence public. His official spokesperson said: “We will respond as required. As you know, I think the Met made clear that that was in seven days, so we will comply with that requirement.” Read the full story here. The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has advised against travel to six countries and territories including South Korea, Azerbaijan and Belarus because of Covid-19 cases. The CDC also added Comoros, French Polynesia, and Saint Pierre and Miquelon to its risk list of “Level Four: Very High”, reports Reuters. More reaction to the news that all remaining legal Covid restrictions in Northern Ireland are to be lifted and replaced by guidance from February 15 (see story at 18.33). PA Media reports that in a video message posted on Twitter, Sinn Fein’s leader in Stormont Michelle O’Neill said: I am really pleased to say that we are moving into a new phase in this pandemic where we can all look forward to a brighter and a more hopeful future. I think we all know that this day has been a long time in coming, so tonight from me can I just say thank you. Thank you for the effort and sacrifices that you have made. Thank you for looking after each other because that has shone through the whole way through the pandemic. Paying tribute to frontline workers, she said: We are finally seeing the light at the end of what has been an extremely long tunnel and this is certainly a very good day.” Nichola Mallon, Infrastructure Minister in the Executive, called it a “major milestone”, adding: This decision should never have been placed in jeopardy by the DUP which has prioritised political stunts over the needs of the people we all represent.” Meanwhile, two more people who had previously tested positive for Covid-19 have died in Northern Ireland, the Department of Health said. Another 2,465 confirmed cases of the virus have also been notified in the last 24-hour reporting period. On Monday there were 437 Covid-19 in-patients, with 13 in intensive care. The EU has stood by its refusal to lift patent protections on Covid-19 vaccines, just days ahead of a summit with African Union countries who see the issue as a priority. Agence France-Presse reports that since October 2020, India and South Africa have led calls at the World Trade Organization (WTO) for the temporary removal of intellectual property protections for vaccines, treatments and diagnostics in the fight against Covid-19. Supporters of the lifting of patent protections argue this would boost production globally and help address the glaring inequity in access between rich and poor nations. The members of the African Union have pushed to include the demand in the conclusions of the joint EU-AU summit that starts on Thursday in Brussels. In the AU proposal seen by Agence France-Presse it states: The African Union... urges the European Union to engage constructively towards the conclusion of a targeted and time-limited waiver. But several wealthy countries hosting large pharmaceutical companies have opposed the move, saying patents are not the main roadblocks to scaling up production and are crucial to innovation. Franck Riester, the trade minister from France, which currently holds the EU’s rotating presidency said: We think that intellectual property should never be a brake [to vaccine production]. At the same time, we do not want to call into question a system of intellectual property that allows for innovation and that has made it possible, in particular, to have vaccines very quickly in the case of Covid-19. Rowena Mason and Aubrey Allegretti have an exclusive story on Covid testing. They write: Ministers are pressing ahead with plans to start winding down Covid testing and payments for isolation from next week to save more than £10bn, despite health chiefs warning this could hamper crucial research into antiviral treatments. No 10, the Treasury and the health department will decide this week on a “living with Covid strategy” due to be unveiled on Monday, which will involve phasing out free Covid testing and all but ending the tracing system. Whitehall sources say the Treasury is driving efforts to reduce costs from an estimated annual £15bn, with an opening suggestion of cutting the budget by more than 90%, to £1.3bn. It is unclear whether the changes will be England-only or apply UK-wide. Read the full report here. Canadian prime minister Justin Trudeau plans to invoke rarely used emergency measures to tackle ongoing so-called “Freedom Convoy” protests that have shut border crossings, and blocked the capital for more than two weeks, reports Reuters. Separately, the prime minister’s office said Trudeau would speak to reporters at 4.30pm ET (9.30pm GMT) without specifying why. One of the sources, who spoke to Reuters, said the aim of using the emergency powers was to provide federal police support to local and provincial forces, and not to use the military. All remaining Covid-19 legal restrictions in Northern Ireland are to be lifted and replaced by guidance from 15 February, health minister Robin Swann said. However, Swann urged the public to remain vigilant despite the move. He said: Today’s announcement follows consideration of legal advice from the Attorney General and consultation with all ministerial colleagues. It moves our response against Covid into a new phase. With the reduced threat from the Omicron variant, we can move away from an emergency and legalistic framework to a new approach where making safer choices is embedded in our daily lives. That means all of us continuing to do our best to cut down risks of infection and transmission. It means looking after each other by following the public health guidance. It must always be remembered that taking unnecessary risks with Covid may affect people who are particularly vulnerable to the virus. So please do not jump the gun and start behaving as if the pandemic is over. That is not the case. As things stand in Northern Ireland, people are still required to wear face coverings in public places and Covid certificates are needed for nightclubs. Tom Ambrose writes of the historic English pub that seemed destined for closure because of the pandemic but may now be in with a last-minute reprieve. With its beer garden overlooking the ruins of the Roman city of Verulamium, the historic Ye Olde Fighting Cocks pub in St Albans has been pushed to the brink by Covid. Two years of on-off lockdown closures, as well as the wider challenges brought on by the coronavirus pandemic, have taken its toll on the pub which once held a Guinness World Record for the oldest pub in England. It was announced earlier this month that the pub, which has foundations dating back to the year 793 and hosted Oliver Cromwell for dinner in the 1600s, had served its last pint. But now its landlord, Christo Tofalli, believes the Ye Olde Fighting Cocks could be given a reprieve, urging regulars and its global fanbase to “watch this space”. You can read the full report here Hundreds of vehicles drove along the main highway from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem on Monday to converge on parliament in protest against Covid-19 curbs in a convoy inspired by demonstrations in Canada. Reuters reports that other protesters assembled as the so-called “Freedom Convoy” passed by, with banners and Israeli and Canadian flags flying from the vehicles. One sign read: “Freedom doesn’t look like this” showing a picture of a girl in a mask. Outside parliament, protesters sounded horns and beat drums, and called for pandemic restrictions to be lifted. Protester Jonathan Deporto, 39, said: “We are all gathered here for freedom. Because for two years already, all this world is going mad because of all the mandates and all the things that don’t let us live as free as we are born.” In recent weeks, Israel has eased Covid-19 restrictions including the requirement to show proof of vaccination at restaurants, cinemas, gyms. However, masks are still mandatory in public indoor spaces, including schools, shops and medical institutions. Last month the “Freedom Convoy” protests started in the Canadian capital Ottawa led by truckers opposing a vaccinate-or-quarantine mandate for cross-border drivers. Similar protests took place in France over the weekend. People with children and renters are more likely to have seen their spending on utility bills increase while working from home during the coronavirus pandemic, official figures suggest. The Office for National Statistics (ONS) said that almost half of people who worked from home had spent less than they would have normally, with reduced costs for travel and food offset by an increase in spending on gas, electricity and internet access. However, it said the change in spending patterns was more pronounced for some people in the survey of more than 3,000 adults in Great Britain undertaken by government statisticians last month. Boris Johnson must confirm that funding for free Covid-19 testing will continue in devolved nations, the SNP has said. It comes as there are rumours free testing could come to an end. PA Media quotes SNP health spokesman, Martyn Day who said Boris Johnson must not introduce changes to “appease Tory backbenchers” and any decisions should be backed by medical advice. Day said: The UK Government must confirm that it will continue to fund Covid-19 testing for devolved nations - after the confusion caused by Boris Johnson and his Tory ministers,” he said. Any changes to Covid testing must be guided by expert public health advice through the chief medical officers. It would be typically reckless for the Westminster Government to simply impose changes in a bid to appease Tory backbenchers and save the Prime Minister’s skin. Scotland’s more safe and cautious approach to the pandemic has seen better outcomes. We must continue to be guided by the scientific evidence, and not by Downing Street’s concerns over the number of letters of no confidence in Boris Johnson from Tory MPs. During a visit to Scotland on Monday, Johnson said: “On testing, which is important, we’ll make sure we continue to work with our colleagues in Scotland.” When challenged further, he added: “We’ll continue to work with our colleagues in Scotland but I believe the similarities in our approach vastly outweigh the differences.” Sage, the independent group of advisers who have been counselling the Government throughout the pandemic, have cautioned against removing free testing. It said getting rid of free testing would make it harder for people to take precautions and “may also increase anxiety among those who have found testing reassuring after possible exposure, particularly those who are, or live with, someone who is clinically vulnerable”. Italy has reported a rise in daily Covid-19 related deaths with 281 registered, the health ministry said. This compares with 191, the previous day. A further 28,630 Covid-19 daily related cases were logged compared with 51,959 the day before, reports Reuters. Italy has registered 151,296 deaths linked to Covid-19 since the beginning of the pandemic - the second-highest toll in Europe after Britain and the eighth highest in the world. The country has reported 12.1 million cases to date. Patients in hospital with Covid-19 - not including those in intensive care - stood at 16,050 on Monday, down from 16,060 a day earlier. There were 63 new admissions to intensive care units, down from 66 on Sunday. The total number of intensive care patients fell to 1,173 from a previous 1,190. Around 283,891 tests for Covid-19 were carried out in the past day, compared with a previous 462,881, the health ministry said. Kuwait’s cabinet has lifted many Covid-19 restrictions including a ban on foreign travel, a move that will also apply to those who are not vaccinated, reports Reuters. The prime minister, Sheikh Sabah al-Khalid al-Sabah, said unvaccinated people will still have to get a PCR test 72 hours before boarding a flight to the Gulf Arab state and quarantine for seven days after arrival, while those who are vaccinated would not be required to do so. Some of the restrictions lifted from next week would include allowing the unvaccinated to enter the likes of shopping centres, and attend cinemas, theatres if they present a negative PCR test. That’s all from me, Léonie Chao-Fong, on the global coronavirus blog for today. I’ll be covering the Ukraine blog for the next couple of hours, please do join me there. Here’s a quick recap of all the international Covid developments: About 500 cars and campervans have arrived in Brussels, mainly from France, in a convoy to protest against Covid-19 restrictions. The vehicles were barred from the city. Police directed them to a parking place on the outskirts of Brussels, from where protesters continued on foot to a square in the city centre and the area housing European Union institutions. The UK recorded 41,648 new Covid cases on Monday, government figures showed, and a further 35 deaths within 28 days of a positive coronavirus test. That is compared with 41,270 infections and 52 fatalities in the 24 hours prior. More than 60 charities, campaigners and non-governmental organisations have accused Moderna of attempting to derail World Health Organization (WHO) plans to manufacture more Covid-19 vaccines in Africa. In an open letter, they urged Moderna to “act in the interests of people, not profits” by withdrawing patents and patent applications in South Africa. The Duchess of Cornwall, 74, is self-isolating after testing positive for coronavirus. The announcement by Clarence House follows that made on Thursday disclosing Prince Charles, 73, had tested positive for the virus. Covid restrictions in Germany are set to end as case numbers have dropped slightly, according to a draft official plan seen by Agence France-Presse. The plan is expected to be approved by the German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, and the heads of the federal states on Wednesday. Hong Kong’s leader, Carrie Lam, has said an “onslaught” of Covid-19 infections has dealt a heavy blow and overwhelmed capacity to deal with the virus. Daily infections have multiplied by a factor of 13 over the past two weeks, from about 100 cases at the start of February to a record 2,071 on 14 February The busiest US-Canada border crossing has reopened after protests against Covid restrictions closed it for almost a week. The Sunday night reopening of the Ambassador Bridge between Windsor, Ontario and Detroit, Michigan came as Canadian officials held back from a crackdown on a larger protest in the capital, Ottawa.A court in Bologna has temporarily stripped the parental rights of a couple after they refused blood from Covid-vaccinated donors for their son in need of an urgent blood transfusion before undergoing delicate heart surgery. The couple had reportedly requested non-vaccinated blood for “religious reasons”. Families bereaved by Covid in the UK want Boris Johnson to relinquish control over which issues will be investigated in the pandemic public inquiry, alleging he is compromised by allegations of lockdown-breaking at Downing Street. New Zealand’s prime minister has said protesters who oppose coronavirus mandates were using “intimidation and harassment”, as authorities appeared to take a harsher stance toward the convoy of demonstrators that has disrupted the capital of Wellington for nearly a week. Taiwan aims to ease its strict Covid quarantine policy from next month as it needs to gradually resume normal life and reopen to the world, the government said on Monday. South Korea will begin giving out fourth doses of Covid vaccines this month and supply millions of additional home test kits to ease shortages amid a surge in Omicron infections, authorities confirmed on Monday. More than 60 charities, campaigners and non-governmental organisations have accused Moderna of attempting to derail World Health Organization (WHO) plans to manufacture more Covid-19 vaccines in Africa. Moderna has previously said it would not enforce the patents on its vaccine but in an open letter to the company, organisations claimed Moderna has “filed several patents with broad claims in South Africa, prompting fears it will begin enforcing patents while Covid-19 is still endemic in Africa, effectively derailing the WHO’s plans to build African vaccine production”. The letter, signed by organisations including Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF) along with People’s Health Movement (PHM), calls on Moderna to “act in the interests of people, not profits” by withdrawing patents and patent applications in South Africa. The letter warns that the patents “pose long term barriers to scaling up the supply of messenger RNA (mRNA) vaccines and to diversifying local production in the continent ... and may potentially undermine the [WHO] Hub’s current and future functioning and research, at the expense of all LMICs [low and middle-income countries].” The UK recorded 41,648 new Covid cases on Monday, government figures showed, and a further 35 deaths within 28 days of a positive coronavirus test. That is compared to 41,270 infections and 52 fatalities in the 24 hours prior. Cases over the last seven days are down 30% on the previous week, with weekly deaths down 27.2% compared to the previous seven days. A leading public health expert who has advised the Scottish government says that a pledge by the UK prime minister, Boris Johnson, to scrap legally enforced isolation for people in England with Covid-19 “flies in the face” of basic infectious disease management, which involves avoids infecting other people when one is infectious. Prof Devi Sridhar, chair of global public health at the University of Edinburgh, says in a piece she has written for the Guardian: We all want our pre-Covid-19 lives back: the question is what the cost of this is. That’s the debate we should be having as a society, without avoiding the difficult realities of the situation. The UK has faced an average of 200 deaths a day now for weeks, while the US is heading towards the million death mark. The media no longer report these deaths widely, as they did at the start of the pandemic: there seems to be a certain acceptance of this as the cost of somewhat normal life to continue. The morality of that is questionable. A Turkish man who is still trying to shake off a Covid-19 infection after 14 months and 78 straight positive tests continues to be in high spirits, joking about his predicament. When Muzaffer Kayasan first caught the virus he thought he was destined to die since he was already suffering from leukemia, but he is still alive despite being in and out of hospital since November 2020 The AFP news agency reports that Kayasan, 56, has Turkey’s longest recorded continuous Covid-19 infection, doctors say, possibly due to a weakened immune system from the cancer. “I guess this is the female version of Covid – she has been obsessed with me,” Kayasan joked last week as he found out that his latest PCR test was, yet again, positive. Nine months in hospital and five months mostly alone in his flat have separated him from much of the outside world, including his granddaughter, Azra, who stays in the garden while visiting, talking through the glass back door. “I will play with you when I get well,” he told her through a mask after giving her a plastic toy telephone. Coronavirus patients with immunosuppression are at risk of prolonged infection with severe acute respiratory syndrome, according to a study published last year in the New England Journal of Medicine. Another by the Leukemia &amp; Lymphoma Society shows one in four blood cancer patients do not produce detectable antibodies even after receiving two vaccine shots. Activists and others have been assembling in the centre of Brussels as the first vehicles from the European “Freedom Convoy” trickle into the outskirts of the Belgian capital. Riot police are present in considerable numbers, with water cannon in reserve. About 500 cars and campervans have arrived in Brussels, mainly from France, in a convoy to protest against Covid-19 restrictions. The vehicles were barred from the city. Police directed them to a parking place on the outskirts of Brussels, from where protesters continued on foot to a square in the city centre and the area housing European Union institutions. Reuters reporters saw around 150-200 protesters in the city centre and a similar number in the European quarter. Brussels mayor Philippe Close said.told Belgian LN24 television the protest, inspired by “Freedom Convoy” demonstrators who have gridlocked the Canadian capital with trucks, had no permit from the Brussels authorities, no leader and had made no demands. Philippe, a French protester from the city of Valenciennes who had earlier protested in Paris, told reporters pandemic restrictions were only part of his problems. “I came particularly for our children’s future. I don’t see how my children can live in the world as it is now. Freedom is swept aside, there’s more and more poverty. Even when you work, when the 15th of the month comes round, you haven’t got enough to live on,” he said. He said he was also protesting against the rise in energy prices and the cost of living. A protest convoy breached police defences and drove into central Paris on Saturday, snarling traffic around the Arc de Triomphe and on the Champs Elysees. A UK diplomat found dead in a forest vanished from his home after suffering extreme stress while working for the British government’s Covid taskforce at the height the pandemic, an inquest has heard. The former ambassador to Nepal, Richard Morris, worked long hours under high pressure, helping co-ordinate briefings to ministers at a time when the UK was battling the fierce first wave of coronavirus. On Monday, his widow fought back tears as she told an inquest he had been “totally unprotected” from the demands of the Covid taskforce. Alison Morris said her husband feared there was not enough time to process information in the fast-moving period and if any information error got past him the Government “would be torn apart in the press”. The inquest continues Here’s a quick roundup of what’s been happening so far: The Duchess of Cornwall, 74, is self-isolating after testing positive for coronavirus. The announcement by Clarence House follows that made on Thursday disclosing Prince Charles, 73, had tested positive for the virus. Covid restrictions in Germany are set to end as case numbers have dropped slightly, according to a draft official plan seen by Agence France-Presse. The plan is expected to be approved by the German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, and the heads of the federal states on Wednesday. Hong Kong’s leader, Carrie Lam, has said an “onslaught” of Covid-19 infections has dealt a heavy blow and overwhelmed capacity to deal with the virus. Daily infections have multiplied by a factor of 13 over the past two weeks, from about 100 cases at the start of February to a record 2,071 on 14 February The busiest US-Canada border crossing has reopened after protests against Covid restrictions closed it for almost a week. The Sunday night reopening of the Ambassador Bridge between Windsor, Ontario and Detroit, Michigan came as Canadian officials held back from a crackdown on a larger protest in the capital, Ottawa. A court in Bologna has temporarily stripped the parental rights of a couple after they refused blood from Covid-vaccinated donors for their son in need of an urgent blood transfusion before undergoing delicate heart surgery. The couple had reportedly requested non-vaccinated blood for “religious reasons”. Hundreds of vehicles taking part in France’s so-called freedom convoy were heading for Brussels. The protest against Covid restrictions and high energy prices shifted its focus to the symbolic heart of the EU after police prevented most of the estimated 3,000 vehicles from entering Paris at the weekend. Families bereaved by Covid in the UK want Boris Johnson to relinquish control over which issues will be investigated in the pandemic public inquiry, alleging he is compromised by allegations of lockdown-breaking at Downing Street. New Zealand’s prime minister has said protesters who oppose coronavirus mandates were using “intimidation and harassment”, as authorities appeared to take a harsher stance toward the convoy of demonstrators that has disrupted the capital of Wellington for nearly a week. Taiwan aims to ease its strict Covid quarantine policy from next month as it needs to gradually resume normal life and reopen to the world, the government said on Monday. South Korea will begin giving out fourth doses of Covid vaccines this month and supply millions of additional home test kits to ease shortages amid a surge in Omicron infections, authorities confirmed on Monday. Here’s the full story on the Duchess of Cornwall testing positive for coronavirus by my colleague Caroline Davies. The announcement by Clarence House follows that made on Thursday disclosing Prince Charles, 73, had tested positive for the virus. The duchess, 74, carried out a string of engagements on the same day. Concern for the Queen’s health mounted after it emerged the monarch had been in direct contact with Charles two days before he tested positive. Buckingham Palace said on Thursday that the Queen was not displaying any symptoms, but refused to confirm whether she had tested positive or negative, citing medical privacy. The 95-year-old spent time with Charles last Tuesday, when the prince was carrying out an investiture on her behalf at her Windsor Castle home. The evening before his positive test result, Charles and Camilla had met the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, and others at a reception at the British Museum. Our Berlin bureau chief, Philip Oltermann, looks at Germany’s faltering plans to introduce a general vaccination mandate this spring: Germany’s Bundestag was originally due to debate motions in favour and against mandatory vaccinations this week, after the chancellor, Olaf Scholz, indicated he considers such a step necessary to cope with a possible resurgence of the virus in the next few months. But the timetable that was meant to see a mandate would be passed in March has already begun to slip, as a Free Democratic party (FDP) politician said his third-way motion proposing mandatory vaccinations for those aged 50 and over would be submitted with a delay. The three motions may not get their second and third reading until the end of March, when Germany’s high infection rates are forecast to be on a downward curve and the government is preparing to loosen restrictions on social gatherings and access to nonessential shops, according to reports in German media on Monday. National and state leaders are set to discuss the opening-up plan on Wednesday, as Germany’s disease control agency reported 6,465 new cases in the last 24 hours, the second consecutive day of declining incidence rates. A low-cost and rapidly scalable ventilator developed by UK scientists has been approved for widescale production, Sky News reports. The OxVent machine costs £1,850 to produce, compared with an average of £22,000 for a model used in the NHS. It was developed by doctors and engineers at Oxford University and King’s College London and has now been certified as compliant with medical regulations. The designs and manufacturing systems will be transferred to low and middle-income countries that cannot afford current ventilators. Prof Sebastien Ourselin, head of school of biomedical engineering and imaging sciences at King’s College London and non-executive director at OxVent Ltd, said: The OxVent ventilator is now a highly evolved medical device which has the technical capability to provide much-needed support in areas of the world where access to life-saving medical technologies is limited. By design the ventilator allows for simple set-up, overcoming challenges posed by a lack of resources. A court in Bologna has temporarily stripped the parental rights of a couple after they refused blood from Covid-vaccinated donors for their son in need of an urgent blood transfusion before undergoing delicate heart surgery. Last week, the couple had informed Bologna’s Sant’Orsola hospital that they were “adamant that our child will only get unvaccinated blood.” The hospital replied to the request with a note, saying “the surgery cannot be postponed” and that it was “necessary to proceed urgently given the severity of the boy’s pathology.” A judge eventually turned down the parents’ appeal, citing that there were “guarantees of absolute safety in using blood from vaccinated donors.” The parents’ lawyer told Italy’s news agency ANSA that the couple had requested non-vaccinated blood for “religious reasons.” Over the weekend a court in Bologna stripped the couple of their parenting rights and the local social services were appointed legal guardians of the child. Our Paris correspondent, Kim Willsher, reports on the so-called freedom convoy headed to the symbolic heart of the EU: Hundreds of vehicles taking part in France’s so-called freedom convoy were heading for Brussels on Monday, despite warnings they would be prevented from entering the Belgian capital. The protest against Covid restrictions and high energy prices shifted its focus to the symbolic heart of the EU after police prevented most of the estimated 3,000 vehicles from entering Paris at the weekend. About 100 managed to get past the police and converged on the Champs Élysées, where they were eventually dispersed with teargas on Saturday evening. Belgian police said they had deployed forces along several motorways and stopped about 30 vehicles heading for the capital. The mayor of the city of Brussels, Philippe Close, said police were directing vehicles to a parking and rest area just outside the city, capable of accepting up to 10,000 vehicles, and warned demonstrators this was the only place they would be allowed to converge and protest. He said protesters might be allowed to enter Brussels on foot, but they would not be allowed to “take the capital hostage”. The Brussels authorities have banned any demonstrations in the city on Monday. Factories in Vietnam are expected to continue production despite record Covid infections, marking a change in the government’s earlier policies of sweeping lockdowns. One of the world’s major garment makers, Vietnam reported more than 26,000 infections on Sunday – about double the peak last year, when factories supplying brands such as Nike, Zara, Apple and Samsung were closed for months. This time, however, millions of factory workers have been vaccinated against the virus. More than 76% of Vietnam’s population has received at least two vaccine doses, up from 3.3% early in September last year, according to figures by the health ministry. “The risk of widespread lockdowns is very low this year as Vietnam has successfully carried out its Covid-19 vaccination campaign,” Dang Duc Anh, director of the National Institute of Hygiene and Epidemiology, told Reuters. On Sunday, the government announced it will remove its Covid-19 restrictions on international passenger flights from 15 February with no limitation on the number of flights. The UK’s prime minister has said it is “clear” that Omicron is less dangerous than previous Covid-19 variants. On a visit to Scotland today, Boris Johnson was asked if there was evidence to back up plans to relax all Covid restrictions in England. Johnson told reporters: I think the situation with Covid is that numbers remain high, but it’s clear that Omicron is much less dangerous than the Delta. You can see the numbers going down in hospitals, numbers in ICU have been nothing like what we saw with Delta. I think we’re on the right lines and together we’ve been taking roughly the same strategy. I know people make a lot of small differences. I understand that completely. But, overall, the UK has really been working very, very effectively together on testing, which is important. Here’s more on the Duchess of Cornwall testing positive for Covid-19 just days after her husband Prince Charles. Charles tested positive last Thursday as part of a routine test, having experienced no symptoms previously. Camilla had continued with her programme of engagements at the end of the week as she continued to test negative for the virus. She described herself as “luckily” negative on Thursday and said she had been tested “so many times”. It is the first time the duchess has caught Covid-19, while Prince Charles has the virus for a second time. Clarence House has confirmed that Camilla, the Duchess of Cornwall has tested positive for Covid-19 and is self-isolating. A Clarence House spokesperson said: “Her Royal Highness The Duchess of Cornwall has tested positive for Covid-19 and is self-isolating. We continue to follow government guidelines.” Camilla, 74, is triple vaccinated, sources said. She carried out a string of engagements last Thursday – the day the Prince of Wales tested positive for Covid-19 for a second time. In the UK, about one in 25 people working in social care, teaching and education were likely to have been self-isolating because of coronavirus last month, according to figures published by the Office for National Statistics. On 29 January, 4.0% of social care workers were self-isolating, up from 2.3% two weeks earlier. Some 3.9% of teaching and education staff were self-isolating because of Covid-19, up from 2.0% two weeks earlier. Levels of self-isolation among health care workers rose from 2.1% to 3.6%. The figures, reported by PA news agency, are the first of their kind to estimate the proportion of people self-isolating in different types of employment. They also show that at the peak of the Omicron wave on 3 January, nearly one in 20 – 4.7% – of the entire working-age population in England were likely to be in self-isolation. Hello everyone. It’s Léonie Chao-Fong here, taking over the live blog from Tom Ambrose to bring you all the latest global developments on the coronavirus pandemic. We start in Germany, where the government’s Covid restrictions are set to end as case numbers have dropped slightly, according to a draft official plan seen by Agence France-Presse. As a first step, contact restrictions will ease to allow people to meet privately. Currently private gatherings are limited to 10 people, or two households if an unvaccinated person is present. Access to shops will no longer be dependent on vaccination status. From 4 March, access to restaurants will no longer be restricted to people who have received a booster jab as long as an unvaccinated person shows a negative test. Finally, “broad restrictions of social, cultural and economic life should be gradually lifted by the start of spring on March 20, 2022,” the plan states. Rules requiring employers to allow staff to work from home if possible will also be lifted at that date. Germany will then rely on “basic protection measures” including “in particular the wearing of medical masks” in public. The plan is expected to be approved by the German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, and the heads of the federal states on Wednesday. Germany reported 76,465 new daily coronavirus cases on Monday, down 20% from the same day last week. Here is a brief round-up of today’s top Covid news stories: South Korea will begin giving out fourth doses of Covid vaccines this month and supply millions of additional home test kits to ease shortages amid a surge in Omicron infections, authorities confirmed on Monday. The busiest US-Canada border crossing has reopened after protests against Covid restrictions closed it for almost a week. The Sunday night reopening of the Ambassador Bridge between Windsor, Ontario and Detroit, Michigan came as Canadian officials held back from a crackdown on a larger protest in the capital, Ottawa. Anti-vaxxers in France are buying fake vaccine passes online to get around the country’s Covid restrictions. These are often promoted on mainstream social media platforms, research has revealed. Many buying the forgeries, which can be used across the European Union (EU), are being redirected from websites such as Instagram and Facebook to the Telegram encrypted messenger where they can be bought discreetly, according to a study by the Institute for Strategic Dialogue (ISD). In the UK, families bereaved by Covid want Boris Johnson to relinquish control over which issues will be investigated in the pandemic public inquiry, alleging he is compromised by allegations of lockdown-breaking at Downing Street. Coronavirus case numbers have dropped slightly in Germany, as the government’s Covid expert panel called for a gradual easing of restrictions in Europe’s biggest economy. Moderna is reportedly in late stage talks with the UK government about investing in research and manufacturing and collaborating with the NHS on clinical trials, the Financial Times reports. New Zealand’s prime minister has said protesters who oppose coronavirus mandates were using “intimidation and harassment”, as authorities appeared to take a harsher stance toward the convoy of demonstrators that has disrupted the capital of Wellington for nearly a week. Sweden’s health agency recommended on Monday that people aged 80 or above should receive a second booster shot of Covid vaccine, the fourth jab in total, to ward off waning immunity amid the rampant spread of the Omicron variant. Hundreds of cars, campervans and trucks are on their way to a protest against Covid regulations in Brussels today where Belgian officials have already banned a demonstration following a weekend attempt in Paris. Hong Kong will extend the suspension of face-to-face classes by two weeks until 7 March, local broadcaster RTHK said on Monday. Taiwan aims to ease its strict Covid quarantine policy from next month as it needs to gradually resume normal life and reopen to the world, the government said on Monday. Japan’s government said on Monday it has agreed to buy an additional 10m doses of Covid vaccine from Pfizer to be delivered in March. That’s it from me, Tom Ambrose, for today. My colleague Léonie Chao-Fong will be along shortly to continue bringing you all the latest coronavirus headlines throughout the rest of the day. South Korea’s parliament on Monday approved plans to provide a special time for Covid patients to vote during the 9 March presidential election as the country grapples with a record-breaking Omicron surge. The proposed revision of an election-related law will take effect if it is endorsed by the Cabinet Council and signed by the president — steps widely considered a formality since the governing and opposition parties have already agreed on the measure. Voters diagnosed with highly infectious diseases such as Covid and others placed in quarantine would be allowed to visit polling stations and cast ballots after regular voting closes at 6pm, according to a copy of the legislation on the website of the National Assembly. The special voting time would close at 7.30pm. Virus patients who have already applied for postal ballots in a now-ended registration period can still vote by mail, according to the National Election Commission. Commission officials said they will work out details such as whether to install separate polling booths for sick voters and what protective gear polling officers would wear. Alexis Danielsen sat down and rolled up her sleeve. When the shot went into her arm, one thought flooded her mind: “Finally!” It was May 2021, and she was receiving her first Covid shot – in fact, her first immunization of any kind. She was 39. Danielsen grew up in an anti-vaccine household, views she held well into adulthood. When her son was born, she declined all vaccines for him. Then she hit a personal crisis, and started rethinking all of her beliefs – including on vaccinations. It was like pulling on a thread and watching an entire sweater unravel, she said. “The Covid vaccine was the only logical choice after really re-evaluating what I believe in, what I actually believe is true,” Danielsen said. Danielsen partly credits her about-face to Lydia Greene and Heather Simpson, the Canada-based founders of Back to the Vax, a support group for people like themselves: one-time vaccine skeptics who’d had a change of heart. How serious is the presence of the Covid virus in deer for humans? Scientists think surveillance is urgent as deer could act as large reservoirs for the virus, and serve as a source for new variants. See the full article below. Hong Kong will extend the suspension of face-to-face classes by two weeks until 7 March, local broadcaster RTHK said on Monday. It comes as as the global financial hub grapples to contain a surge in Covid infections, Reuters reported. Hong Kong reported 2,071 new daily Covid infections on Monday, a new record, with 4,500 preliminary positive cases, authorities said. Japan’s government said on Monday it has agreed to buy an additional 10m doses of Covid vaccine from Pfizer to be delivered in March. Japan is already contracted to purchase 120m doses from Pfizer this year. Including the extra shots and acceleration of shipments, Japan will import 46m Pfizer doses in March to aid in its booster shot program, health minister Shigeyuki Goto told reporters. South Korea will begin giving out fourth doses of Covid vaccines this month and supply millions of additional home test kits to ease shortages amid a surge in Omicron infections, authorities confirmed on Monday. The surge has pushed daily cases to records, but widespread vaccination, with first booster shots received by more than 57% of the population of 52 million, has helped limit deaths and serious infections, Reuters reported. High-risk groups will be the first to get the fourth dose, in effect a second booster shot, health minister Kwon Deok-cheol told a Covid response meeting. “We’re planning to provide fourth shots to those who live in nursing homes and care facilities and others with declined immunisation, in light of a recent increase of infections among people aged 60 or older,” he said. At least 44.22 million people, or 86.2% of the population, are considered fully vaccinated. Sunday’s 54,619 new cases took the tally of infections to 1,405,246, the Korea Disease Control and Prevention Agency (KDCA). The country’s death toll rose by 21 to 7,102. Sweden’s Health Agency recommended on Monday that people aged 80 or above should receive a second booster shot of Covid vaccine, the fourth jab in total, to ward off waning immunity amid the rampant spread of the Omicron variant. The recommendation also covered all people living in nursing homes or who receive assisted living services at home. The second booster shot should be administered at least four months after the first booster jab, the agency said in a statement. Sweden hit record levels of infections earlier this year as Omicron spread rapidly across the country. But authorities are banking on booster shots and the milder symptoms of the variant to ease the pressure on healthcare and removed restrictions and scaled back testing this month. The busiest US-Canada border crossing has reopened after protests against Covid restrictions closed it for almost a week. The Sunday night reopening of the Ambassador Bridge between Windsor, Ontario and Detroit, Michigan came as Canadian officials held back from a crackdown on a larger protest in the capital, Ottawa. The Detroit International Bridge company said “the Ambassador Bridge is now fully open allowing the free flow of commerce between the Canada and US economies once again”. The crossing normally carries 25% of all trade between the two countries, and the blockade on the Canadian side had disrupted business on both sides, with carmakers forced to shut down several factories. Police in Windsor said earlier in the day that more than two dozen people had been peacefully arrested, seven vehicles towed and five seized as officers cleared the last demonstrators from near the bridge, which links the city – and numerous Canadian car factories – with Detroit. New Zealand’s prime minister has said protesters who oppose coronavirus mandates were using “intimidation and harassment”, as authorities appeared to take a harsher stance toward the convoy of demonstrators that has disrupted the capital of Wellington for nearly a week. Police initially let the protesters set up tents and camp on the grounds of New Zealand’s parliament before arresting 122 people on Thursday and then backing off again. The size of the protest dropped to a few hundred last week but increased again to about 3,000 over the weekend. Speaking with reporters, prime minister Jacinda Ardern signalled the thinning patience of authorities, the Associated Press reported. “I very clearly have a view on the protesters and the way that they’ve conducted their protest because it has moved beyond sharing a view to intimidation and harassment of the people around central Wellington,” she said. “That cannot be tolerated.” Parliament speaker Trevor Mallard tried to make the protesters uncomfortable last week by turning on lawn sprinklers and blasting out decades-old Barry Manilow songs and the 1990s hit Macarena on a repeat loop. Police on Monday told protesters to move their illegally parked vehicles, offering them alternative parking at a nearby stadium. Coronavirus case numbers have dropped slightly in Germany, as the government’s Covid expert panel called for a gradual easing of restrictions in Europe’s biggest economy. Germany reported 76,465 new daily coronavirus cases on Monday, down 20% from the same day last week. The seven-day infection incidence per 100,000 people also fell to 1,460 from 1,467 on Sunday, Reuters reported. Germany’s expert panel said on Sunday the government needed to put plans in place for easing curbs, given the current wave of infections was expected to flatten in the coming weeks, but it warned against loosening restrictions too soon. “Thanks to the milder course of the disease, we are entering a new phase of the pandemic, which allows prospects for gradual opening,” Hendrik Wuest, the prime minister of Germany’s most populous state, North Rhine-Westphalia, told Welt newspaper. The German chancellor Olaf Scholz and the heads of the federal states are due to meet on Wednesday to discuss possible easing. In the UK, families bereaved by Covid want Boris Johnson to relinquish control over which issues will be investigated in the pandemic public inquiry, alleging he is compromised by allegations of lockdown-breaking at Downing Street. The Covid-19 Bereaved Families for Justice group fears the current arrangement, where Johnson has a final say over inquiry topics, could allow him to water down examination of how his own conduct and that of senior officials may have undermined public trust in infection control measures that the bereaved say cost lives. The group, which represents more than 6,000 families, is calling on the prime minister to commit to accepting terms of reference presented by the chair to the inquiry, Lady Hallett, after a public consultation. Under the Inquiries Act it is for the minister in formal charge to set the terms of reference, in this case the prime minister. “It’s becoming increasingly clear that it’s not good enough for him to just take the chair’s recommendations for the terms of reference as advice and he needs to commit to implementing them in full,” said Hannah Brady, a member of the bereaved group. “The fact his office is under police investigation for breaching the rules shows he is compromised and cannot be allowed to have a final say on what the inquiry looks into.” Taiwan aims to ease its strict Covid quarantine policy from next month as it needs to gradually resume normal life and reopen to the world, the government said on Monday. Since the pandemic began two years ago, Taiwan has succeeded in keeping reported cases of Covid below 20,000, having enforced a blanket two-week quarantine for everyone arriving on the island even as large parts of the rest of the world have ditched theirs, Reuters reported. Speaking at a meeting with senior health officials, Premier Su Tseng-chang said that even though there could be further domestic infections the government was “quite confident” in its anti-pandemic measures. “The government must also take into account livelihoods and economic development, gradually return to normal life, and step out to the world,” his office cited him as saying. Hello. Tom Ambrose here to bring you all the latest Covid news from around the world over the next few hours. First, let me share with you a story I have been working on about how anti-vaxxers in France are buying fake vaccine passes online to get around the country’s Covid restrictions. These are often promoted on mainstream social media platforms, research has revealed. Many buying the forgeries, which can be used across the European Union (EU), are being redirected from websites such as Instagram and Facebook to the Telegram encrypted messenger where they can be bought discreetly, according to a study by the Institute for Strategic Dialogue (ISD). The report also raised concerns that social media algorithms are automatically directing people disillusioned with the French government’s handling of the pandemic towards far-right online spaces. ISD’s research coordinator, Zoé Fourel, who led the study, said that while some Facebook groups dedicated to the sale of fake Covid passes had about 1,000 members, there were Instagram accounts with as many as 17,000 followers. For the full story, see the link below. Hundreds of cars, campervans and trucks are on their way to a protest against Covid regulations in Brussels today where Belgian officials have already banned a demonstration following a weekend attempt in Paris. Around 1,300 vehicles from across France had arrived near the French border town of Lille by late Sunday, according to police and as reported by Agence France-Presse. Some protesters brandished French flags and chanted “We won’t give up” and “Freedom, freedom.” Ninety-seven people were arrested at the weekend in Paris where thousands of demonstrators defied a ban on attempting to blockade the French capital. The demonstrators took aim at the “vaccine pass” required to enter restaurants, cafes and many other public venues across the country. Belgian authorities have banned all demonstrations in the capital with “motorised vehicles” and said they had taken measures to prevent the blocking of the Brussels region. Belgian prime minister Alexander De Croo advised the demonstrators to abandon their plans to come to Brussels. I say to those who come from abroad: look at the rules in Belgium. We never had rules that were too hard and we don’t have so many anymore. So complain at home.” Checks are planned at the border and vehicles coming to the capital despite the ban will be diverted, Belgian authorities warned. Brussels airport also advised travellers to take precautions on Monday and come by train for fear of blocking access routes. The self-proclaimed “freedom convoy” is one of several worldwide inspired by a truckers’ standoff with authorities in Canada over vaccine mandates. Moderna Inc is reportedly in late stage talks with the UK government about investing in research and manufacturing and collaborating with the NHS on clinical trials, the Financial Times reports. The US biotech company is close to agreeing a significant investment and, if concluded, the deal would be a “key element” of the UK’s post-Brexit strategy to become a global hub for the life sciences, according to a person familiar with the matter, the publication added. UK health secretary Sajid Javid met with Stéphane Bancel, Moderna’s chief executive, for talks in Boston late last week. “The UK is ideally placed to become a life sciences superpower, and collaboration with world leading companies is crucial to this,” Javid tweeted on Friday, alongside a photo of him and Bancel. Moderna is considering sites in London, Oxford and Cambridge, to put it in prime position to collaborate on research into new vaccines and therapeutics with top scientists, one of the people told the publication. Hello it’s Samantha Lock back with you on the blog to bring you all the latest Covid developments from across the world. Let’s jump in with the news that England has delayed the announcement of a plan to expand Covid vaccinations to all children aged five to 11 amid an apparent impasse between the government and its vaccinations watchdog. While the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI) made its decision more than a week ago, Downing Street is continuing to review the verdict. A decision is now expected to be announced on 21 February, when Boris Johnson unveils the government’s long-term Covid plan. On the other side of the world, Hong Kong’s leader Carrie Lam has said an “onslaught” of Covid-19 infections has dealt a heavy blow and overwhelmed capacity to deal with the virus as daily cases surge to record highs. “The onslaught of the fifth wave of the epidemic has dealt a heavy blow to Hong Kong and overwhelmed the city’s capacity of handling,” she said. Daily infections have multiplied 13 times over the past two weeks, from about 100 cases at the start of February to more than 1,300 on 13 February, with authorities scrambling to control the deepening outbreak. Here’s a more detailed snap of how Covid is unfolding across regions around the world. Europe: The announcement of a plan to expand England’s Covid vaccinations to all children aged five to 11 has been delayed amid an apparent impasse between the government and its vaccinations watchdog. While the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI) made its decision more than a week ago, Downing Street is reviewing the verdict. A decision is now expected to be announced on 21 February, when Boris Johnson unveils the government’s long-term Covid plan. A future variant of Covid-19 could be much more dangerous and cause far higher numbers of deaths and cases of serious illness than Omicron, leading UK scientists have warned. As a result, many of them say that caution needs to be taken in lifting the last Covid restrictions in England, as Boris Johnson plans to do next week. France has dropped its Covid testing requirement for vaccinated travellers arriving from the UK. The French interior ministry said that from 12 February, travellers will not need to test as long as they are vaccinated according to European regulations. Anti-vaxxers in France are reportedly buying fake vaccine passes online to get around the country’s Covid restrictions, which are often promoted on mainstream social media platforms, research has revealed. Demonstrators against Covid-19 restrictions in France and the Netherlands staged protests on Saturday inspired by the “freedom convoy” demonstrations in Canada. In France police fired teargas at demonstrators on the Champs Élysées in Paris shortly after a convoy protesting against restrictions made it into the capital. A convoy of vehicles from across the Netherlands also brought The Hague’s city centre to a standstill earlier in the day. Germany hopes the arrival of 34m Nuvaxovid (Novavax) doses in 2022 will convince many to get the Covid-19 vaccine. Around 4m doses should be delivered in the first quarter, a spokesperson for the health ministry said. Asia: Hong Kong’s leader Carrie Lam has said an “onslaught” of Covid-19 infections has dealt a heavy blow and overwhelmed capacity to deal with the virus as daily cases surge to record highs. Daily infections have multiplied 13 times over the past two weeks, from about 100 cases at the start of February to more than 1,300 on 13 February, with authorities scrambling to control the deepening outbreak. Hong Kong authorities also said supplies of vegetables and chilled poultry to the global financial hub may be temporarily disrupted after some mainland goods vehicle drivers preliminarily tested positive for Covid-19. Hong Kong imports 90% of its food, with the mainland its most important source, especially for fresh food. Vietnam will remove its Covid-19 restrictions on international passenger flights with all markets starting 15 February with no limitation on the number of flights. South Korea will begin giving out fourth doses of Covid-19 vaccines by the end of the month and supply millions of additional home test kits to ease shortages amid a surge in Omicron infections, authorities confirmed on Monday. Singapore has granted interim approval for Novavax’s Covid-19 vaccine with the first batch of the Nuvaxovid vaccine expected to arrive in the next few months, Singapore’s Health Sciences Authority (HSA) said on Monday. China’s medical products regulator has given conditional approval for Pfizer’s Covid-19 drug Paxlovid to treat adults who have mild to moderate Covid and high risk of progressing to a severe condition, making it the first oral pill specifically developed to treat the disease cleared in the country. Americas: The busiest US-Canada border crossing has reopened after protests against Covid-19 restrictions cumulated in a six-day blockade. Canadian police cleared protesters from the Ambassador bridge linking the country to the United States on Sunday allowing North America’s busiest trade route to reopen.Paris has switched on its first noise radar as part of a plan to fine loud motorcycles and other vehicles in one of Europe’s noisiest cities. The machine placed high on a street lamp-post in the 20th district in eastern Paris is able to measure the noise level of moving vehicles and to identify their licence plate. “Too much noise makes people sick,” said David Belliard, the Paris deputy mayor. “For our health and quality of life … this first sound radar’s aim is to automatically issue fines for vehicles that makes too much noise.” In the next few months the city will test whether the radar can accurately identify the number plates of roaring motorcycles or cars, after which the equipment will have to be officially approved by authorities by the end of 2022. Paris plans to start issuing fines from early 2023, while the government deploys more noise radars in other French cities and tests out procedures for automating the fines as part of a 2019 mobility law. Under existing legislation authorities can already sanction the owners of noisy vehicles, but police need to have the necessary equipment and catch the driver in the act. The new system will work like a speed radar, with automated fines. “The problem is that police often have other things to do,” said Fanny Mietlicki, head of the Bruitparif agency that has pioneered the noise radar technology. Other noise radars have been installed in the Ile-de-France region around Paris and in the cities of Nice and Lyon since late January. On Tuesday a second noise radar will be installed in western Paris. A December 2021 study by Money.co.uk based on European Environment Agency data showed that Paris was one of Europe’s noisiest cities, with over 5.5 million people exposed to road traffic noise at 55 decibels or higher, compared with 2.6 million people in London and 1.7 million people in Vienna and Rome. With ReutersJust who is remembered, even eulogised, in the nomenclature of place is becoming one of the most burning questions at the heart of 21st-century public history. No less vexed than the so-called “statue” wars that flare up intermittently across the world (not least in the United States over confederate “heroes”, in the UK over slavers and here, in Australia, over murdering colonisers) are place names given to towns and other landmarks. Of course, much of this continent was already named when James Cook, having telescopically sighted Tolywiarar from the deck of Endeavour on 19 April 1770, promptly renamed it Point Hicks and continued that process all the way up the east coast. The renaming gathered pace with successive waves of colonial exploration, exploitation and violent dispossession of First Nations inhabitants. What is surprising is how many places – towns, streets, buildings, landmarks, federal and state electorates, local government areas - named in honour of the murderers of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people remain unchanged today. In recent years some progress has been made in Australia when it comes to righting some of the egregious wrongs of Australian nomenclature, not least in regards to John Batman, Angus McMillan and “Moreland” (the name given to a council in Melbourne’s inner north whose genesis was a Jamaican slave estate). It’s a beginning. But there are plenty more to reconsider. Bunbury in Western Australia, for example. Perth historian Chris Owen recently focused on WA’s third-largest city – situated on Noongar Wardandi country – in a recent post on his Darkest West Australia page, where he routinely chronicles the state’s shocking pre- and postcolonial violence against Indigenous people. Bunbury is named after Colonel Henry William St Pierre Bunbury, a British army officer who arrived in the colony in March 1836 and who, in just a year-and-a-half, earned a reputation as one of the harshest proponents of colonial “justice” (a genteel euphemism for “killing”) in the history of the place. First, a necessary digression before I recount a little about Bunbury based on the research of Owen and others. It’s worth remembering that Bunbury was in the service of James Stirling, WA’s first governor and the architect of the shocking Pinjarra massacre of 1834, who is commemorated variously in statuary and with a federal electorate and local government. In 1836 Stirling despatched Bunbury and his redcoats to York, 100km east of Perth in the Avon district, to repel the “warlike” and powerful Balladong Noongar, who were violently resisting the invading colonists. Bunbury went with Stirling’s orders to “tranquilise the district” and to give the Noongar “proper examples of the severity to the full extent to which the law warrants in such cases ... so that the natives may be deterred from the Commission of further outrages”. Bunbury wrote in his journal that the country wasn’t much to his liking, but “the Natives seem inclined to be quiet since I shot a few of them one night”. Owen writes: “Bunbury wrote of shooting at least 25 Aboriginal people himself in multiple locations. In 1837 Bunbury recorded the names of 11 Noongar shot at York – Warangwert, Dudum, Boonyup Wanup or Weinepwer, Wonnup, Boongang, Nookinman, Darraman, Wurap, Duir and Yoayoungwort. “What occurred around York (and nearby towns such as Northam and Toodyay) is less well known but it differed very little from what occurred at Pinjarra three years earlier. Force (often lethal) was used to pacify the Noongar into subservience.” It is equally clear that Stirling’s reference to adherence to “the law” when it came to his intent to “tranquilise” (another quaint euphemism) the Indigenous warriors (and their non-combatant families) was nothing but a charade. Theoretically, according to English law, the Indigenous custodians of the land upon which the WA colony was imposed were British subjects and, consequently, subject to – and protected by – imperial law. But Bunbury’s diaries make his contempt for this clear, as evidenced by this entry from July 1837: “The state of this district is at present moment most alarming, and I feel confident that it would not only be injudicious, but would lead to great loss of life, to act strictly according to law, by apprehending the perpetrators of the late dreadful murders; since the natives have now at different farms expressed their determination to spear a white man for every native either killed or apprehend ... it appears to me necessary by severe measures to deter the natives from the commission of further outrage.” At York and elsewhere, other colonists murdered with similar impunity. As Owen writes, Bunbury lived in WA barely 18 months. “But it is a measure of how he was valued as a soldier that the honour of naming a town was bestowed on him – the conquerer’s legacy. Secure possession of the colony through murder, however illegal it may have been ... and you were celebrated.” (Instructively, missionary Louis Giustiniani was hounded out of WA for exposing state-sanctioned slaughter of Aboriginal people – including Bunbury’s 1837 punitive expedition.) Visitors to – and some residents of – Bunbury might like to know the true story of the man the city is named in honour of. After which they – like many Aboriginal people – might, rightly, challenge whether his name should remain attached to the place. Meanwhile, I’ll periodically bring you more, here, from the Australian atlas of places named in honour of the killers of Indigenous people. Until then another name and another WA town – Busselton, named after John Garrett Bussell – to contemplate.It is rare for athletes to get a fairytale ending. To walk away from the sport at the top of one’s game, with a premiership trophy or a gold medal in hand is the dream for every sportsperson, but in reality those stories are few and far between. While some must be satisfied with a middle-of-the-table finish and a tribute on grand final day, the most difficult retirements are those that are not on the athlete’s own terms. It isn’t uncommon to see players with a few professional caps succumb to an injury or fail to have their contract renewed, but it is most jarring when it happens to a player who has reached the highest levels of their sport. It doesn’t fit the narrative, it’s not a neat ending to a career that we can tie a bow on and reminisce about at pubs and barbecues for years to come. Caitlin Bassett’s retirement from netball last week is a prime example of an ending to a career that doesn’t quite sit comfortably. After making her international debut at 20, Bassett cemented her placed in Diamonds’ folklore at 23 when she came off the bench in the 2011 Netball World Cup final and sunk the winning goal. From there she went on to win a Commonwealth Games gold in 2014, another World Cup medal in 2015 and silver medals at both events in 2018 and 2019 respectively, this time as the team’s captain. With 102 caps for the national team, she is not a player who many would have expected to finish her career by fading gently into obscurity. Bassett’s decline began in 2020 when she was forced to the bench for much of the Super Netball season, resulting in an early release from her contract with the Giants and a move over the ditch to New Zealand’s ANZ Premiership for the 2021 season. While she was hoping for a Super Netball return in 2022, she was not offered a contract with any of the eight teams and ongoing knee issues put an end to her plan to take up a training partner position and try to work her way back to the top, instead announcing her retirement from the sport. While sometimes seen as a polarising figure off the court, Bassett’s on-court achievements are indisputable and it is difficult to marry up the highs of her career with its less than glorious conclusion. It raises important issues around athlete transition – particularly for female athletes in the professional era. In years gone by, women worked full-time jobs around their sporting careers and retirement from sport simply meant they finally had a chance to get a full night’s sleep on a regular basis and an ability to use their annual leave for leisure. For professional male athletes – particularly those with as many accolades as Bassett – retirement is often bolstered by a large investment portfolio, a fully paid off property and a plethora of connections in the business and media world to forge a new career. While women’s sport has come a long way in recent years, a situation like Bassett’s highlights the large gap that must still be bridged before gender equality is achieved. In an era that requires female athletes to train as much as their male counterparts and demands standards of athleticism to warrant prime time television slots, how are these women being equipped for life after sport? While female athletes – Bassett included – usually have a degree under their belt by the time they retire from sport, it is difficult to enter the workforce in your mid-30s with a resume filled only with sporting achievements. Bassett is currently pet sitting to pay her rent, a situation that male athletes such as Michael Hooper and Pat Cummins are never likely to find themselves in. Earning a living as an athlete is a privilege afforded to few and one that isn’t taken for granted by the current generation of women who know that it was barely a distant dream for their predecessors. But it is a job that demands more than most – from the physical toll it takes to the obligatory early retirement, the sacrifices sometimes outweigh the benefits. Living out a childhood dream is all well and good, but when children act out their fantasies of slotting last second goals to win World Cups in backyards all over the world, they don’t involve limping into retirement with a body broken from years of training and a desperate search for an entry level office job. When an athlete as decorated as Caitlin Bassett speaks out and illustrates the difficulty of this transition, it provides the opportunity to make amends. To fix the system so that the next generation of women face a gentler incline as they traverse the difficult path to life after sport.The Australian government used a fraud conviction to attempt to deport an otherwise “model” New Zealand citizen who has lived in Australia for 40 years, with three Australian children and an Australian wife, and has not returned to his birth country since he was 17. The Morrison government is using the final days of parliament to attempt to harden its “character test” policy, which is used to cancel the visas of non-citizens, primarily New Zealand citizens, who are sentenced to more than 12 months’ imprisonment. The policy has been a huge point of contention between the two nations, souring relations, and prompting direct rebukes to prime minister Scott Morrison from his New Zealand counterpart Jacinda Ardern. Last week, the government lost a case in the Administrative Appeals Tribunal to deport a 47-year-old New Zealand man, who was convicted in 2021 of defrauding his own small business of more than $200,000, but had no other criminal history and was a “very low” risk of reoffending. The man was “otherwise exemplary in his behaviour” and a “loving and caring father and husband who has contributed significantly to the community”, tribunal deputy president Stephen Boyle said. The man’s lawyers argued before the tribunal that immigration minister Alex Hawke’s refusal to revoke the automatic cancellation in November threatened to separate the man from at least one of his children and take his wife and immediate family away from their school, relatives and friends. His lawyers appealed to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal, arguing the decision was against the best interests of his children, that their client and his family were heavily established in Australia, posed no ongoing risk to the community, and the man had not committed offences of violence, drugs or abuse. “[He] is not a violent criminal,” they argued. “[He] was not involved in drugs and has no other criminal record. He is not a member of a group involved with criminal conduct nor was he involved in human trafficking or vilification of any sector of the Australian community.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “[He] does have an Australian wife, three Australian children and an extended network of family and friends which has grown from his many productive years as a respected citizen and taxpayer in his community. He is presently paying for his error in prison and there is no suggestion that he will ever repeat his mistakes when his sentence is finished.” The AAT decided in the man’s favour, finding that the considerations in favour of allowing him to remain in Australia outweighed those against. It revoked the cancellation and allowed him to stay in the country. Australia’s policy of deporting non-citizens has been the source of longstanding trans-Tasman tensions. The number of visa cancellations under the policy has skyrocketed in less than a decade. Almost half of the 946 visas cancelled under the policy last financial year were New Zealand citizens. Those numbers will increase further if the government succeeds in its current attempt to harden the law. The Morrison government is currently attempting to push through the Migration Amendment (Strengthening the Character Test) bill 2021, which would cause more people to be deemed to have automatically failed the character test. The Law Council of Australia has criticised the changes as “disproportionate and unnecessary”. In 2020, Ardern publicly rebuked Morrison over the deportation policy, declaring that New Zealand would “own our people [and] we ask that Australia stops exporting theirs”. More recently, prominent Māori leader Matthew Tukaki, the executive chairman of the National Māori Authority, said Australia was attempting to turn New Zealand into a “dumping ground” for criminals. Tukaki suggested the Ardern government should “turn the planes around”.San Francisco police used DNA collected as part of a rape exam to link a woman to a crime, possibly violating her constitutional rights, the city’s district attorney alleged on Monday. The department’s crime lab entered the DNA profiles of potentially thousands of sexual assault victims over “many years” to a database that is used to identify suspects, the San Francisco Chronicle reported. District attorney Chesa Boudin, who said his office first learned of the practice last week, told the newspaper such use of victims’ DNA could violate the California’s Victims’ Bill of Rights as well as constitutional laws related to unreasonable searches and seizures. The woman’s DNA, which was collected in a rape exam as part of a domestic violence and sexual abuse case several years ago, was used to link her to a felony property crime in the city. Police identified her in the crime based on evidence from the rape exam, Boudin said. The district attorney expressed concerns the practice would deter victims of sexual assault, which is widely underreported in the US, from coming forward. “Law enforcement retaining and using DNA collected from survivors’ sexual assault exams to incriminate them hurts survivors,” Boudin said on Twitter. “Public safety demands that we support sexual assault survivors and end any practices that dissuade them from coming forward.” Bill Scott, the San Francisco police chief, told the Chronicle the woman could have been identified in the property crime via DNA found in a different database, rather than a profile collected from a rape exam. Scott also said the department “would thoroughly review the matter” and report back to him and the district attorney’s office. State senator Scott Wiener, who represents the city, said lawmakers were seeking to determine whether a change in state law was needed to prevent the practice. “Getting a rape kit can be re-traumatizing. Having that DNA placed in a database for future use creates yet another incentive not to do it. It’s unacceptable,” he said on Twitter.Thousands of nurses rallying outside New South Wales parliament have vowed to “come back bigger and angrier each time we are ignored” during the first statewide nurses strike in a decade on Tuesday. The healthcare professionals turned out in large numbers despite a ruling by the Industrial Relations Commission late on Monday that the strike should not go ahead. Staff at around 150 public hospitals are participating in staggered strikes across the state on Tuesday, with a skeleton staff working to ensure patient safety. Nurses want ratios of one nurse to every four patients on every shift and a pay increase above the government’s prescribed public sector offer of 2.5%. A nurse of 15 years told the Guardian it had “taken a lot for us to walk off the job today” but it had reached a critical point and she felt like it was her only option. “The way it’s going, it’s unsustainable,” she said. “We just want to provide safe care to our patients.” An emergency department nurse from Wollongong, who has been working for two years, said he was already burnt out and considering changing careers. “We were thrown in the deep end and we’re totally burnt out,” he said. “We’re supposed to be working in one of the better healthcare systems in the world but at the moment it feels pretty piss-poor.” The NSW Nurses and Midwives’ Association (NSWNMA) general secretary, Brett Holmes, accused the premier, Dominic Perrottet, of being out of touch “with the real world” and the reality of working though the Omicron wave in hospitals. Union assistant general secretary Shaye Candish read out stories from nurses detailing extreme cases of understaffing and burnout. “This government is under-resourcing the health system and it’s creating trauma for us,” she said. “It’s time for the premier to listen. [Nurses] are saying that the system’s not coping and it’s not OK. We are not going away until our demands are met. “We will come back bigger and angrier each time we are ignored.” Pressed on the issue of staffing ratios last week, Perrottet said it “hasn’t actually worked so well in other states”. But Queensland University of Technology health executive dean, distinguished professor Patsy Yates, disagreed, pointing to a study she co-authored in the Lancet journal last year looking into the policy’s implementation in Queensland. The study concluded improvements in staffing due to the implantation of ratios saw mortality rates drop, better outcomes for patients and cost savings due to fewer readmissions. “The evidence is pretty clear that having a skilled, educated nursing workforce makes a difference to patient mortality, to other patient outcomes and it improves healthcare system efficiency,” Yates told the Guardian. “It is just such a logical thing to do to actually get better healthcare. “There’s a growing body of evidence across Europe, across the US, that demonstrates that this simple intervention can make a difference.” Yates said all governments should be looking carefully at the study and similar work from overseas to guard against further future staffing shortages. “We can’t afford not to pay attention to issues such as burnout and wellbeing amongst the workforce,” she said. “It doesn’t only make sense in terms of patient safety, it makes sense in terms of having a sustainable workforce going forward.” The NSW health minister, Brad Hazzard, met with the union on Monday in an attempt to avert the action and said he was disappointed the strike went ahead. “It’s unfortunate ... there’s been all sorts of efforts to try and work our way through their principal issues,” he told Sydney radio 2GB on Tuesday. But union officials speaking at the rally accused the government of being disingenuous in “crisis talks”. NSW Nurses and Midwives Association president O’Bray Smith said Hazzard and health bureaucrats spent the meeting “mansplain(ing) about life in health”. “Those ‘crisis talks’ were merely a tickbox so they could go to the IRC and the media and say ‘Oh, we tried’,” she said. “I will not be lectured about safe staffing by these men.” Hazzard agreed there needed to be enough nurses to ensure patients were safely cared for but said the union’s demands would cost around $1bn. “I still need to be able to manage taxpayers’ dollars and make sure it works,” he said. While calling for the government to engage in “meaningful negotiations” with the union, the state’s opposition leader, Chris Minns, would not commit to implementing nurses’ demands if he led the state. “We’re not ready to announce our election promises today,” he said. “We understand [the union’s] issues, we’re committed to a safe working model for public hospitals.” Australian Associated Press contributed to this reportThe Myanmar military kidnapped civilians and forced them to work as human shields, attacked homes, churches and carried out massacres, according to a report that warns recent atrocities in eastern Myanmar may amount to war crimes. The report, by the Myanmar-founded human rights group Fortify Rights, documents abuses by the country’s military in Karenni state, also known as Kayah state, an area that has seen intense fighting between the army and groups opposed to last year’s military coup. The military has faced strong resistance in Karenni state, and has responded with brutal violence in an attempt to crush opposition. The report includes claims that the army used civilians as human shields and as forced porters – allegations which have also been reported elsewhere in the country, including in Chin state. An 18-year-old student from Moe Bye township, located on the border between Karenni and Shan states, told interviewers that he was taken, along with his uncle and two other men, in early June 2021 and used as a human shield in clashes between the military and the local armed resistance. The group escaped after having been detained for four days, during which time they were tied up, blindfolded and tortured, the student said. Another interviewee alleged that he and nine others were captured by the military and forced to porter army equipment for five days. The Fortify Rights report, a flash report providing preliminary documentation, based on interviews with 30 people, including eyewitnesses and survivors, adds to growing evidence of military abuses. Numerous international organisations have raised concern over recent atrocities in Karenni, including the Christmas Eve massacre of at least 40 civilians, including a child and two humanitarians working with Save the Children, near the village of Moso in Hpruso township. The victims were killed and burned. The Karenni Civil Society Network estimates that 170,000 civilians, more than half the state’s estimated population, have been displaced since the military seized power last year. UN estimates suggest about 91,900 have been forced to flee their homes. According to Fortify Rights, the military has targeted shelters for those who are displaced, including camps and churches, resulting in the deaths of civilians. In January, the military killed at least three people, including two children, when it bombed a camp for displaced people near the village of Ree Khee Bu in Hpruso. Banyar Khun Naung, director of the non-profit Karenni Human Rights Group, said there were no indications that violence would reduce in intensity and that he feared shortages of food and essential supplies would worsen over the coming months. “In Karenni we can see that our socio-economic condition has collapsed. Ordinary people, even if they are not [internally displaced people], even if they are the host community of IDPs, they can hardly survive. “We cannot grow rice, or vegetable, we cannot trade between township to township, the online banking system has failed,” he said. The supply of food and medicine to Karenni state was also being blocked by the military, he said. Statements by the UN expressing concern over the situation in Myanmar have had “no discernible effect” on the military junta, Fortify Rights said. The junta has also failed to honour a five point plan developed last year by the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, which calls for the “immediate cessation of violence” and a commitment for all parties to exercise “utmost restraint.” Asean, which has led diplomatic efforts to ease the crisis and will meet this week, should support the establishment of a UN security council-mandated global arms embargo, Ismail Wolff, regional director at Fortify Rights. “The Myanmar junta is murdering people with weapons procured on the global market, and that must stop,” said Wolff. “The UN security council must urgently impose a global arms embargo on the Myanmar military, and it would be strategic and sensible for Asean to support it.”We are going to wrap up this blog for the time being. Please follow our live coverage of the ongoing Ukraine crisis here: Jair Bolsonaro is facing backlash at home and abroad over his decision to visit Russia for trade talks with Vladimir Putin. Two officials from Brazil’s foreign ministry told Associated Press that they have received messages from US officials saying the trip’s timing is inopportune and conveys Brazilian indifference to threats of invasion. The officials spoke on condition of anonymity for lack of authorisation to speak publicly, AP said. A US state department official, meanwhile, issued a statement on Monday night US time that appeared to accept the meeting would go ahead. As democratic leaders, the United States and Brazil have a responsibility to stand up for democratic principles and the rules-based order. We hope Brazil will take this opportunity to reinforce this message in their conversations in Moscow. At least two of Bolsonaro’s Cabinet ministers, who spoke on condition of anonymity for fear of reprisals, said privately they have been trying since last week to convince him to call off the trip. They said Bolsonaro sees potential benefits for a possible reelection bid because he can show proximity to fellow conservative leaders abroad. Brazil’s president Jair Bolsonaro has set off on an official visit to Russia where he will meet the Russian leader Vladimir Putin. Bolsonaro, who likes to portray himself as a “strongman” nationalist leader, decided to go ahead with the visit despite pressure from Brazil’s traditional ally the United States and within his own cabinet. He says the visit is to build trade relations. Brazil, a major global agricultural producer and exporter, “depends largely on fertilizers from Russia” Bolsonaro said to justify the trip. However, it will be seen as a signal of support for Putin amid the Ukraine border standoff. Agence France-Presse also reported that Brazil has reaffirmed its diplomatic ties with Kyiv on Monday. “The minister of foreign affairs, Carlos Franca, spoke by phone today with the Ukrainian foreign minister Dmytro Kuleba,” the foreign ministry said on Twitter shortly before Bolsonaro took off for Russia. Franca “listened to his counterpart’s assessment of the current situation on the border between Ukraine and Russia” and reiterated Brazil’s support of a “peaceful resolution” of the crisis, said the ministry, noting that Brazil and Ukraine recently celebrated 30 years of diplomatic ties. Japan may take steps against Russia, including imposing sanctions, if its troops invade Ukraine, foreign minister Yoshimasa Hayashi said, Reuters reports. Hayashi told a news conference in Tokyo on Tuesday: First and foremost, Japan is strongly seeking a resolution through diplomatic dialogue. But if a Russian invasion takes place, Japan will take appropriate steps including possible sanctions, in response to what has actually happened, and in coordination with the G7 and international community.” More on that Belarus announcement from the US state department. A travel advisory reads: Do not travel to Belarus due to the arbitrary enforcement of laws, the risk of detention, unusual and concerning Russian military buildup along Belarus’ border with Ukraine, Covid-19 and related entry restrictions. US citizens in Belarus should depart immediately via commercial or private means.” On 31 January, the department ordered the departure of family members of US government employees from the embassy in Minsk. However, due to an “increase in unusual and concerning Russian military activity near the border with Ukraine, US citizens located in or considering travel to Belarus should be aware that the situation is unpredictable and there is heightened tension in the region. On 12 February, the US ordered the departure of most employees at its embassy in Kyiv due to the continued threat of Russian military action. Potential harassment targeted specifically at foreigners is also possible, the advisory warned. Given the heightened volatility of the situation, US citizens are strongly advised against traveling to Belarus. A quick snap from Reuters here that the US state department is recommending American citizens leave Belarus immediately due to the Russian military buildup along the Belarus border with Ukraine. We will have more on this story as it develops. Hello it’s Samantha Lock joining you on the blog as my colleague Kari Paul signs off. Let’s start with the recent announcement that Canada has said it will send lethal military weaponry to Ukraine with a promise to loan Kyiv $500m to help defend itself in the face of “Russian aggression”. Prime minister Justin Trudeau made the announcement during a press briefing on Monday, Reuters reports: In light of the seriousness of the situation and following conversations with our Ukrainian partners, I’ve approved the provision of Can$7.8 million worth of lethal equipment and ammunition. This responds to Ukraine’s specific request, and is in addition to the non-lethal equipment we’ve already provided,” he said, adding that “the intent of this support from Canada and other partners is to deter further Russian aggression.” Trudeau followed up the conference by tweeting that Canada would continue to support Ukraine “in the face of persistent Russian aggression”. In addition, the prime minister said Ottawa would provide more loans to Ukraine, bringing the total announced since the beginning of the year to Can$620 million (US$490 million). Canada, which is home to a large Ukrainian diaspora, has ordered its military trainers out of Ukraine and closed its embassy in Kyiv temporarily. Some 200 Canadian soldiers have been deployed in Ukraine since 2015 as part of the UNIFIER mission, aimed at contributing to the training of Ukrainian forces. Kari Paul here, logging off for the evening. Next you will hear from my Australia colleagues. Below are some top news lines from the afternoon. The State Department said on Monday that Russia still has not responded to documents delivered weeks ago by the Biden administration regarding a diplomatic path relating to the Ukraine crisis. Due to safety concerns relating to a potential Ukraine invasion, the World Bank and IMF have relocated staff in the country temporarily. The White House said on Monday that it is considering an offer of $1bn in credit guarantees to Ukraine to help it endure economic fallout from the ongoing crisis. Joe Biden and Boris Johnson agreed in a call on Monday that a “crucial window for diplomacy” remains in the Ukraine crisis. Meanwhile, the White House has assembled a tactical team to prepare for a Russian invasion. White House prepares for a Russian invasion Over at the Washington Post we have a window into the “Tiger Team”: a Biden administration team coordinating a response to the Russia-Ukraine conflict. According to the report many of the officials conscripted to the operation are veterans of the 2014 Russian invasion and annexation of Crimea. More from the report: The White House team has staged two multihour tabletop exercises — including one with Cabinet officials — to bring the scenarios to life and assembled a playbook that outlines an array of swift potential responses, starting with Day One and extending through the first two weeks of an envisioned Russian invasion. That playbook covers everything from actual battlefield scenarios to potential responses to related issues, like how to manage an influx of refugees in neighboring countries, and potential cyber attacks from Moscow. US and UK leaders strategize Russia response as ‘window for diplomacy’ remains There is a “crucial window for diplomacy” remaining in the Ukraine crisis, Boris Johnson and Joe Biden agreed in a call Monday. World leaders agreed in discussion that even as Russia inches towards an invasion there remains time for the country to step back and avoid a conflict. “The leaders emphasised that any further incursion into Ukraine would result in a protracted crisis for Russia, with far reaching damage for both Russia and the world,” a Downing Street spokesman told AFP. Diplomatic discussions with Russia remain “the first priority”, that spokesman said, adding that officials have “agreed that Western allies must remain united in the face of Russian threats”. European countries should also work to reduce their dependence on Russian gas, the leaders said, to further destabilize the country’s strategic interests. The White House said the leaders “reviewed ongoing diplomatic and deterrence efforts in response to Russia’s continued military build-up on Ukraine’s borders and reaffirmed their support for Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity”. “They discussed efforts to reinforce the defensive posture on NATO’s eastern flank and underlined the continued close coordination among Allies and partners, including on readiness to impose severe consequences on Russia should it choose further military escalation,” it added. US considers $1bn in credit guarantees to Ukraine The United States is considering an offer of $1bn in credit guarantees to Ukraine to help it endure fallout caused by ongoing threats from Russia, the White House said on Monday. In a press conference on Monday, White House principal deputy press secretary Karine Jean-Pierre told reporters that the loan guarantee is “something we are considering as part of the additional macro-economic support we are exploring to help Ukraine’s economy in this pressure resulting from Russia’s military build-up”. The loan comes as Russia has sent over 100,000 troops to Ukranian borders, encroaching from three directions. With one of the poorest economies in Europe, Ukraine has already suffered financially from heightened tensions over the possibility of an invasion by Russia. Jake Sullivan, the US National Security advisor, briefed congressional leaders Monday on the plan, according to a source familiar with the matter. Sullivan said on Sunday the Biden administration believes that Russia could attack Ukraine “any day now”. The US has now provided Ukraine with $650m in military assistance over the past year, in addition to economic and humanitarian aid. Other countries are also supporting Ukraine-German chancellor Olaf Scholz said on a visit to Kyiv on Monday he was “determined” to maintain aid to the country. G7 countries have also warned Moscow they are ready to impose sanctions that would have a huge and immediate impact on Russia’s economy, should it pursue any further military aggression against Ukraine. AFP contributed to this report. World Bank and IMF relocate staff from Ukraine As concerns of a potential Russian invasion intensify, the World Bank and International Monetary Fund will relocate staff currently based in Ukraine. The institutions said they would continue to support work in the country but that staff would be sent elsewhere. Reuters has obtained an internal memo from the World Bank sent Monday, which said it is monitoring the situation at the border as Russia amasses a large military force there. It did not say where the staff would relocate or how many members were impacted. “The World Bank Group’s foremost priority is to keep our staff and their families safe. In line with our evacuation policy, temporary relocation of staff is under way and enhanced security measures are in place,” the memo said. Meanwhile, a spokesperson for the IMF confirmed that Vahram Stepanyan, its representative based in Ukraine, would be temporarily located. Stepanyan has been based in Kyiv since July 2021, acting as a local head of the IMF and working with local Ukrainian employees. “IMF staff remain engaged and in contact with their Ukrainian counterparts,” the IMF spokesperson said. The United States is relocating its Ukraine embassy operations from the capital Kyiv to the western city of Lviv, Secretary of State Antony Blinken said on Monday, citing a “dramatic acceleration in the buildup of Russian forces” on the nearby border. The IMF maintains a $5bn loan program for Ukraine, while the World Bank has provided nearly $1.3bn in financing to Ukraine since the Covid-19 pandemic started. US state department still has not received a response to documents sent to Russia A spokesman for the US state department said on Monday that Russia has still not responded to documents it sent officials there weeks ago. From the press briefing: “We’ve seen the comments from the Kremlin, from Moscow, indicating that their response, in their words, has been finalized. It’s been I believe, over two weeks now, since we dispatched our non-deeper to Moscow. We’ve yet to see a response,” state department spokesman Ned Price said at a briefing. Joe Biden previously said the documents laid out a response to Russia’s recent actions and “sets out a serious diplomatic path forward should Russia choose it”. They were delivered in person to the Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs by US Ambassador to Russia, John Sullivan. Price said the US would “carefully review” the response once it is received. “We are prepared to engage in diplomacy, we hope to engage in good faith, dialogue and diplomacy, but in order for it to be good faith, of course, that will require the Russians to respond in kind,” he said. “In order for this to bear fruit, it will also have to take place in the context of deescalation. And that is just not something we’ve seen to date,” Price said. Vladimir Putin has suggested it is still not too late for dialogue over Ukraine, as the world continues to be left guessing whether the Russian president is on the brink of invading his neighbor or whether his military buildup is a negotiating ploy. In a meeting in the Kremlin, the foreign minister Sergei Lavrov told Putin he believed there was still room for dialogue on Russian requests for a new security deal with the west, which have been made as Russia amassed 140,000 troops around Ukraine’s borders in recent weeks. “It seems to me that our possibilities are far from being exhausted. They certainly should not continue indefinitely. But at this stage I would suggest that they continue and be intensified,” Lavrov told Putin. Putin, who has taken to holding meetings with extreme social distancing owing to a fear of contracting Covid, gave his assent from the other end of an extremely long table. The footage released from the meeting appeared carefully choreographed to send a message about Kremlin thinking. “We warn against endless conversations on issues that need to be resolved today. Still, as the foreign minister, I should say that there is always a chance,” said Lavrov. At the same time, a senior Russian diplomat told the Guardian that Russia would be within its rights to “counterattack” against Ukraine if it felt Kyiv was threatening the population of eastern Ukraine. “We will not invade Ukraine unless we are provoked to do that,” said Vladimir Chizhov, Russia’s ambassador to the EU, in an interview in Brussels. “If the Ukrainians launch an attack against Russia, you shouldn’t be surprised if we counterattack. Or, if they start blatantly killing Russian citizens anywhere – Donbas or wherever,” he said. Donbas is the region of eastern Ukraine where Russia has armed and funded an insurgency since 2014 and where the Kremlin has handed out hundreds of thousands of Russian passports. In January, US officials briefed journalists on intelligence they claimed showed that Russia was preparing a “false flag” incident that could be used as a pretext for an intervention. Full report here. Hello, readers! This is Kari Paul in the Guardian’s California bureau taking over with updates for the next few hours. Stay tuned for more news. United Nations secretary general Antonio Guterres has called on countries embroiled in the crisis over whether Russia will invade Ukraine to find a diplomatic fix. He said today that he is deeply worried about the heightened tensions over Ukraine and “increased speculation” about a military conflict. Calling on countries to respect the UN charter and avoid war, Gutterres said: “The time is now to defuse tensions and deescalate actions on the ground. There is no place for incendiary rhetoric. Public statements should aim to reduce tensions, not inflame them.” In a live address he told gathered reporters: “Abandoning diplomacy for confrontation is not a step over a line, it is a dive over a cliff. In short, my appeal is this: do not fail the cause of peace.” More from White House principal deputy press secretary Karine Jean-Pierre on prospects for an invasion of Ukraine “at any time.” “It remains unclear which path Russia will choose to take because we do not know, it is his [Putin’s] decision to make. We remain engaged with Russian government in full coordination with our allies and partners. “The path for diplomacy remains available if Russia chooses, again, to engage constructively. But we’re clear-eyed about the prospects on the ground and we are ready to impose severe costs on Russia, in coordination with our allies and partners, if they attack Ukraine.” White House principal deputy press secretary Karine Jean-Pierre has just warned that: “We are in the window when an invasion could begin at any time” in relation to the face-off between Russia and Ukraine. At the daily media briefing at the White House a little earlier, Jean-Pierre added: “The path for diplomacy remains available ... But we are clear-eyed about the prospects on the ground” with 100,000-plus Russian troops massed along the Ukraine border. US president Joe Biden has just wrapped up a phone call with Britain’s prime minister, Boris Johnson, where the two leaders discussed their latest positions in the Russia-Ukraine crisis. They discussed efforts to reinforce the allies’ defensive posture on Nato’s eastern flank and their “readiness to impose severe consequences on Russia should it choose further military escalation”, according to the White House. “The leaders discussed their recent diplomatic engagements with Ukraine and Russia. They also reviewed ongoing diplomatic and deterrence efforts in response to Russia’s continued military build-up on Ukraine’s borders and reaffirmed their support for Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity,” the White House further said. In his most recent address to the nation, Zelenskiy was not saying he necessarily agreed with the assessment that there would be an attack on Wednesday, and he attributed it to reports from others. He has been consistently critical of US and allied forecasts of doom. The intent behind the address appeared to calm nerves, assure Ukrainians of the capabilities of the armed forces, and a call for national unity in the face of the constant psychological pressure. According to CNN, Mykhailo Podoliak, a Ukrainian presidential adviser said that Zelenskiy was being ironic. And NBC reports that Sergii Nykyforov, Zelenskiy’s spokesman told NBCNews: “By saying ‘we were told the attack is going to be on Feb 16’, the president referred to a date that was spread by the media. It is not even an official date. Just a date that came from some officials, a leak.” Hello to our live blog readers following events in the Russia-Ukraine crisis. The news has been breaking fast and furious in recent hours and we’re bringing you all the developments – now from your team at Guardian US HQ in New York, who have recently taken over coverage from the team at the Guardian’s London global HQ. We’ll take you through the next few hours before handing the baton to our Guardian US colleagues in California. Here’s where things stand: Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy just gave an address to his nation, posted in English on Facebook saying: “We are told that February 16 will be the day of attack.” He cites no sources for that prediction of a Russian invasion of Ukraine. US Secretary of State Antony Blinken announced that the Biden administration is moving its remaining embassy staff in Ukraine from the capital Kyiv to the city of Lviv, further west, for safety reasons, as expectations of a Russian incursion continue to rise. The Pentagon warned that Russian president Vladimir Putin is adding more military force and capability near Ukraine’s border with each passing day. Russian oligarchs would be targeted with “severe” sanctions if Russia invaded Ukraine, the UK’s foreign secretary, Liz Truss, said. German Chancellor Olaf Scholz said on his visit to Zelenskiy in Kyiv earlier today that the “territorial integrity of Ukraine is not negotiable”. Scholz (who was elected to succeed the long-serving Angela Merkel) will be in Moscow tomorrow to talk to Putin. A video address from Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy to his nation has been posted in English on Facebook, saying: “We are told that February 16 will be the day of attack.” Zelenskiy does not cite a source for the information. In a different translation on the Reuters news wire, he is quoted as saying: “They tell us February 16 will be the day of the attack.” He then goes on to say, according to Reuters: “We will make it a day of unity. They are trying to frighten us by yet again naming a date for the start of military action.” In the Facebook translation, Zelenskiy continues: “We are intimidated by a great war and once again set the date of the military invasion. This is not the first time. “But our state is stronger today than ever. We strive for peace and want to solve all issues exclusively through negotiations.” Such a statement is surprising and, if the president has been reliably informed of the timing of a planned incursion, or invasion, it is utterly extraordinary. The Hill also reported the Facebook post. The Facebook post translation further says: “We have one great European aspiration. We want freedom and are ready to vote for it. 14 thousand defenders and civilians who died in this war [since the Russian aggression in Ukrainian territory since 2014] are watching us from the sky. “And we will not betray their memory. We all want to live happily, and happiness loves the strong. We have never been able to give up and we are not going to learn that.Love Ukraine! We are at peace! We are strong! We are together!” The decision to evacuate the Kyiv embassy is a turnaround from Saturday morning when a senior state department official insisted that the embassy would not be closed and that a few diplomats would stay on “sufficient to be able to continue working closely with the Ukrainian government, to be able to ensure we’ve got the best possible information for our senior leaders and the President about what’s happening broadly in society.” The official noted the US does not have a diplomatic facility in Lviv, so it would be an ad hoc operation out of the western Ukrainian city.” Conceptually, this is much more like a group of people from the embassy temporarily working in another city, just as we would if we had a visit by senior US government officials or members of Congress,” the official said. US Secretary of State Antony Blinken has just announced that the Biden administration is moving its remaining embassy staff in Ukraine from the capital Kyiv to the city of Lviv, further west. Blinken is citing the “dramatic acceleration in the buildup of Russian forces” on the border with Ukraine. The secretary of state had already told a news conference in Honolulu yesterday that the risk of Russian military action in Ukraine was high and imminent enough to justify the departure of much of the staff from the embassy, Last Friday, Joe Biden urged American citizens to leave the country while there were still commercial flights. That was excluding essential embassy staff who remained put in Kyiv. Blinken said in a statement today that the decision was taken out of safety concerns. “My team and I constantly review the security situation to determine when prudence dictates a change in posture,” Blinken said. He noted that Washington would continue working for a diplomatic solution to the tensions with Moscow. Embassy operations were being temporarily moved to Lviv - which is around 50 miles from the western border of Ukraine, next to Poland. Blinken added that US diplomats would continue to engage with the Ukrainian government from that location. Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelensky has declared that Wednesday 16 February, the day on which US intelligence believes a Russian invasion could take place, will be a day of national unity. Published on the president’s website, Zelensky called on the country’s blue and yellow national flag to be hung on state buildings and other structures, and for the national anthem to be played nationwide at 10am on Wednesday. The decree states that “urgent measures to consolidate Ukrainian society” are required in order “to strengthen the consolidation of Ukrainian society, strengthen its resilience in the face of growing hybrid threats, information and propaganda, moral and psychological pressure on the public consciousness.” The United Nations has no plans to evacuate or relocate out of Ukraine any of its more than 1,600 staff, according to UN spokesperson Stephane Dujarric. UN Secretary-General Antonio Guterres spoke separately on Monday with Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov and Ukraine’s Foreign Minister Dmytro Kuleba and still believed “from his own analysis, his own hopes” that there would not be a conflict, Dujarric said. “He welcomed the ongoing diplomatic discussions to defuse those tensions and underlined, yet again, the fact that there is no alternative to diplomacy,” Dujarric said. Latvian airline airBaltic is adding extra flights from Kyiv to the Latvian capital Riga, citing exceptional demand. The announcement came after the Ministry of Foreign Affairs urged Latvian nationals to leave Ukraine at the earliest opportunity. In a statement, the airline said the flights, scheduled on Tuesday and Wednesday, are “to address the significant passenger demand”. “AirBaltic is continuously evaluating the current situation and … is flexible and ready to adjust its flight schedule if necessary,” the statement said. Ukraine’s National Police have entered a so-called “enhanced mode” to “ensure security and preparedness,” according to police Igor Klimenko. In a Facebook post on Monday, Klimenko said security measures would enter an “enhanced” mode until Saturday. In practical terms, this means implementing an increased number of patrols to ensure public safety and order on the streets; the deployment of additional “situational centres” for 24-hour monitoring; and securing protection for critical infrastructure, public authorities and local governments. He said the rationale for the enhanced mode is to “provide a more efficacious response to public safety threats”, adding: “This stricter police regime should not be cause for alarm. It is necessary to ensure security and preparedness. We protect, not panic!” Vladimir Putin is adding more military force and capability near Ukraine’s border with each passing day, Pentagon spokesperson John Kirby said. “This is a military that, that continues to grow stronger, continues to grow more ready,” Kirby told MSNBC. “They’re exercising, so we believe that he has a lot of capabilities and options available to him should he want to use military force.” “Should he want to use military force ... it could happen any day,” he said, adding that the United States has also not ruled out potential cyber attacks from Russia. The UK is sending a “small number” of troops to Lithuania to help it with the migrant crisis on its border with Belarus, the Ministry of Defence has said. Earlier today it was reported that a German military aircraft carrying around 70 soldiers landed in Lithuania, the first of several planned Nato deployments amid fears in the region about a possible Russian invasion of Ukraine. A senior EU official has said EU leaders could hold an emergency summit on the Ukraine crisis this week, on the sidelines of a meeting with their African counterparts, Agence France-Presse reports. The official said Brussels was waiting for the results of German Chancellor Olaf Scholz’s visit to the Kremlin and an emergency summit was “possible” if needed when EU leaders gather in Brussels on Thursday for the Africa meeting. The EU official, speaking on condition of anonymity, said the West could not say if Putin has yet taken a decision to invade - but warned that an attack could take place at any moment. From Ukraine’s minister of foreign affairs Dmytro Kuleba, following a day of rumours that Ukraine might renounce its ambitions to join NATO. Russia’s ambassador to the EU has said Moscow would be within its rights to launch a “counterattack” if it felt it needed to protect Russian citizens living in eastern Ukraine. The comments in an interview with the Guardian will do little to calm fears of a major Russian assault on Ukraine, given one of the key scenarios suggested by western intelligence was Russia launching a “false-flag” operation to provide a pretext for invasion. “We will not invade Ukraine unless we are provoked to do that,” said Vladimir Chizhov, who has represented Russia in Brussels since 2005. “If the Ukrainians launch an attack against Russia, you shouldn’t be surprised if we counterattack. Or, if they start blatantly killing Russian citizens anywhere – Donbas or wherever.” Donbas is the region of eastern Ukraine where the Kremlin has armed and funded an insurgency since 2014. It has also, in recent years, handed out hundreds of thousands of Russian passports to residents of two so-called “people’s republics”, which are no longer controlled by Kyiv. More than 14,000 people have been killed in the conflict since 2014. Russia has always denied being a party to the conflict despite overwhelming evidence to the contrary. Reuters reports that Russian mercenaries with ties to Moscow’s spies have increased their presence in Ukraine in recent weeks, stoking fears among some Nato members that Russia could try to engineer a pretext for an invasion. The news agency cited the information to “three senior Western security sources”. The sources, Reuters reported, said, “their concerns had strengthened in recent weeks that a Russian incursion into Ukraine could be preceded by an information war, and cyber attacks on Ukraine’s critical infrastructure such as electricity and gas networks.” Russia could also use the mercenaries to sow discord and paralyse Ukraine through targeted assassinations and the use of specialised weaponry, the sources said. The United States has warned that Russia could stage a “false flag” operation inside Ukraine to justify an invasion. “It is likely that Russian mercenaries, under the direction of the Russian state, will be involved in any hostilities in Ukraine, potentially including a pretext for an invasion,” said one Western security source, who spoke on condition of anonymity. The Kremlin told Reuters that Russia was not strengthening its presence on Ukrainian territory and that Russian troops had never been present there and were not now. Russian oligarchs would be targeted with “severe” sanctions if Russia invaded Ukraine, the UK foreign secretary, Liz Truss, has said. (Via PA Media) Truss said she still hoped for a diplomatic solution, telling reporters: That is why the prime minister and I are travelling around Europe this week, that is why we are working to persuade the Russians to remove their troops from the border, because a war would be disastrous. But she added: We are very clear that Russia is the aggressor in this situation. They have 100,000 troops lined up on the Ukrainian borders. They need to de-escalate because it will be a cost to Russia if they invade Ukraine, both in terms of the cost of a long-running war, but also the sanctions that we would impose, which would be severe, and would target oligarchs and it would target companies across Russia. AFP has this on Zelenskiy telling Scholz that Russia is wielding its Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline as a “geopolitical weapon”. The controversial energy link bypassing Ukraine has been a growing irritant in Germany’s relations with Washington and Kyiv. “We have certain disagreements in our assessments” of the Russia-Germany energy link, Zelenskiy said, after talks with Scholz in Kyiv. “We clearly understand that it is a geopolitical weapon.” Russia has completed the building the pipeline, which runs under the Baltic Sea, but German regulators are yet to approve its use. US president Joe Biden has warned that he would find a way to “bring an end” to the project should Russia invade Ukraine. Without mentioning Nord Stream 2 by name, Scholz said that “no one should doubt the determination and preparedness” of Berlin to punish Russia in case it attacks its neighbour. “We will act then and they will be very far-reaching measures that will have a significant impact on Russia’s economic development opportunities,” Scholz said. Vladimir Putin could launch an invasion of Ukraine “almost immediately”, the UK foreign secretary, Liz Truss, has warned. She repeated a call for Britons to leave Ukraine because of the threat of war, after chairing a meeting of the government’s Cobra emergency committee. Truss said: We are fully aware that there could be a Russian invasion almost immediately. That is why British citizens do need to leave Ukraine but we are also pursuing the path of diplomacy and de-escalation. (Via PA Media) Russia’s foreign minister advises Putin to continue talking to west – video During a televised exchange, Sergei Lavrov suggests to Vladimir Putin that Moscow continue along the diplomatic path, saying possibilities for talks on Ukraine had not been exhausted. ‘They shouldn’t continue endlessly, but at this stage, I would propose to continue and increase them,’ says the foreign minister. More here from Zelenskiy on Ukraine’s pursuit of Nato membership (via Reuters). He says his country won’t be told how to act because of the possible reaction in Moscow: Today, many journalists and many leaders are hinting a little to Ukraine that it is possible not to take risks, not to constantly raise the issue of future membership in the alliance, because these risks are associated with the reaction of the Russian Federation. I believe that we should move along the path we have chosen. According to Reuters, Zelenskiy has also just questioned the patriotism of “entities that have moved their offices to Warsaw or Lviv in western Ukraine. The German chancellor has said these are “very serious times”, but that Germany stands closely by Ukraine’s side and is impressed with the country’s democratic movement. Scholz says “no other country has supported Ukraine as much financially as Germany”, and has just announced that €150m will be paid out to Ukraine with immediate effect, with a new credit of another €150m. He says Germany has been training Ukrainian soldiers and treating injured civilians, and that “the sovereignty and territorial independence of Ukraine are non-negotiable”. Scholz has promised to emphasise the consequences of an invasion when he is in Moscow tomorrow: If Russia again violates the territorial integrity of Ukraine, we will know what to do … There’s one central challenge: to de-escalate the situation and for troops to draw back. Scholz says he expects clear steps towards de-escalation from Russia, adding that he will tell Putin that any invasion would have heavy economic consequences. He also says a sanctions package is being worked on, and that the necessary decision on imposing them could be made at any moment. Scholz says there is no reasonable justification for Russian military activity on the Ukrainian border, and that Germany expects Russia to use the offer of security dialogue. The German chancellor is also reacting to the Nato talk, saying that Ukrainian accession discussions are not on the agenda at the moment, so it is strange that Russia would raise the issue. Quite a few people, including my colleague Peter Beaumont, are a little puzzled by the armed forces minister James Heappey’s assertion that Europe is now closer to war than it has been for 70 years. (See here.) Peter writes: The comments by James Heappey, the UK’s armed forces minister, to the BBC that Europe is closer to war than it has been for 70 years will be baffling to a number of countries that have seen full-blown conflicts in the past seven decades, or experienced Soviet aggression. Among the wars that have occurred since the second world war are the wars in the Balkans in the 1990s, including the wars in Croatia, Bosnia and Kosovo, and the conflict in Cyprus – which saw a Turkish invasion in 1974 following a Greek Cypriot coup. The large-scale interventions by Soviet forces in Hungary in 1956 and by Warsaw Pact forces in Czechoslovakia in 1968 both provoked large numbers of people to flee their respective countries. Perhaps most puzzling of all is that Heapey seems to be discounting the war that has been ongoing in Ukraine for the past eight years. Reuters has a little more from the press conference. Zelenskiy has reacted to suggestions from Moscow and elsewhere that the temperature could be lowered if Ukraine dropped or postponed its joining of Nato: Ukraine’s Zelenskiy says some leaders hint that Ukraine shouldn’t talk so much about joining Nato but this decision is our decision. Some quotes, via my colleague Fran Lawther, from the press conference that’s followed the meeting between the German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, and the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy. Scholz said he and Zelenskiy had spoken about sanctions and the importance of preventative measures, adding: There are no good reasons for the activities on the Ukrainian border. The sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine is not negotiable. We expect Russia to take clear steps to resolve the situation. Zelenskiy, meanwhile, has said: Ukraine’s security is the security of all of Europe A bit more here from the World at One’s interview with Vyacheslav Nikonov. He’s just warned that if Russia doesn’t receive a “positive response” to its security concerns, there will be “some technical response”, which will put the west “in the same position of danger”. He said: Russia is still waiting for a positive response to its security concerns. But still waiting … we will not wait forever. There will be some technical response, which will put the West in the same position of danger. It’s also clear that the west is not prepared to introduce Ukraine into Nato in the next century, so why not have an agreement on that? As for the tactical nukes in western Europe, what is the point for for those nukes? We do not have our nukes on foreign soil. Vyacheslav Nikonov, first deputy chairman of the State Duma committee on international affairs, has said there is “nothing special” about Russian military exercises around Ukraine. Nikonov, grandson of Vyacheslav Molotov, who concluded the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact with Nazi Germany on behalf of the Soviet Union, told BBC Radio 4’s World At One programme: The connections between the two countries are very, very close. Both my grandmothers were born in Ukraine. This is true of almost any family, you know … I have friends and relatives there. That’s true for Ukrainians, for Russians and so on. So, these are the two very interconnected nations. It has got its sovereignty by the decision of the Russian government. When asked about the large military buildup around Ukraine, Mr Nikonov added: Well, first of all the information about the amassment of Russian troops on the border we get from the western sources so you must know better … As for Russia, Russian exercises are standard, regular, and there is nothing special about it. (Via PA Media) Boris Johnson cut short his UK tour Monday to return to London as Liz Truss convened a COBR meeting to discus the UK’s consular response, reports the Guardian’s chief political correspondent, Jessica Elgot. Foreign secretary Truss will consider whether to change advice to UK diplomats in the country, after it issued new guidance on Friday advising British citizens in Ukraine to leave immediately while commercial means are still available. Speaking on a visit to Scotland, Johnson said he would be making immense diplomatic efforts over the coming days including liaising with US president Joe Biden. He said that Ukraine’s future membership of Nato could not be “bargained away” as part of Western leaders’ efforts. I think it’s very important that we have a conversation, but what we can’t do is trade away the sovereign rights of the Ukrainians who aspire to Nato membership. That’s something that was a massive gain for our world. If you remember what happened in 1990, you had a Europe whole and free, countries could decide their own futures. We can’t bargain that away. It’s for the Ukrainian people. Here are Lavrov’s quotes from his brief televised exchange with Putin: “We have already warned more than once that we will not allow endless negotiations on questions that demand a solution today,” Lavrov said. But as foreign minister, he said, “I must say there are always chances.” He added: “It seems to me that our possibilities are far from exhausted... At this stage, I would suggest continuing and building them up.” Russia’s defence minister, Sergei Shoigu, is now meeting with Putin. He says the joint military drills in Belarus were ending. Those exercises, in a country that neighbours Ukraine, have been seen as one of the most overtly threatening elements of the Kremlin’s buildup of forces around Ukraine’s borders. Shoigu also got the long table: Foreign minister Sergei Lavrov has suggested to President Putin that Moscow continue along the diplomatic path in its efforts to extract security guarantees from the west. Lavrov met Putin on Monday and said Moscow should continue dialogue with the west, even though responses from the European Union and the Nato military alliance had not been “satisfactory”. Asked by Putin if it made sense to continue diplomatic efforts, Lavrov responded that possibilities for talks had not been exhausted and proposed to continue the negotiations. Russian foreign minister Sergei Lavrov is getting the long-table treatment, according to my Moscow colleague, Andrew Roth. Dedicated readers will know that Putin has a thing for big tables. Athens is playing down the killing of two ethnic Greeks in the frontline region of eastern Ukraine as relevant to the Russia crisis but has said it will bolster its diplomatic presence in the area. Greece’s foreign affairs ministry attributed “the double homicides” to a fight that broke out between a group of Greeks – all members of the region’s sizeable ethnic Greek community – and Ukrainian soldiers on Sunday. “Three Ukrainian army soldiers who got into a fight with community members for an insignificant reason are responsible for the double homicides,” it said in a statement on Monday. “The minister of foreign affairs, Nikos Dendias, has requested to speak by phone with his Ukrainian counterpart to emphasise, once again, the need for the Greek community to be protected in Ukraine.” The country is home to a large ethnic Greek community that traditionally has lived in the south-eastern Donbass region around the city of Mariupol. The minority is estimated at around 100,000 people although in Athens officials also put the figure at almost twice that number. Some analysts have suggested that in the event of a Russian invasion, Hellenic navy ships could be dispatched to evacuate the community by sea. Earlier on Monday, Athens stepped up calls for Greek citizens in Ukraine to leave the country. Athens has downsized its diplomatic mission in Kyiv but said Monday it would be bolstering its mission in Mariupol where most ethnic Greeks live. Parliamentarians from Russia’s ruling party have proposed a draft resolution to seek the foreign ministry’s view on whether to call for the recognition of two breakaway Ukrainian regions as independent. The State Duma, Russia’s lower house, is due to discuss the proposal from the United Russia party later today. A final resolution would then be sent to President Vladimir Putin, according to the Reuters news agency. Recognition of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions – collectively known as the Donbass – would almost certainly further inflame tensions. It would be seen as a death blow to the Minsk agreements that are considered vital to avoiding major hostilities. More on the Minsk accords here: Reuters has this from Kaunas airport in Lituhania: A German military aircraft carrying troop reinforcements landed in Lithuania on Monday, the first of several planned Nato deployments amid fears in the region about a possible Russian invasion of Ukraine. The A400M airplane carried around 70 soldiers of what is expected to grow to a 360-strong German deployment, which comes on top of existing Nato forces in the region, a spokesperson for the alliance’s enhanced forward presence battlegroup said. The new deployments include reconnaissance and artillery troops and medics from units throughout Germany, as well as around 100 howitzer and other vehicles, with arrivals expected to continue throughout this week. “It’s a strong signal that Germany is willing and capable of reinforcing the battlegroup immediately as needed,” Lieutenant Colonel Daniel Andrae, German commander of the Nato troops in Lithuania, told reporters. “I am really happy to have the guys with me, and be ready for everything which (could) come up,” Andrae added. The added soldiers will stay as long as they are needed, he said. Since 2017, Nato has deployed battlegroups in Baltic states of Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia as well as Poland, all sharing borders with Russia, in response to Moscow annexing the Crimea peninsula from Ukraine in 2014. Totalling 5,000 soldiers, the battlegroups are led by Germany, Canada, Britain and the United States. Britain is also preparing to reinforce the British-led Nato battlegroup in Estonia, Prime Minister Boris Johnson said last week. German soldiers comprise about half of the 1,100-strong battlegroup already present in Lithuania, which includes troops from Belgium, the Czech Republic, Luxembourg, the Netherlands and Norway. Amid concerns of a Russian attack, we we would like to hear from people living and working in Ukraine about the situation in the country. What is the mood like at the moment? Are you making any plans in the event of a possible conflict? Latest words from Scholz as he prepares to meet the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy: We urgently expect signs of de-escalation from Moscow. Further military aggression would have very serious consequences for Russia. I absolutely agree with our allies on that. We are witnessing a very, very serious threat to peace in Europe. Ukraine has requested an urgent meeting with Russia and dozens of other European states to explain Moscow’s buildup of troops along the ex-Soviet state’s frontier, AFP reports. The Ukrainian foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, said late on Sunday that Russia had ignored Kyiv’s formal request to explain why Moscow had positioned more than 100,000 troops and advanced weapons around Ukraine. The 1990 Vienna document requires the 57 members of the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) to share information about their military forces and notify each other about major activities. “Ukraine is convening a meeting with Russia and all member states in the next 48 hours to discuss the reinforcement and movement of Russian forces along our border,” he wrote on Facebook. The US fears that Russia’s buildup of forces could lead to an invasion of Ukraine “any day”. On Monday, Russian president Vladimir Putin’s spokesman did not comment on Kyiv’s request but reiterated Russia’s stance that Moscow was free to move troops across the country’s territory. I would like to emphasise once again that we are talking about the movement of Russian troops on Russian territory,” spokesman Dmitry Peskov told reporters, once again accusing Ukraine of ramping up tensions. “Large-scale movements of Ukraine’s armed forces are also carried out in the border zone on Ukrainian territory, moreover, in the area that borders on the territory of the self-proclaimed republics, which leads to escalation of the situation” A senior Russian military official said on Monday that Russia was ready to open fire on foreign ships and submarines that illegally enter its territorial waters, the Interfax news agency reported. Any such decision would, however, be taken only at the “highest level”, Stanislav Gadzhimagomedov, deputy head of the main operational department of the general staff, was quoted as saying. The comment came two days after Moscow said a Russian naval vessel had chased away a US submarine in Russian waters in the Pacific. The US denied it had carried out military operations in Russian territorial waters. Tensions between the two countries are running high, with Washington warning that Russia could attack Ukraine at any time. Moscow denies any such intention, despite massing more than 100,000 troops near Ukraine’s borders, and has accused western governments of hysteria. Interfax quoted Gadzhimagomedov as saying Russia was able to adequately counter the US fleet in the Black and Baltic Seas but did not have enough ships and plans to do so in the far east at the moment. All of Russia’s military fleets have been carrying out exercises in recent weeks across vast areas including parts of the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans and the Mediterranean. (Via Reuters) The Australian prime minister, Scott Morrison, has lashed out at Russian aggression on the Ukraine border, as Australian diplomatic staff evacuate from the embassy in Kyiv. As tensions in the region heighten, Morrison said it was time for Australia to stand up to countries that bully Ukraine. We denounce Russia’s bullying, coercion, intimidation and threats of violence against Ukraine, and we will always take steps to do that,” he told parliament. “We look on these issues and these events with great concern, we support Ukraine’s sovereignty, we support their right to territorial borders, and that they not be imperilled.” A senate estimates hearing was told 198 Australian citizens in the Ukraine have registered for consular assistance. Travel advice for Australians in Ukraine has been to leave the country immediately. (Via Australian Associated Press.) The Kremlin on Monday said it did not view comments from Kyiv’s envoy to London as signalling an official change in Ukraine’s position on wanting to join Nato, but said it would significantly help address Russia’s security concerns if Kyiv did renounce its intention to become an alliance member. Ukraine’s ambassador to Britain on Monday clarified earlier remarks about possibly dropping a bid for Nato membership, saying that the former Soviet republic would not be reconsidering its attempt to join the military alliance. Shaun Walker and Rachel Hall have further clarification from Ukraine after its ambassador to the UK, Vadym Prystaiko, appeared to suggest the country could drop its bid to join Nato to avoid war with Russia. (See 10am post.) A spokesperson for the country’s foreign minister quickly quashed the remarks, claiming Prystaiko’s words had been taken out of context. “Ambassador Prystaiko rightly noted in his interview that the prospect of Nato membership is established in the constitution of Ukraine, although Ukraine is currently not a member of Nato or any other security alliance,” wrote Oleg Nikolenko on Facebook. “The key for us is the issue of security guarantees. Undoubtedly, the best such guarantee would be the alliance immediately accepting Ukraine. But the threats to Ukraine exist here and now, so the search for security guarantees becomes a fundamental and urgent task. At the same time, no decision can be made that contradicts the Ukrainian constitution.” The full piece is here. My colleague Mark Sweney has more on the tremors in the markets here. Mounting fears of an imminent Russian attack on Ukraine triggered a global share sell-off on Monday, and prompted oil prices to hit a seven-year high. European markets followed Asian shares sharply lower, with the UK’s FTSE 100 down 160 points, or 2%, at 7,501 in morning trading. Travel-related stocks were hardest hit, including the British Airways owner, IAG, which was the biggest faller on London’s blue-chip index, down 7%. The jet engine maker Rolls-Royce was down 4%, as only five companies on the FTSE 100 made it into positive territory. Europe is closer to war than at any point over the past 70 years, a UK government minister has warned, as Russian troops amass on the borders of Ukraine and western leaders warn that an invasion could take place early this week. The armed forces minister James Heappey told the BBC Radio 4 Today programme he feared “we are closer than we’ve been on this continent” to war “for 70 years”. There’s 130,000 Russian troops around the borders of Ukraine, thousands more on amphibious shipping in the Black Sea and the Azov Sea. All of the combat enablers are in place and my fear is that if all of this was just about a show to win leverage in diplomacy that doesn’t require the logistics, the fuel, the medical supplies, the bridging assets, the unglamorous stuff that actually makes an invasion force credible, but doesn’t attract headlines. Yet all of that is now in place too. Ukraine’s ambassador to the UK has rowed back on an apparent suggestion that the country could drop or delay its plans to join Nato to avoid war with Russia, PA Media reports. Vadym Prystaiko said the constitutional commitment to joining Nato remained, having previously indicated the country would consider making “serious concessions” to avoid the risk of an invasion by Vladimir Putin’s forces. Prystaiko said that while Ukraine was open to negotiations with Russia, the issue of its ambitions to join the alliance was not on the table. On Sunday night on BBC 5 Live, he was asked whether Ukraine would contemplate dropping its aim of joining Nato. He said: “We might, especially if threatened like that, blackmailed like that and pushed to it.” The comments raised eyebrows in Kyiv and Downing Street, and on Monday morning the diplomat returned to the broadcast studios to clarify his position. “We are not a member of Nato right now and to avoid war we are ready for many concessions and that is what we are doing in our conversations with Russia,” he told BBC Breakfast. “But it has nothing to do with Nato, which is enshrined in the constitution.” Stressing that the commitment to joining Nato had not shifted, he pointed out that Ukraine would not be a member of the alliance by Wednesday – reportedly highlighted by US intelligence agencies as a potential day for an invasion. “It’s not happening before Wednesday so we have to find the solution right now, we have to find the friends who will stay with us,” he said. The German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, is travelling to Kyiv today as fears grow over the possibility of an imminent Russian invasion of Ukraine, sending stock markets tumbling and the price of oil soaring. Scholz has said that any Russian attack on Ukraine would be met with “tough sanctions that we have carefully prepared and which we can immediately put into force”. The visit comes amid warnings from US intelligence that Russia has brought forward its invasion plans and could move troops across the border as soon as Wednesday, before the end of the Winter Olympics on 20 February. Scholz and Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy are expected to talk about how Germany could help stabilise Ukraine’s economy after fears of an imminent war took a toll on its currency. Meanwhile, UK prime minister Boris Johnson has said he will hold further talks with world leaders to bring Russia “back from the brink” of war. His office did not say which world leaders the prime minister was hoping to talk to or where he plans to travel, but it was understood he is keen to engage with Nordic and Baltic countries. A White House statement said Joe Biden made clear the US would “respond swiftly and decisively to any further Russian aggression” and the two leaders agreed on the need to continue pursuing diplomacy and deterrence. Biden has already ordered a near-total evacuation of the US embassy in Kyiv. We’ll be covering all this here live throughout the day.The Morrison government is gearing up for a national security election, daring Labor to vote for a bill that would ease deportation of permanent visa holders for low-level offending and amping up its rhetoric on “appeasement” of China. In caucus Labor reserved its position on the strengthening character test bill – which it previously helped defeat in the Senate – ahead of a lower house vote on Wednesday, which Scott Morrison claimed would prove whether Labor was “on the side of criminals”. Anthony Albanese told caucus that “every government scare campaign has blown up in their face”. Earlier, Morrison told 2GB Radio the government’s efforts to deport criminals were “being frustrated by soft decisions in the courts” as judges “haven’t given a higher sentence because they’ve, they fear that they’ll lose their visa”. The prime minister was referring to the orthodox sentencing principle that judges may take into account penalties other than the one handed down by the court, such as visa cancellation and deportation. Morrison said if people have committed crimes “they have breached every single obligation they have to the country that gave them a visa” and should not be able to use “loopholes” to stay. The bill lowers the bar for automatic failure of the character test, making it more likely people convicted of low-grade offences will have their visas cancelled although the minister already has the power to do so. On 10 February Labor’s immigration spokesperson, Kristina Keneally, wrote to her counterpart, Alex Hawke, noting Labor had supported mandatory cancellation of visas for those actually sentenced to 12 months or more for serious crimes and arguing the existing powers are fit-for-purpose. Guardian Australia understands Keneally reiterated Labor’s concerns: that low-level offending should not be a trigger for deportation, retrospective application should be removed, and a ministerial direction should be issued to soften the impact on New Zealand citizens. The government does not intend to negotiate on these points, meaning Labor’s final position will be decided by the party’s leadership group with Keneally and the assistant immigration shadow minister, Andrew Giles. Morrison pointed to Russia’s military buildup on the border with Ukraine and declared it was “not a time for weakness”. “I don’t flinch on these things,” he told radio 2SM. “In the mettle department, there’s plenty there.” The head of Asio, Mike Burgess, declared that his intelligence agency was “not here to be politicised” and he would have conversations with ministers, parliamentarians or staff if he felt intelligence had been misused. The comments came days after the defence minister, Peter Dutton, said he based Thursday’s inflammatory allegation that the Chinese government had picked Albanese “as their candidate” on “open source and other intelligence” he saw. Burgess had said in a speech last week that Asio had foiled an alleged election interference plot, which involved an unnamed “puppeteer” hiring an employee who then allegedly searched for “candidates likely to run in the election who either supported the interests of the foreign government or who were assessed as vulnerable to inducements and cultivation”. Burgess told the Senate committee he “deliberately chose not to identify the election, jurisdiction, party, the individuals that were targets, or the country attempting to conduct the interference”. That, the Asio chief said, was because attempts at foreign interference were “not confined to one side of politics” and were being seen “at all levels of government, in all states and territories”. A Labor senator, Kimberley Kitching, under the protection of parliamentary privilege, named Chinese-Australian property developer Chau Chak Wing, who has previously been a major donor to both major parties. “I am reliably informed that the puppeteer mentioned in your case study in your annual threat assessment speech given last week is Chau Chak Wing,” Kitching told Burgess at the Senate hearing, asking him to confirm it. Burgess replied that he would not comment on “speculation” about identities “and it’s unfair you ask me that question in public”. Chau later issued a statement saying he was “shocked and disappointed at the baseless and reckless claim made by Senator Kimberley Kitching”. He said he had “never had any involvement or interest in interfering with the democratic election process in Australia”. “It is always unfortunate when elected representatives use the shield of parliamentary privilege as a platform to vilify and attack Australian citizens without producing a shred of evidence,” Chau said. Keneally, when asked earlier about Kitching’s decision to name Chau, said “a range of senators from a range of political parties” had asked questions of national security agencies “that I would not ask in a public forum”. Keneally encouraged “all members of parliament to take heed of the Asio director general’s advice about the importance of keeping national security information and intelligence information confidential”. The home affairs minister, Karen Andrews, told Tasmanian radio station LAFM: “Quite frankly, I thought it was appalling behaviour by Labor in Senate estimates yesterday where they started making claims under parliamentary privilege and putting questions to the director-general of security, trying to identify who the individual was.” The former prime minister Kevin Rudd said on Tuesday the government was telling “rancid lies” about Labor’s approach to China and he could not “sit back, be silent and allow lies and this hypocrisy to remain uncontested”. Rudd said the federal election campaign should be “conducted on the basis of the facts” rather than “the fiction and hypocrisy we’ve been served up by Field Marshal Dutton”. The former Labor prime minister said Liberal party figures had previously made supportive comments about an extradition treaty with China, questioned Labor’s ban on Huawei’s involvement in the National Broadband Network, and criticised a speech Rudd as prime minister had made in Beijing raising human rights concerns. “I don’t intend to stand idly by while Peter Dutton smears the party of which I’ve been parliamentary leader, prime minister, and could form the next government of Australia as being somehow soft on China,” Rudd said. Comment has also been sought from Dutton and Kitching. China’s foreign ministry spokesperson, Wang Wenbin, brushed off Morrison’s complaint that Beijing had been “chillingly silent” on the Russian troop buildup near Ukraine’s border. Wang said the Australian government should “abandon the cold war mentality and ideological bias and stop making belligerent rhetoric that will escalate the tensions”.“There’s only one thing a romance book absolutely must have, with no exceptions,” my boss explained to me seriously, spreading out a bunch of the types of titles we published and sold – regency romances with dashing princes on the cover, paranormal erotica with sultry vampires and butch werewolves, and our speciality: rockstar romances with shirtless tattooed men clad in leather. “Fucking,” I answered. “Or, you know, at least general horniness. Foreplay?” “No,” he said, shaking his head firmly. “That’s sort of a myth. Mostly. It doesn’t hurt, I guess.” The main rule, I was told, is that a romance book HAS to have a happily ever after. If you’re not across this trope, it’s exactly what it sounds like: the end of the book has to feature the protagonists falling in love – and not just falling in love, but at least the implied idea that they are in love for ever. There’s definitely nuance the deeper you get into it the trope – the debate about the existence and importance of “soul mates” for example being a good one. Erotica doesn’t tend to follow the “happily ever after” rule, replacing it with the innuendo laden “happy for now” instead. But as a rule, Happily Ever After is prescriptive and absolute – when you pick up a romance book, you KNOW that the couple will end up happy, and blissfully in love. It’s a guarantee. Even after my four years doing marketing and publicity for a romance book imprint of a major publishing house, I can’t pretend to have more than a passing familiarity with the fascinating and gorgeous and sometimes remarkably silly world of romance publishing, and the massive community of authors and readers. The romance community is fascinating – often ignored, mocked, and maligned by the male-dominated literary establishment, it became a bubble, where mostly women write for other women. But it’s a huge and extremely successful bubble. It just doesn’t really need anyone else. The experiences I did have, and the lessons I managed to pick up, only made me fall more in love with it all. Maybe not a grand, happily ever after romance (I no longer work in that field), but definitely a gorgeous flirtation. The montage of my relationship with romance and erotica publishing includes the campaign where I got to hang out with hot shirtless models who gave out free copies of one of our titles to people around the city, the hilariously boozy conferences and award nights, and watching with pride as one of our bestselling erotica authors (a middle-aged mum from Queensland) explained on stage to a panel of famous international authors, in clinical and eye-opening detail, the difference between double and dual penetration – and how one was erotica, and the other simply porn. Do NOT Google this on a work computer. It was an incredibly fun and often strange job, but it was also weirdly juxtaposed with my own life. Every day I went out and sold novels about true love and heart-fluttering romance and also centaur-on-centaur sex (don’t ask), while also indulging in the most cynical and heartbroken period of my life, tracking the dissolution and breakup of an 11-year relationship. I didn’t just think a happily ever after was far-fetched – at that point it would have been hard to convince me of a happily ever occurring again. Being dunked head-first into the saccharine sugary neon pink confection of romance books every day while also genuinely believing that love was a myth, that heartbreak was the only constant in a cruel and unforgiving world, was sometimes hard, sometimes hilarious. Once during a publishing meeting (in which I had the pleasure of telling a bunch of upper management types what “pegging” was) I remember cynically describing romance books as “just fantasy, but without dragons”. Genre fiction of all types are often both beloved and criticised for being “escapism”, a way to escape the harsh realities and disappointments of our own lives, through outlandish ideas like wizards and space ships and people falling in love for ever. I remember reading a male/male military soldier erotica book that we published (incidentally, most of our male on male books were written by straight women for some bizarre reason), where lube was not only never used, it simply didn’t seem to be needed in this world. See – it was all a ridiculous fantasy. Give people their little holiday away from the truth, away from loneliness and pain, I thought. It’s easy when you’re heartbroken to feel disillusioned about the industry of romance – the way it’s been turned into a money-making scheme, into a worldwide obsession, an aspiration. Things like Valentine’s Day, billion-dollar weddings, dating reality shows – and romance books – all seem part of a hysteria, a year-round marketing ploy to make love financial, lucrative. When you’re learning about the rules and tropes of a romance book, you realise it’s nothing more than a formula, a recipe for fictional happiness. It seems ludicrous at best, cheap at worst. If it actually worked, surely all these romance authors would be the happiest people in the world, who wouldn’t have time to write books about love, because they’d be too swept up in their own grand romance. I guess the moral is don’t read romance books when you’re heartbroken. I’d recommend true crime, the genre that reminds the heartbroken that things could be much worse. My own heartbreak came from a realisation that the romance I was in didn’t have a happy ever after, despite the fact that I really wanted it to and thought it would. I thought that I was following a set of rules that would ultimately lead to happiness. I think, add or subtract some plot specifics, that’s what a lot of breakups come down to. It’s also why I think we love romance books . We love them purely because real life romance doesn’t have one rule, and it doesn’t have a formula, a recipe. It’s more mysterious, more exciting, more strange than that. It’s also scarier – because at any point you could be let down again. But it’s why we’re so obsessed with love, and why we reflect it in all our art and literature. It’s why, as a treat, we sand the hard edges off in romance books, and enjoy a depiction of a love that will never let you down. All the benefits of being in love (feeling great, being obsessed with someone, having someone to help you do the Wordle) but none of the terrifying lack of certainty. When I think about it, I realise the only real fantasy that romance books peddle (apart from the whole lube thing) is the idea of a guaranteed happily ever after, the certainty, the fact that when we start dating someone they are the one for ever. That certainty would be so nice, so easy. What romance books tap into is the intoxicating hope, the belief that when we open up a new chapter – as I eventually did, years after my time in the industry – that this time we’ll find happiness. They reiterate, which I truly believe, that even though it’s a risk, if you find the right person, it’s worth it.Liberal democracies can regain their lost sense of shared moral purpose by agreeing to set a long-term internationally agreed target for the number of refugees they are each prepared to take each year, Rory Stewart, a former Conservative cabinet minister, has proposed. Unveiling his plan to the Guardian, Stewart said: “Reforming the international resettlement coalition around the Afghan crisis presents a rare opportunity for key liberal democracies to restore their moral authority, form a workable international coalition, and deliver rapid, concrete, ethical results.” Stewart has already garnered preliminary support for his plan from a group of Afghan specialists, including three former US envoys to Afghanistan, as well as parliamentarians from the UK, Germany and Canada. He proposes each country joining the coalition should aspire within two years to take refugees equivalent to 0.05 % of their population annually. The voluntary target would be similar to the aspiration for advanced economies to spend 0.7% of their GDP on overseas aid. Stewart said the plan could be adopted at a global pledging summit possibly convened by Germany as the chair of the G7 group of industrialised nations. However, it is unclear whether the UK government would consider the plan. Last year, the government cut its aid pledge to 0.5% of GDP, ending the Tory commitment to spend 0.7%, claiming it was “difficult to justify to the British people”. Under the Stewart plan, the UK would take a minimum of 32,000 refugees annually, several times the number it accepted last year. The plan has won the support of Tom Tugendhat, the Conservative chair of the UK foreign affairs select committee, Tobias Ellwood the chair of the UK defence select committee, Michael Roth, the chair of the German Bundestag’s foreign affairs select committee, and Ret. Gen David Petraeus. The co-sponsors, in a joint forward for an Atlantic Council paper written by Stewart, argue the humanitarian system has “atrophied” since the refugee crises of the 2010s and has not been able to respond to a sense of duty the west feels towards Afghans trapped under Taliban rule. Stewart said: “We currently find ourselves in the very odd position that an important part of what it means to be a thoughtful modern international player – a willingness to take people at real risk of persecution – has been severely eroded.” He added: “[The] shared tradition of such democracies, acting in concert, is now being questioned and challenged by authoritarianism abroad and populism and isolation at home. “This is the moment to answer some of those challenges. A practical international response to the Afghan refugee crisis through a credible resettlement system would revive the values that formed the multilateral system in the wake of the horrors of second world war. We have a very special obligation towards Afghanistan after 20 years. We can see we played a direct part in tipping the Afghans into this horror.” Stewart says the 0.05 % commitment would be a modest and realistic move towards transparent burden-sharing. He estimates if a coalition of Germany, France,Benelux and Nordic countries, as well as the UK agreed voluntarily to sign up the proposal, then 120,000 refugees would be guaranteed a home a year. By adopting the target, the US would be committing itself to taking 160,000 a year – slightly more than the number of refugees Joe Biden proposes to take this year. Stewart says the target is the equivalent of a town of 10,000 people hosting a single Afghan family of five. For Canada, the target would be slightly lower than 52,290 refugees it is seeking to take in 2022. For the scheme to work Stewart, a former UK international development secretary, said there would have to be some processing of asylum applicants inside Afghanistan since so many of the countries surrounding Afghanistan were refusing to let more refugees cross their borders. At least three major categories of resettlement priority would be targeted within these overall numbers. The three categories would be those who have been evacuated but lack permanent settlement in a new country; those who remain in their country having already been promised a right to resettle; and those at risk of persecution. He saysas many as 200,0000 Afghans are still trapped there who are already eligible for resettlement under existing international scheme but could not cross into the countries on Afghanistan’s borders. In addition there are tens of thousands not designated for existing schemes that are under extreme threat, such as female judges. Even though many embassies remain closed, Stewart said, “a window is open to process in Afghanistan and evacuate with the consent of the Taliban, which may not remain for long. It should be used”. But Stewart said Taliban cooperation to allow its political opponents to leave would be contingent on the west’s behaviour. He criticised Biden’s decision last week to seize the Afghan Central Bank’s $7bn (£5.2bn) assets frozen in the US and hand half to the victims of 9/11. “For Biden to help himself to half that money is compounding betrayal upon betrayal. The first betrayal was to abandon the country to the Taliban. The second is to leave millions on the edge of starvation. Now the US president is proposing to steal Afghanistan’s own money which could have been used to feed the starving.” Overall global resettlement spaces have fallen by 50% between 2016 and 2019. According to the UN agency for refugees, UNHCR, out of 1.44 million refugees in urgent need of resettlement globally, only 22,770 were resettled through the agency.New Yorkers who live in areas where controversial stop-and-frisk searches happen most frequently are also more likely to be surveilled by facial recognition technology, according to research by Amnesty International and other researchers. Research also showed that in the Brooklyn, Bronx and Queens boroughs of the city there was a direct correlation between the proportion of non-white residents and the concentration of controversial facial recognition technology. “Our analysis shows that the NYPD’s use of facial recognition technology helps to reinforce discriminatory policing against minority communities in New York City,” said Matt Mahmoudi, artificial intelligence and human rights researcher at Amnesty International. The research is a part of the global anti-facial recognition technology campaign, Ban the Scan, investigating increasing use of surveillance initiatives in the New York police department (NYPD). Using thousands of digital volunteers through the Decode NYC Surveillance project, more than 25,500 CCTV cameras were mapped across New York City. Data scientists and researchers from Amnesty International compared the data on the camera placement with statistics on police stop-and-frisk. “We have long known that stop-and-frisk in New York is a racist policing tactic. We now know that the communities most targeted with stop-and-frisk are also at greater risk of discriminatory policing through invasive surveillance,” said Mahmoudi. While the NYPD has been using facial recognition technology for more than a decade, its use has not been without controversy. According to Politico, the NYPD has faced at least six lawsuits over its facial recognition technology use. Additionally, in June 2020, the New York city council mandated that the NYPD publicly disclose information on its surveillance efforts. Despite local and national pushback to facial recognition technology, its use has been fully supported by New York’s mayor, Eric Adams, as a tool to investigate crimes. “If you’re on Facebook, Instagram, Twitter – no matter what, they can see and identify who you are without violating the rights of people,” said Adams in January while discussing a new plan to solve gun violence in New York City. “It’s going to be used for investigatory purposes.” Previously, the use of facial recognition technology has led to false arrests, all of Black men. In 2019, Michael Oliver, a 25-year-old Black man from Detroit, was wrongly identified by facial recognition technology and arrested for grabbing a teacher’s cellphone and damaging it as the teacher was recording a fight among students. Oliver was also wrongly identified by the teacher in a photo lineup. In 2020, Robert Julian-Borchak Williams was falsely arrested by Detroit police after facial recognition technology incorrectly identified him as a shoplifting suspect. In the same year, Nijeer Parks, 33, spent 10 days in jail and $5,000 to defend himself after being falsely accused of stealing candy and trying to hit a police officer with a car in Woodbridge, New Jersey. Parks, who was wrongly identified by facial recognition technology, was 30 miles away when the incident took place. He is now suing the police department, the city of Woodbridge and the prosecutor on his case, according to the New York Times.LaQuan Smith’s autumn/winter 2022 show at New York fashion week on Monday evening started over an hour late. It soon became clear why – a celebrity was involved. Julia Fox, the model and actor who has had the lens of the paparazzi trained on her for months thanks to her recent relationship with Kanye West, opened the show and caused a hush across the audience. Her arrival was preceded by something a little more somber - a moment of silence for Smith’s mentor, former Vogue editor André Leon Talley, who died in January. ‘This one’s for you, Andre’ said a voice over the sound system before the show began. Talley, who loved glamour, would have been proud. The collection was ripe with the dressed up style that Smith has made his trademark. There were red sequined dresses, faux fur corsets, gold leggings, cut-out frocks, Lurex and very short miniskirts. Every model wore sky high heels. Fox’s appearance could be seen as a flex from Smith regarding his increasingly powerful position within the celebrity landscape. The designer has also dressed Rihanna, Beyoncé and Irina Shayk. Hailey Bieber wore his dress last summer when she met French president Emmanuel Macron in Paris. As well as glamour, Smith is gaining a reputation for taking on American landmarks. After his show in September at the top of the Empire State Building, this show was in a private club right at the heart of Wall Street. It could all be seen as a statement of intent - he plans to go to the very top of American fashion. It’s fair to say the audience here weren’t the usual people found in grand rooms with wooden-panelled walls. Club kids with pink hair, extra wide shoulders, PVC and tutus mixed with fashion types in catsuits, faux fur and leather. There wasn’t a pinstripe suit in sight. Smith - like many of the Black designers now on the calendar at New York fashion week - has had a circuitous route to the top of fashion, and his celebrity connections have been central to his rise. Rejected by prestigious schools Parsons and FIT, he first produced textured leggings, which were worn by Lady Gaga and Kim Kardashian, and founded his brand proper in 2010, aged 21. Glamour has always been his stock in trade - an aesthetic also bought by non-celebrities thanks to collaborations with Asos and Revolve. “I’m here to bring sexy back!” he said to Vogue Business in September. “Where are the women who want to get dressed up and look fabulous? That is the kind of people I need to market myself to.” This glamour unexpectedly saw him through an era of lockdowns. While sweatpants were the norm for many, Smith’s collections of cocktail dresses, sequin leggings and satin blouses had a sales surge of 87% from early 2020 to September 2021 He was mentored by powerful industry figures including fellow designer Tom Ford and Talley. Talley was instrumental in Smith’s career - as the first person to write about his work - hence the designer dedicating the show to him. “There was no limit to the amount of support or guidance he gave,” Smith said to the New York Times. “When I was designing out of my grandmother’s home with no team or money, cutting patterns out of newspapers, André gave me the money I needed to travel to Paris for the first time.”Boris Johnson and Joe Biden believe there remains “a crucial window for diplomacy and for Russia to step back from its threats towards Ukraine” after a 40-minute call between the two leaders on Monday night. Britain said the pair emphasised the importance of unity and, while neither the UK nor the US will send troops to defend Ukraine, they insisted that any further Russian incursion “would result in a protracted crisis for Russia with far-reaching damage for both Russia and the world”. The sense of an opportunity for diplomacy was echoed by Vladimir Putin’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, who told the Russian president that talks “certainly should not continue indefinitely. But at this stage I would suggest that they continue and be intensified.” German chancellor Olaf Scholz was due to land in Moscow on Tuesday in search of a diplomatic solution to avoid a war in Ukraine as the west and Russia signalled tentative hopes of an easing in the tense standoff. His talks with Vladimir Putin are the latest in an intense diplomatic scramble to dissuade the Russian leader from attacking Ukraine. Russia has massed an estimated 145,000 troops along various stretches of its border with Ukraine, in Belarus where joint military drills are taking place, and in Crimea, annexed from Ukraine in 2014. On Monday night, the US offered Ukraine a sovereign loan guarantee of up to $1bn to help its economy navigate the tensions. Secretary of state Antony Blinken said: “This offer … will bolster Ukraine’s ability to ensure economic stability, growth, and prosperity for its people in the face of Russia’s destabilising behaviour.” The state department also advised US citizens to immediately leave Belarus and the breakaway Moldovan region of Transnistria, “citing the unusual and concerning Russian military activity” along their borders with Ukraine. Russian forces continue to mass near the border. British officials estimate that a further 14 Russian battalions are heading towards Ukraine, each numbering about 800 troops, on top of the 100 battalions deployed near the borders – a force already believed capable of launching an invasion. UK ministers believe the Russian president has not yet decided to attack and may never do so but the continued buildup prompted Johnson to chair a Cobra emergency meeting on Tuesday. Earlier, the British prime minister said: “This is a very, very dangerous, difficult situation. We are on the edge of a precipice, but there is still time for President Putin to step back.” He said it was important for western allies to remain united in the face of Russian pressure. Ukraine’s future membership of Nato could not be “bargained away” as part of western leaders’ efforts, he added. The office of Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, on Monday released a decree calling for all villages and towns in Ukraine to fly the national flag on Wednesday, amid speculation it is the day Russia might invade. It also called for the entire nation to sing the national anthem at 10am, and for an increase in the salaries of soldiers and border guards. “They tell us February 16 will be the day of the attack. We will make it a day of unity,” Zelenskiy said in a video address to the nation. “They are trying to frighten us by yet again naming a date for the start of military action … On that day, we will hang our national flags, wear yellow and blue banners, and show the whole world our unity.” Zelenskiy has long said that, while he believes Russia is threatening to attack his country, the likelihood of an imminent invasion has been overstated by western allies, responding to Moscow’s efforts to intimidate Ukraine and sow panic.Up ahead, beneath dried splinters of cut kale, the ground appears to shift. A ripple of small birds is working its way through the stubble in the morning sun, foraging on fallen seed. Occasionally they raise their heads, striped like humbugs, the colour of caramel or butterscotch, and I count quickly, scarcely able to believe my luck. I have come to this sloping stretch of farmland on the south Devon coast in the hope of spotting just one of these rare sparrow-sized birds. Instead, I have stumbled across a chattering flock numbering upwards of a dozen. They are cirl buntings – pronounced “sirl” – and these close relatives of the yellowhammer have every reason to sound chirpy. Once spread across 39 counties, cirl buntings drained from the countryside during the 20th century as agricultural practices intensified, leaving just over a hundred pairs in the west country. A desperate bid to save the species from extinction in the UK was launched in the 1990s by the RSPB, working with local farmers to ensure hedge-lined fields and coastal scrub were providing sufficient food and nesting sites. Thanks to the concerted conservation work, these yellow and brown buntings now number more than a thousand pairs, strung out along the southern edge of Devon and Cornwall. While still far from common, the cirl bunting embodies something every bit as rare these days: a wildlife good news story. And watching the feeding flock, I feel fortunate to witness such a precious sight first-hand. Eventually they fly to a nearby blackthorn bush overlooking the sea, perching in the sunshine, seemingly enjoying the mild weather and companionship of their kind. Among them, there is a handsome male in brighter breeding plumage, sporting stencil-sharp black-and-lemon head stripes. The cirl bunting may sound like an obscurity for the ornithological connoisseur, with its peculiar name of Italian origin and restricted range, but this is now a species anyone can encounter on a stroll along the South West Coast Path, well accustomed to passing hikers and dog walkers. Every one of these little beacons of hope, lighting up the hedgerows, is a cause for optimism. Roll out the bunting and celebrate this conservation success. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiarySwitzerland’s Mathilde Gremaud soared to gold in the Olympic women’s freeski slopestyle final after holding off another last-gasp charge by Eileen Gu, the American-born emerging superstar representing China, who settled for silver by the narrowest of margins but stayed on course for a historic treble at the Beijing Games. The 22-year-old Gremaud, who snuck into the final with the 12th-highest score in qualifying and scored a meagre 1.00 on her first of three runs on Tuesday after breaking a binding and losing a ski, roared back with an 86.56 on her second attempt to leapfrog the gaggle of favourites atop the leaderboard. Gu was in eighth place after taking a tumble on her second trip down the course, but the San Francisco-born freestyler competing for her mother’s home nation delivered under pressure once again, putting down a clean, controlled final run for a score of 86.23 – a scant 0.33 points behind Gremaud’s benchmark – to add a silver medal to her big air gold from last week. Kelly Sildaru took home bronze, becoming the first athlete from Estonia to win an Olympic medal in freestyle skiing on a bitterly cold -22C (-7F) morning in the mountain village of Taizicheng roughly 120km northwest of Beijing. Sheffield’s Katie Summerhayes put down three complete runs that pleased the British team by the finish area, but was unable to challenge the frontrunners and finished in eighth, one place ahead of the talented Aberdeen teenager Kirsty Muir. “It really came down to the last run again,” a beaming Gu said. “I don’t know why I keep doing it to myself. It doesn’t make it easy for myself. It certainly doesn’t make it easy for my coaches, and my mom has a heart attack every day. It’s definitely not the easiest, but I’m happy that I was able to push through and turn that pressure into fuel and it feels so, so good.” Eleven entrants competed in the three-run final on Tuesday with the best score counting towards their final position. The frigid conditions further complicated their attempts down the 665-metre course filled with rails and jumps, which featured a carved-out replica of China’s Great Wall designed to protect the runners from strong westerly winds. With the weight of more than a billion people on her shoulders and the sounds of Lady Gaga and $uicideboy$ playing through her earbuds, Gu has flashed her ability to thrive under pressure repeatedly throughout an Olympics that she’s very much the face of here. The 18-year-old was in danger of missing the big air final entirely after a ski popped off on her second run, but she confidently landed her last attempt, then won the gold from third place entering her final run by throwing down a 1620, a four-and-a-half-revolution manoeuvre that she had never even attempted in practice, much less in competition. When Monday’s slopestyle qualifier finally took place after a 24-hour postponement, Gu avoided a shock exit after an error-strewn opening attempt, putting down an impressive second run to book her place in the final. Then on Tuesday, Gu fell on her second trip after over-rotating on the third rail and dropped into eighth. Once more, she saved the best for last, putting down a standout run including a double-cork 900 punctuated with a Buick grab that came within a fraction of a point of catching Gremaud, who took the silver four years ago in Pyeongchang less than 36 hours after suffering a head injury in a training crash. “I think I was feeling a little bit tired mentally after big air,” Gu said. “In my first and second run I wasn’t fully in it. I wasn’t in the zone, I wasn’t feeling that rush, that excitement. I felt almost too calm, which sometimes doesn’t work out the best. I’m one of those people that kind of needs to have the pressure on and I was happy that I was able to put it down.” Gu remains on track to become the first action-sports athlete to capture three medals at a single Winter Olympics. She is a hot favourite in the halfpipe competition, which starts with qualifying on Thursday, having won gold in the discipline at last year’s world championships in Aspen. The precocious teenager was already well on her way to becoming a household name even before these Olympics, with more than 1.3m followers on Weibo, a growing profile as a supermodel after signing with IMG that earned her an invite to the Met Gala, and a roster of more than 20 sponsors including Cadillac, Tiffany, Fendi, Estee Lauder and Victoria’s Secret. But her delicate, if lucrative, attempt to straddle two countries and two cultures has not come without criticism back in the US, where the hashtag #EileenGuTraitor has trended on social media during her events. One of America’s most hyped action-sports prospects in recent memory, Gu’s decision to compete for China raised eyebrows when she changed affiliations in 2019. The issue has only grown thornier over the past two and a half years amid global condemnation for the host country’s human rights abuses against Uyghurs and other Turkic Muslims in far western Xinjiang – which the US state department has labelled a genocide – in addition to the persecution of Tibetans and the repression of Hong Kong’s freedoms. While she faced no questions on her ambiguous citizenship status during a press conference on Tuesday – unlike the half-dozen queries she adroitly elided after her big air triumph a week ago – Gu was asked whether she felt like she made a compromise by any of the state restrictions that come with doing business in China. “I don’t really think of skiing as a business endeavour,” Gu said. “I guess it’s my job, but I also do it because I love it. “I chose to ski for China because there’s this massive opportunity to spread the sport to people who haven’t even heard of it before. And honestly, I have met my goal. There are 300 million people on snow [in China], and to have even influenced a tiny fraction of that makes me immensely proud.” She added: “I feel as though I use my voice as much as I can in topics that are relevant and personal to myself and targeted toward people who are willing to listen to me. “That being said, I’m also a teenage girl. I do my best to make the world a better place. I’m having fun while doing it, I’m skiing, I’m hoping to inspire my girls and that’s my message right now.”One of the last remaining countries without Covid-19 - the small Pacific nation of Cook Islands - has reported its first case of the virus. Prime minister Mark Brown said the first case arrived on an international flight from New Zealand on 10 February. “While she was asymptomatic, she returned a positive result in just a few hours later. The case been issued an Isolation Order. The case is travelling with two others, and they will all remain in isolation until they no longer test positive for Covid-19,” Brown said on Monday. The prime minister warned on the weekend there could be “silent transmission” in the country after another traveller tested positive for Covid-19 upon their return to New Zealand, having travelled through the Cook Islands from 31 January to 8 February. “It is likely that the person who tested positive was infectious while here and further likely that the virus is in our community,” the prime minister said of that case on social media on Saturday. Hundreds of people came forward for testing at drive-through sites on Tuesday in an effort to trace any possible community transmission. Te Marae Ora, the Cook Islands Ministry of Health, confirmed that 31 potential close contacts had tested negative. The Cook Islands – a popular holiday destination with a population of about 18,000 people – has kicked into full precautionary measures which include grounding outer island flights to contain any possible transmission in Rarotonga, the main island. Despite this being the first case, there is no sense of panic, according to Rashneel Kumar, editor of the national newspaper, Cook Islands News. “People are calm and collected. Maybe if this case arrived sooner it would have been different. But people have been prepared and practising social distance, wearing masks and taking precautionary measures. It also helps that vaccination coverage is very high.” The vaccination coverage in the Cook Islands is 96% of the eligible population 12 years and over, according to Te Marae Ora. The positive case comes a week after vaccines for five-11-year-olds were rolled out, and a week after reopening of all schools. Kumar told the Guardian that some parents expressed concern about schools being open, while others were comfortable to keep their children in school while they wait for test results.The Bank of England is facing fierce criticism from both sides over its plans to raise interest rates. For hawkish economists, Threadneedle Street has fallen badly behind the curve, miscalculating the rise of inflationary pressures, and now needs to play catch-up to regain credibility. Others say the Bank is navigating the most dangerous moment for the economy in decades, but now risks a huge policy mistake. They argue that driving up borrowing costs will have little effect on inflation caused by global supply chain disruption, and that it risks engineering the conditions for a recession in an economy still grappling with Covid-19 and struggling for momentum. Each side fears that a lack of coherent strategy either way will fatally undermine the central bank’s credibility. Behind the curve Andrew Sentance, a former member of the Bank’s monetary policy committee (MPC), said a steady rise in interest rates last year, clearly communicated to financial markets, would have been a sensible reaction to rising prices, and he criticised the Bank for a kneejerk response. “They’ve sent conflicting messages on monetary policy since last November, and they seem to have lurched from being very cautious to being seen to want to act. But it’s still not clear what strategy they’re going to be following in the future.” With inflation poised to hit more than triple the Bank’s 2% target rate come April – rising to about 7% – City investors are betting that the MPC will add several more interest rate rises to one in December and another this month in an attempt to restore its credibility after waiting and watching for too long last year. The Bank governor, Andrew Bailey, was criticised as being out of touch when he urged workers this month not to demand big pay rises. Financial markets expect rates to reach 2% by the end of the year, the highest in more than a decade, since rates sank close to zero during the 2008 financial crisis. Roger Bootle, chairman of the consultancy Capital Economics, told MPs on the Commons Treasury committee last week that the Bank was “way behind the curve”, breeding a mismatch between the degree of tightening of policy and how quickly the inflation danger was picking up. “The Bank has not communicated clearly enough how tough it may need to be,” he said. Official figures are expected to confirm on Wednesday an inflation rate of close to 5.4% in January, the highest level in three decades. The Bank has said the measure for the annual increase in the cost of living could peak at about 7.25% by April as surging energy prices feed through. “Out of the blue, for the first time in 20 years, inflation comes powering ahead, way above what they dreamed of, and they are like: ‘Oh my God,’” Jim O’Neill, the former Treasury minister who sits as a crossbench peer in the House of Lords, told MPs at the same hearing. O’Neill, a former chief economist at Goldman Sachs, said acting too fast could exacerbate the damage. “At this point they have to get out of that dilemma, but they now run the classic risk, for those who have been around long enough, that they might end up going too much in completely the wrong way, just to get their own credibility back,” he said. On the Bank’s own forecasts, it anticipates unemployment rising from the current rate of 4.1% to 5% by early 2025 as the economic outlook deteriorates due to weak real income growth and fading consumer demand. Helped by higher interest rates, inflation is forecast to fall back below target to 1.5%. Despite the risks to the economy, Karen Ward, a former adviser to Philip Hammond when he was chancellor, and now the chief market strategist for Europe, the Middle East and Africa at JP Morgan Asset Management, said Threadneedle Street was still likely to prioritise protecting growth. “They’re walking a tightrope between maintaining their credibility and showing that they will not tolerate such high inflation, but not being so heavy-handed that they short-circuit the recovery. On that balancing act, I feel they’ll err on the side of inflation rather than [damaging] growth” she said. Hold your nerve It’s possible to be too critical of policymakers when they are coping with a once-in-a-lifetime pandemic, said Neil Shearing, chief economist at the global consultancy Capital Economics. “There is lots of gnashing of teeth about inflation at the moment. And there is an argument that governments and central banks have over-stimulated their economies, triggering higher prices than would have been the case. But in the 2008 financial crash they were rightly criticised for not providing enough stimulus, and that mistake led to a much worse situation in the years that followed.” Dario Perkins, the head of global macroeconomics at the consultancy TS Lombard, said the BoE should not be blamed for the rise in inflation. He believes it was sensible to maintain ultra-low rates last year while the economy recovered from the pandemic. “However, the bank’s credibility is at stake now as it starts to increase interest rates without a good reason for doing so,” he said. Ben Broadbent, the Bank’s deputy governor, has tackled criticism of the Bank head on, saying the economy was weak last year and continued to need low interest rates. He has justified the turnaround since December by arguing that the Bank needs to clamp down on early signs that workers, keen to limit the damage from rising inflation, are demanding higher wages, triggering a wage/price spiral. Perkins, a senior Treasury economist during the 2008 crash, described the concern about spiralling wages variously as “ridiculous”, “spurious” and “fake”. It’s a view that goes to the heart of the Bank’s dilemma. It also potentially undermines the credibility of the central bank’s regional agents, who underpin the Bank’s forecasts of future earnings and have reported that wage increases are already running hot across the country. “I think with every move it makes, the MPC is trying to convince us that despite two years of unexplained policy changes, and despite appearing to embark on a new and undeclared policy of financing government debt, despite an economy showing no sign of above-average wage growth, it remains a credible and independent policymaking body,” said Perkins. “It is when this defensive mindset takes over that policy mistakes are possible.” Rupert Harrison, George Osborne’s chief economic adviser from 2006 to 2015, said all central banks were in danger of making their first major mistake. “[It] really feels like central bankers around the world are making a collective policy mistake – trying to use rapid rate rises to cool inflation that is driven mainly by supply constraints, just as growth momentum is slowing,” he tweeted. “Only in the US can you see anything like the hot labour market that would justify significant tightening – I really struggle to understand the Bank of England’s reasoning today.” Robert Skidelsky, a peer who sits on the Lords economics affairs committee, said the central bank was struggling to maintain a fiction that it was independent from Treasury policymaking. “It is terrified of losing its credibility as an independent central bank, but cannot admit that it has become like an agency of the Treasury. Now it is trying to act independently and yet its dual mission – to bring down inflation while also fostering growth – leaves its policymaking in disarray.” Danny Blanchflower, a former member of theMPC, believes a series of missteps through the pandemic mean the Bank’s credibility is “totally shot”. He said: “Since the time the Bank was made independent [in 1997], I don’t think we’ve seen anything so bad.” Blanchflower said higher unemployment was riskier than above-target inflation. “The danger is they’re going to generate a recession,” he said.Another week, another sewage outflow of corruption into the polluted river of Tory politics. Are voters so profoundly cynical that no political bribery or MPs touting for contracts shocks them? Polling suggests the country is not losing its sense of smell. The time may soon be here to take up John Major’s call in the Guardian to clean up party funding and stop dirty donations from distorting democracy. For that, the public has to swallow what it deplores: state funding for political parties. Every inquiry has concluded there is no alternative. Here’s the latest filth: the Tories direct their biggest donors to apply for public posts controlled by a Downing Street unit hidden from public scrutiny. The Sunday Times reports “officials offering behind-the-scenes support and directing applicants to a secretive Number 10 unit”. That’s their win-win: collecting cash for the party while trying to pack Tories into appointments to public and arts bodies. This comes on top of openDemocracy revealing that donors giving £3m or more to the Tories are virtually guaranteed to be offered a peerage. The stink surrounding Tory fundraising leaks out in an email from its treasurer’s office telling their big donors: “We thought you may be interested in the latest list of public appointments. It is important Conservatives rebalance the representation at the head of these important public bodies.” The party’s donor club the Leaders’ Group charges a minimum of £50,000 a year for access to ministers. The Tory party co-chairman, Ben Elliot, the Duchess of Cornwall’s nephew, is founder of Quintessentially, a luxury concierge service offering “lifestyle management” for the ultra-wealthy. It boasts it can do anything: they once told me of delivering bongo drums to the bored teenage son of a billionaire on a yacht mid-Pacific; and paying a top Manchester United footballer to play with a plutocrat’s seven-year-old. That’s the world Elliot fishes in while he also guides donors to public appointments. The Times reports that Elliot told senior advisers at No 10 that one major donor would be an “excellent candidate” to oversee emergency Covid-19 loans. His staff lobbied for Mohamed Amersi, the telecoms millionaire and £750,000 Tory donor, to chair the National Lottery Community Fund; he made it to the last round of selection. This week Elliot’s fundraising comes under scrutiny when Amersi takes his feud with the Tory party to the high court in a libel claim against former Tory MP Charlotte Leslie for questioning the origins of his wealth. In all this murk, no one knows a donor’s true influence, but sometimes they break to the surface. Jonathan Leavesley, the chair of the secretive Midlands Industrial Council bankrolling the Tories and the Taxpayers’ Alliance, threatens their cash in the Daily Telegraph: “I have been a party donor through bad times as well as good, but my enthusiasm can ebb and flow.” Castigating the rise in national insurance contributions and corporation tax, Leavesley writes: “Have they never heard of the Laffer curve? It is time for the government to act as a free enterprise champion and act Conservative. Get a grip Boris, or go.” Other donors are on the rampage over Johnson’s failings, but it’s not for them to ordain his fate. Colossal power is wielded by dangerously few donors, says Brunel University’s Prof Justin Fisher, with just 10 people donating a quarter of Tory funds – more than £10m – since Johnson became prime minister. Particularly pernicious is Johnson’s elections bill abolishing the Electoral Commission’s power to prosecute illegal donations. Labour was always over-reliant on power-wielding union leaders. Unite’s leader, Sharon Graham, last week rattled her money bags in a crude threat over a dispute with bin lorry drivers in Labour-run Coventry. “Let me be very clear – the remaining financial support of the Labour party is now under review,” she said. Keir Starmer would have none of it: “The Labour party I lead is not going to be influenced by threats from anybody, whoever they are, and that is just an absolute matter of principle.” Fisher points to the 2019 general election, when Unite donated £4.6m of Labour’s £8.3m; the union has already cut funding after Jeremy Corbyn’s departure. This politicking ignores union members’ interests, since Labour’s strongest policies include fair pay deals in every sector, ending zero hours insecurity and guaranteeing every workplace access to union recruiters. Unlike secret Tory influencers, at least Unite’s attempt at cash-for-influence is rudely transparent. John Major rose to a tremendous philippic against Boris Johnson’s corruptions, though as prime minister he was no Cicero. As ever with former prime ministers, you sigh at their retrospective wisdom, regretting radical reforms they never dared, such as party funding. “The system needs cleansing,” he writes, to stop politics being “the plaything of the rich or of pressure groups”. Limit donations by individuals and unions so donors no longer “sway policy through an open cheque book”. The last review in 2011, by the Committee on Standards in Public Life, called for capped donations, with state funding at 50p a year per voter. But Nick Clegg slaughtered it at birth in the Commons, saying austerity spending couldn’t afford it. Deep public mistrust means politicians fear asking taxpayers to foot the bill, though political parties are essential to a functioning democracy: less than 2% of the electorate ever join a party. The best idea for distributing state cash came from the Power Inquiry, chaired by Helena Kennedy: voters at elections should allocate a £3 state voucher to any party. That too was killed stone dead. Plummeting polls show the limit to how much voters “priced in” corruption with Johnson. Enough is enough, the country hasn’t run out of outrage. Whoever inherits Johnson’s filthy stables can only make a clean break by purging political funding. Polly Toynbee is a Guardian columnistHealth officials have “paid lip service” to racism in the NHS for years, leading black, Asian and minority ethnic doctors have warned as they called for “concrete” action to tackle inequalities exposed by a landmark review. The Guardian revealed how a damning study – the largest of its kind – had found “vast” and “widespread” inequity in every aspect of healthcare it reviewed, and warned that this was harming the health of minority ethnic patients in England. In response, an NHS spokesperson said the health service was “already taking action” to improve the experiences of patients and access to services and was working “to drive forward” the recommendations made in the report. However, Dr JS Bamrah, a consultant psychiatrist in Greater Manchester and national chairman of the British Association of Physicians of Indian Origin, said he was unsatisfied with the response. “This 166-page review … is a terrible indictment of the current state of the NHS,” he told the Guardian. “As many of us have often said and reported, we don’t need any further reports. It’s action we need, as there are scores of patients who are not getting optimal treatment, and many are being neglected. “It really isn’t good enough for NHS bosses to say that action is being taken and it’s even more disappointing to then not see any concrete proposals on dealing with glaring disparities despite all that we have learnt during the pandemic.” Dr Rajesh Mohan, presidential lead for race and equality at the Royal College of Psychiatrists, said it was “time for warm words to end” as he urged NHS leaders to “do everything they can to ensure patients from ethnic minority backgrounds get the care they need”. Dr Subramanian Narayanan, president-elect of the Hospital Consultants and Specialists Association, the hospital doctors’ union, said “the blight of institutional racism” was “all too common” in the NHS, adding: “Health leaders have paid lip service to racism for years, but that has got us nowhere.” The review, commissioned by the NHS Race and Health Observatory and led by the University of Manchester, made a series of recommendations to NHS leaders and organisations. They include, for example, improving ethnicity data collection, investing in racial health inequalities research, fostering better links with community organisations and tackling “racist attitudes and behaviours” among healthcare staff. Dr Chaand Nagpaul, chair of the British Medical Association, said: “The findings show that people from ethnic minority backgrounds are being failed within the health service across all age groups and clinical areas. As patients receive poorer care on the basis of race the NHS is failing to honour its core value; to treat everyone equally. This can no longer be ignored – there is a moral duty to put this right as matter of urgency.” An NHS spokesperson said: “While our latest equality report shows that progress has been made in some areas of the NHS, we are working with the GMC and NHS Employers to ensure that we are addressing these concerns and have appointed senior leaders to take this work forward and monitor progress. “The NHS has also set out what local health services should be focusing on over the next year so they can also make improvements in their local communities for patients and will work closely with the Race and Health Observatory to drive forward the recommendations set out in this report.”What my body knows The story my body wants to tell is that my body and the body of Earth are One. Our power and the power of Earth are intrinsically bound in generosity and regeneration, not scarcity and sacrifice. Renewal, abundance, retreat and restoration are the seasons within us. But we forget what real power looks like – because the power of the patriarchy has disguised what hurts us as what we deserve. The assaults on my body are akin to the assaults wounding the body of Earth, but I am human and that alone makes me complicit in the degradation and sacrilege of Nature. Atonement is possible. The story my body wants to tell is that she is tired. She is tired of running on fumes, the same fumes killing the planet by burning coal and oil and gas. The story of my body is exhaustion. Am I listening? She is telling me that the energy I count on is a false energy, a lie sputtering from the flames of sheer will, fear and illusion. The story my body wants to tell is that she is grieving. She is sick from not being heard, or seen, or cared for, while I am taking care of everyone else except my own beloved body, my one and only body – flesh of my flesh called Earth. My body understands I take her for granted, and why wouldn’t I? We are conditioned, as women, to believe there is divine purpose in busyness and distraction – forgetting ourselves, forgetting the soul-needs of our children: the soil, the air, savannas and forests, wetlands and oceans. My body is my collaborator, whether I think about her or not. She continues to construct my health and wellbeing in the blood and bones of my body, even as my nervous system registers danger and adrenal glands sound the alarm. Every muscle and organ is inflamed with the heartache of this burning world. The story my body wants to tell is a warning. Our bodies and the body of Earth are changing quickly, alchemically, through the violence of climate collapse. We are supporting a collective death by suicide. But our indigenous sisters, like the Women of Bears Ears, mentors in the red rock desert of southern Utah, are committed to “the rematriation of Mother Earth”, bringing forth harmony and wholeness from the wisdom and ceremonies passed on to them through generations. New rituals tapping the hearts of women worldwide are being born commensurate with this moment. Our ancestors are with us. With our hands on the Earth, we will know what to do. Earth care is self-care. The story my body wants to tell is a story of love. It is time to lay our bodies down on the Mother and defend her creation – we breathe – we breathe ourselves back into the insistence of Beauty. Our tears will fall as rain in the desert, in sorrow and relief. We will rise, drenched in joy, and lead. Our bodies on Earth, of Earth, for Earth will be fearless – keening and singing, chanting and dancing, circling the planet in defiance and prayer, as our stay against extinction, both human and wild. We locate the pulse that refuses to cease – because what my body knows is: life follows life. Terry Tempest Williams is a writer, conservationist and activistEvery morning last autumn, as he took the short walk from Farringdon station in central London to his new restaurant, Russell Norman came face to face with a ghost. The pandemic had hit the hospitality sector hard, and this stretch of takeaway outfits and dine-in burger chains was no exception. A Byron, a Coco di Mama, an Itsu – all long gone, doors locked, interiors dark. And then, just before the final right turn, the one that really hurt, the words on its signage removed but the outline unmistakable: Polpo. The Venetian-inspired restaurant, which took its name from the Italian for “octopus”, had been a breakout success for Norman in the early 2010s. With its small plates, no-reservations policy and stripped-down interiors, the original Soho site had been credited with reinventing casual dining after the Great Recession. But then, like so many brands that emerged during the same period, it started to expand: taking on investors, extending tentacles across the UK, and then collapsing in instalments from 2016 onwards. Most of its sites were forced to close in the context of a broader casual dining crunch, as the cost of running a restaurant rose and the number of customers fell. These days, just two Polpos survive, in Soho and in Chelsea, west London, under the management of Norman’s former business partner Richard Beatty. Norman’s own departure from the project was finalised in June 2020. Now, after a hiatus, he was back. For years, Norman had wanted to open an old-fashioned trattoria, replicating the homely, family run restaurants of Italy for a central London audience. A 2017 trip to Tuscany had brought his vision into sharper focus. Many of the region’s most celebrated dishes are rooted in the tradition of cucina povera (“poor cooking”), which makes resourceful use of pasta, beans, bread and offal. The food is nourishing and full of flavour, but beige and unphotogenic. In recognition of this, the restaurant would be called Brutto – or, in English, Ugly. Almost from the start, the name felt less like a clever, self-confident nod to Tuscan gastronomy – Tuscan food is not just ugly, it is “ugly but good”, brutto ma buono – and more like a description of Brutto’s own fortunes. The past two years have been the hardest in living memory for restaurateurs. Brutto was supposed to open in June 2021, but the global shortage of construction materials delayed it until autumn. A further delay to the completion of the kitchen had left the head chef, Oli Diver, little time to develop the menu for opening day. Brexit had made it difficult to recruit staff. Brexit- and pandemic-related disruption had made it nearly impossible to secure crucial ingredients. When I first visited the restaurant in late September 2021, Britain was in the midst of a fuel crisis and the queues at the petrol stations were at their longest. The shortage of lorries with drivers and full tanks meant that the bar – intended to be a space where local people could pop in for an espresso – would have to get through its first few weeks without any coffee cups. The Norman I met was a macchiato-sipping, cigarette-smoking caricature of an anxious restaurateur. But he also seemed perversely thrilled, vibrating with the nervous energy of someone facing an enormous challenge. His highly caffeinated sentences tripped over one another, offering abundant rephrasings, clarifications and reformulations. He was dressed in his typical attire: a mixture of slightly rumpled continental tailoring, open-collar shirts and Chelsea boots, as artfully dilapidated as a restored Florentine palazzo. This was, he calculated, his 31st restaurant opening. Most of the first 15 had come as he worked his way up through the ranks at Caprice Holdings, a hospitality industry behemoth that specialised in central London restaurants in which rich people unthinkingly parted with large sums to enjoy pristine shellfish (Scott’s), haute nursery food (The Ivy), or high-grade protein wrapped in gold leaf and garnished with caviar (Sexy Fish). Polpo, which opened in 2009, was different: the room was dark, the décor distressed. But before long, the queue snaked out the door; punters packed the bar as they waited for their table. Its instant success earned Norman a slew of adulatory headlines – ‘the coolest man in food’; ‘the new king of Soho’ – and introduced many Londoners to concepts like small sharing plates that would soon become ubiquitous. Polpo targeted a younger crowd, but Brutto would be a broader church, welcoming dog-owners, parents with babies, older couples; its backstreet location gave it the cachet of a neighbourhood restaurant. Still, the parallels between the two restaurants were unavoidable: the focus on regional Italian cuisines, the playful two-syllable names, the fact both were born into a time of crisis. All of which made the proximity of the shuttered Polpo seem like a warning. It was a constant reminder of how most restaurants end. The economics of running a restaurant pre-pandemic were not favourable – even before Covid, restaurants in the UK went bust at three times the rate of other businesses – but they were at least familiar and, with good management and luck, survivable. Now, mid-pandemic and post-Brexit, Norman was operating in a new economic reality. The pandemic had wiped out one in 10 of Britain’s restaurants. When we spoke in September, as much as he was excited about the next few weeks, he was realistic about how they might conclude. “The pressure in business terms running a restaurant is always the first month,” he said. “There’s a massive, massive capital outlay and you don’t get any money coming back into the business until a good week and a half after you’ve started to operate – partly because most restaurants open with a preview period where everything’s discounted 50%, which means you’re not making any money at all, just about covering your costs. So that first month is critical. A lot of restaurants fail because they literally run out of money, it’s as simple as that. “If things aren’t great, if it’s not a hit from the beginning, I’m going to have to look to borrow money in order to keep it afloat. And that’s where it gets scary.” * * * A new restaurant is a precarious business venture, but to start with, it is also an empty stage. Before he found his home in restaurants, Norman had worked as a council arts administrator and then as drama teacher at a north London school; he is still, unmistakably, a thespian, from the way he works a room to his flair for circumlocution. And as much as he cared about Brutto’s financial success it was clear that the artiste manqué in him was just as focused on the aesthetics of the thing. Early in our time together, Norman professed: “I don’t think of myself as an entrepreneur, I think of myself as a creative.” Running a restaurant was not so different from putting on a theatrical performance – tellingly, Norman referred to Brutto’s very first service as a “technical rehearsal”. Spurred by past failures to fully realise his vision – “I was trying for Bohemian Rhapsody but I ended up with the Birdie Song” – with Brutto he was exacting. Push on the front door with its Italian blue-and-white spingere sign, and inside, everything is as precisely curated as the restaurant’s 18-and-a-half hour Spotify playlist (a mix of Pitchfork-approved rock, lo-fi electronica, and a lot of Everything But the Girl). Lampshades fashioned from napkins float from the ceiling like tiny ghosts; tables are dressed with red-and-white checked tablecloths and candles wedged into chianti bottles. One wall is given over to framed portraits, photographs and still lifes, a nod to the decor of Florentine favourite Trattoria Cammillo; another is covered by a cacophonous mural by artist Neil Fox – Bosch’s Garden of Earthly Delights populated with uncanny-valley celebrity portraits and 20th-century pop culture arcana (is that Christopher Hitchens? Damien Hirst? Chet Baker?; that’s definitely Mickey Mouse, King Kong and Captain Haddock). If the inspiration for Brutto was a traditional Tuscan trattoria, the end result is 90% earnest homage and 10% high-camp pastiche. As Norman and Diver worked together in the weeks before Brutto opened, they ran into problems in realising his very specific vision. To stock the restaurant, they relied on a diffuse network of suppliers: about 20 different outfits provided ingredients for Brutto’s kitchen; a further 15 or so provided the linen, crockery, glassware and other bits and pieces used in the dining room; another 20 serviced the restaurant’s well-stocked bar – six or seven wine merchants, then separate sources for traditional Italian aperitivi and amari like Select and Fernet-Branca, plus soft drinks and beer. All in all, Norman calculated, “60, 65 individual suppliers just to open a restaurant on a Tuesday”. But finding the suppliers was tricky. The pandemic had forced even some of the biggest names in hospitality to downsize or shut down entirely. “About 80% of the bread suppliers we tried to contact,” Diver recalled, “Google search: permanently closed”. Those who survived were struggling with their own supply chain issues, and insisted on weekly payments, rather than the old industry standard of 60 days – agonising for a restaurant not yet producing a reliable cashflow. Even those suppliers that had stock available were running into problems. “One said they had a three-month wait time because they had no drivers, and the drivers don’t have fuel,” said Diver. “You’re expecting things to be like ‘Yep, we’ll have an account for you next week’ and instead you’re like ‘OK, so I can’t get any of that for another three months now’.” Across the country, restaurants were suffering in similar fashion. In the month before Brutto opened, Nando’s was forced to close about 50 of its branches as it faced the prospect of running out of chicken. Another poultry giant, KFC, warned customers to expect shortened menus and packaging that “might look a little different to normal” as it struggled to secure supplies of food and materials. McDonald’s reported a shortage of milkshakes and some bottled drinks. Pizza Hut ran out of ice-cream in the same week as Wetherspoon’s suffered nationwide beer shortages. And it wasn’t just fast food and pub chains: in a survey conducted by Deliveroo last year, 89% of the small and independent restaurants on its platform had seen wholesale costs increase, and 54% had removed items from their menus owing to a lack of availability. Given the context, even a generic pizza and pasta joint would have been challenging to get off the ground. But the task at Brutto was complicated because it took its inspiration from Florence, a city of arcane and singular culinary traditions that include lampredotto (stewed cow’s stomach), cibrèo (a stew of rooster testicles, crests and wattle) and pappa al pomodoro (a cold tomato soup thickened with chunks of stale Tuscan unsalted bread). Norman had wanted the menu on opening day to feature a dish of wild boar sausages with lentils, but no wild boar could be found. The bread supplier was unable to offer a crusty white roll of the kind typically used in a sandwich stuffed with lampredotto; the lampredotto itself had to be shipped in from France. Except the French suppliers only sold it 20kg at time, so Brutto also had to buy a separate freezer, purely to store the vast slabs of offal. It wasn’t always this way. When Norman opened Polpo, he had far less trouble in securing outre fare like baccalà (salt cod) and moscardini (tiny baby octopuses). But these days, the economic pressures of the pandemic and the post-Brexit difficulty of getting produce into the country has forced suppliers to cut their offerings to only the guaranteed bestsellers. “The niche stuff, the suppliers just don’t bother with,” said Norman. “So what you end up with is a choice of goods which is really basic.” * * * It wasn’t just supplies that were scarce. So, too, were staff. The key lieutenants had come together quickly: general manager Monique Sierra and the restaurant manager, Alexis Ross, had worked with Norman before. In the kitchen, Diver had been recruited from the well-regarded modern European restaurant Allegra, with the promise of his first head chef gig. But after this, they spent weeks hunting for a qualified deputy to Diver, a team of three or four chefs de partie, and a further three or four front of house. On 27 September, two days before Brutto’s first dress rehearsal, Norman posted on the restaurant’s Instagram account a sketch of a chicken standing on a restaurant table in front of a bemused customer. The caption read “There’s not enough staff, so you’ll have to cook me yourself”. Subsequent posts would include a list of vacancies that still need to be filled – amounting to practically the entire staff of the restaurant. Sierra – “Russell’s representative on Earth,” as one waiter described her – led the recruiting effort for front-of-house staff. “To be blunt,” she told me, “all the people who love working in restaurants are hard to find here at the moment, because they’ve all gone home”. The impact on the industry was brutal. Industry platform Big Hospitality reported that 660,000 jobs disappeared in 2020. And then, as businesses sought to rebuild last year, they found workers in short supply. “When the uncertainty started to ease, the market just went crazy with outbidding and competing with each other,” said Joanne Searley, operations director for JKS Restaurants, which owns 20 establishments ranging from the fast casual Bao in Borough Market to the two Michelin-starred Kitchen Table in Fitzrovia. In December 2021, JKS Restaurants found itself with more than 300 vacancies to fill. Chefs and operators agreed that this was an unprecedented crisis. “It’s definitely the worst I’ve ever seen,” said Tom Anglesea, an acclaimed chef who has spent the best part of 18 months attempting to assemble a team for a new project in Mayfair. “You look, every week there’s new openings – and there’s just not enough manpower to go around, you know?” In an industry notorious for its exploitative and abusive workplace culture, the sudden scarcity of staff placed power in the hands of cooks and waitstaff who had long been treated as fungible. At the multinational chains like McDonald’s and Chipotle, food service workers put pressure on their employers to improve working conditions and wages. “It’s an employee’s market really,” said Mandy Yin, who runs the celebrated Malaysian restaurant Sambal Shiok in north London. “There’s been high turnover since reopening last year with many choosing to leave the industry altogether – a much smaller pool of available staff.” It also led to fierce competition, especially when it came to hiring kitchen staff. “There have been lots of attempts to poach key team members,” lamented Crispin Somerville, an industry veteran of 25 years who co-owns a London-based restaurant group including Quo Vadis, Barrafina and El Pastor. “It’s definitely got much more cut-throat out there.” In June 2021, the Italian restaurant Ombra – based in east London, but casting around for cooks in the same pool as Brutto – announced via Instagram that it would be closing on Tuesdays and Wednesdays until further notice, blaming a “major shortage of staff both on the floor and in the kitchen caused by the brutal trifecta of the pandemic, Brexit and a wasteman poaching some of our team.” As he tried to set up Brutto’s kitchen, Diver quickly became acquainted with the brutal trifecta. He took to advertising vacancies on industry job boards, paying up to £200 per post for negligible returns. Even promising leads had a habit of crumbling to dust. “Ten per cent of [chefs] you try to get in contact with will turn up,” he began, before pausing to correct himself. “No, less, less. 10% say they’ll turn up, 5% turn up, 2% are fit for the job, and you’ll say ‘OK, well let me know what you think in a couple of days’, and they’ll come back to me and say they’ve been offered a sous chef job somewhere else for about £35,000.” In the weeks building up to opening day, Russell’s brother, Lloyd, was called into action in the kitchen, despite having no prior culinary experience. (Even someone relatively unskilled can be useful: any time a chef is not chopping onions or peeling potatoes, they can spend on more complex tasks.) For front-of-house, “Hire on the basis of attitude rather than experience” became the motto. Among the new hires was Ryan Petersen, a former theatre publicist who had not waited tables for two decades. (“Russell took a real chance on me,” he said.) Meanwhile, Diver tailored his menu to take account of an understaffed, underskilled kitchen, rejecting labour-intensive tasks like preparing fresh pasta in-house and focusing on dishes that could be prepared, as much as possible, before service began. One dish that could not be prepared in advance was the legendary bistecca – a giant T-bone steak that represents one of the cornerstones of Florentine gastronomy, cooked over flames and served bloody, like something out of Dante’s Inferno. Norman had a provisional arrangement in place with a supplier, but was always looking for ways to shorten his supply chain. The day before opening, an opportunity presented itself, courtesy of the Flat Iron Steak founder Charlie Carroll: would Norman be interested in a supplier based just metres away in Smithfield market, who could provide him with the giant 15kg loins from which the Bistecca would be hewn? Norman jumped at the chance, and hours before his new project opened its doors it was possible to see the onetime king of Soho strolling through Farringdon with the best part of a dry-aged cow slung over his shoulder. It was chancy, last-minute stuff, but it worked. Through the technical rehearsal on Wednesday 29 September and a series of soft opening services in the days that followed, customers came and went and the whole shaky edifice did not topple over. Partly, this was due to carefully managing the number of orders – no more than 15 every half hour was the sweet spot that kept punters happy without overloading the kitchen. “I was pessimistic and had many prepared apologies up my sleeve should things go wrong,” Norman told me the following Monday. But disaster had not struck. “At the end of each service we all looked at each other and thought ‘My God, we did it, it felt like a real restaurant!’” * * * Before Brutto opened its doors, Norman had planned for all the predictable things – wages, food bills, rent – but one unknowable was how much each punter would be willing to part with. Brutto’s pricing was London mid-market: more expensive than an Italian casual dining mainstay like Franco Manca, but a long way off the capital’s Italianate heavy hitters like Locanda Locatelli or Murano, where dinner with wine could run to hundreds of pounds per person. Norman had therefore originally budgeted for a spend of £40 a head, enough to cover a starter like coccoli (fried dough “cuddles” served with prosciutto and tangy stracchino cheese); a pasta like the tagliatelle ragù, winkingly undersold on the English menu as “pasta with meat sauce”; a glass of wine and a coffee. But the Brutto Instagram account from the time, with its photos of the bistecca blackboard – its offerings systematically crossed out as customers order steaks costing £62, £70, £75, £80 – demonstrated how readily punters were parting with their money. Lots of people were coming in: local designers, new mothers, camera-happy food dorks – all of them spending more on food and booze than Norman had expected (the figure per head, in fact, was closer to £70). Sierra spoke in awed terms about the gentleman at table 49, a prodigious consumer of negronis, champagne and brandy who would come in for lunch and take down an entire bistecca and bottle of wine by himself. “I think it’s working,” Norman told me on a rainy day in early November. “The restaurant has a very good chance of survival.” But he also admitted that the kitchen was running on fumes, and the challenge of finding enough people to get Brutto off the ground had now become the challenge of finding reinforcements to give the vanguard time to recover. A typical kitchen might expect to manage with a head chef and a handful of sous chefs working on rotation, but in Brutto’s early days Diver had to churn through 90-hour work-weeks with only his senior sous chef Alan Williams (and Norman’s brother, Lloyd) for company. Diver was phlegmatic – “I’ve never worked in a kitchen that’s calm and relaxed” – but with no days off and no end in sight, he seemed to be hitting his limit. There were two principal problems. The first was time. Diver’s strategy of lightening the load on the kitchen during service meant that a huge amount of prep had to be fitted into the remaining hours. Carrots, onion and celery had to be chopped and simmered down into soffritto, the aromatic base for the soups and meat ragùs that are central to Tuscan gastronomy. The sauces themselves had to blip and bubble for hours before they could be set aside, decanted and refrigerated for later use. It was impossible, at the start of the week, to do all the necessary prep for the 10 services ahead (lunch and dinner, Tuesday to Saturday). The fix here was easy, though painful financially: from 14 October, Brutto would be closed on Tuesday lunchtimes. The second issue was gnarlier. Up to this point, front of house had tried to keep things manageable for the kitchen by limiting numbers in the dining room. Occasionally, it would be the customers who lost out: amid positive online reviews, there was a small but voluble subset of Tripadvisor reviews decrying long wait times for a table, or how front-of-house had handled them in their disgruntlement. Now that the restaurant was up and running, Norman wanted to increase the number of covers. “We’re serving more than 130 people a day and we could definitely do more,” he told me. “This is a finely balanced mathematical machine.” The margins between success and failure, profit and loss, were razor-thin. “It’s a constant worry for me that I’m going to burn my chefs out because demand is so high,” Norman said. His hope was that he had bought enough goodwill from his staff to get through the gruelling first few months. “Everything has been collaborative and so they are completely invested in it, and even though they grumble at the end of the shift, ‘Oh my God, that was tougher than I expected’ I say look, guys, come on, here’s a beer, here’s a second beer, let’s talk about it. We have to push on. We need more staff, we need more prep chefs – we’ll get there. It’s hard work at the moment but I promise you – you will be rewarded.” * * * Despite mounting stress, I wasn’t aware of any blow-ups in the kitchen. “[Diver] is just so calm all the time,” Sierra said. For Petersen, who had last worked front of house in the days of Gordon Ramsay and Marco Pierre White, the difference was striking. “The old notion of the bully and shouting chef does still exist – we know this – but it doesn’t happen here. The kitchen isn’t a scary place for a waiter to go.” And, in time, Norman’s optimism and the kitchen’s perseverance were vindicated. In Brutto’s opening weeks, Norman had fretted that people might not “get” it: that they would come expecting Polpo 2.0, or something MasterChef-flashy, or Michelin-star precise. He emphasised how Brutto’s inspiration was family run trattorie, that the food could be strikingly simple: a plate of raw cabbage, seasoned with lemon and olive oil; bitter chicory puntarelle, dressed with garlic and anchovy. Still, Norman was perhaps overanxious about managing customer expectations. Pasta, £5 negronis and decent music was an easy enough concept to “get”. And people clearly got it. Good reviews kept appearing in the newspapers. One night, the Michelin-starred celebrity chef Jun Tanaka visited, and went into the kitchen after service to pass on his congratulations. Websites regularly scoured by London’s foodies began to include Brutto on rankings of the city’s hottest restaurants. Its booking policy – nothing taken further than 14 days out, with reservations for the 14th day released at 9.30am on the dot – created further demand. As Brutto’s fame spread, so did the number of chefs interested in working there. After spending thousands on recruitment ads, Diver now had chefs coming to him. By early December, the team was as jubilant as I had seen it. Norman had shaved his head in the spirit of “fuck it” when things had been at their most parlous; now it had started to grow back, he no longer looked like a condemned man. On one of the days I visited, it was his birthday and the team had banded together to get him a smart Missoni tie that he immediately put on in place of the one he had been wearing. He was quick to credit his young crew for all Brutto’s recent success, pointing out Lily, a 19-year-old waiter now running her own section of the restaurant with the elan of a seasoned veteran; and Filippo, a part-time waiter who alternated studying for his politics degree with stints in front of house, adding observations about what real Tuscan food looks like (“It’s not a real bistecca if it’s under a kilogram”). The buildup to Christmas was well under way; business was booming; life at Brutto was, for the first time, unambiguously buono. Norman couldn’t resist a joke, as I prepared to finish reporting for the day. “I guess,” he said, “you need more jeopardy.” * * * We did not have to wait long. As the Omicron variant took hold around the globe, the UK government announced on 8 December that it would be tightening Covid-related restrictions and recommended that everyone work from home if they could. It was a painful blow for Brutto, which relied heavily on custom from the offices and studios around it. But, when I spoke to Norman in the week before Christmas, it was more what the government wasn’t doing that was the real source of anger. “There doesn’t seem to be any joined-up thinking,” he lamented. Like many other restaurants in the UK, Brutto was on a precipice. The run-up to Christmas is traditionally the busiest time of the year for the hospitality industry: pubs host raucous team drinks; restaurants cater to team lunches or office parties. But now, customers were spooked. Things were especially bad in London, where diners were down to 57% of their 2019 volumes; bookings at Brutto were down 40% on usual levels as the threat of another lockdown lingered. Then again, a lockdown would at least have represented some clear action. What was so punishing about the current situation was the barrel was being drained without anyone in the Treasury prepared to top up the shortfall. “It’s just so frustrating that it’s neither one thing nor the other,” Norman said. “Because there’s no edict from the government to close down hospitality, there’s no support.” It felt like a return to Brutto’s early days, with a skeleton staff trying to make do, and financial disaster constantly hovering, as fixed costs – wages, rent, taxes – continued to demand attention even as takings dwindled. “It’s not just day by day, it’s hour by hour,” said Norman, as he nervously awaited another batch of lateral flows. “If one of them comes back with two lines, it’s game over.” Norman and his lieutenants agonised over the number of staff available, gaming out different scenarios. Could they just open as a bar? Serve cold food only? With a future lockdown still a possibility, could Diver really take the risk of ordering a week’s worth of supplies if they were going to end up unused? Hospitality margins are thin: a day’s ingredients cost about £3,000; Brutto’s profit from the 10 weeks since it opened were only three or four times that. The restaurant could be plunged into the red with a single ill-judged shopping spree. Bit by bit, the number of healthy staff dwindled into single figures. In a two-week span, more than three-quarters of them had contracted Covid. In the end, it was inevitable: Brutto closed its doors for Christmas on 21 December, three days earlier than planned. * * * Brutto was not alone in its suffering. Omicron had cut a swathe through pre-Christmas festivities. One of the many restaurants that closed early was the Quality Chop House, just up the road from Brutto in Clerkenwell. Its co-owners, Daniel Morgenthau and Will Lander, made the proactive but painful decision to close on 16 December. “We just had this impending sense of doom,” explained Morgenthau, citing increasing Covid cases among his staff and declining guest bookings. The closure took its toll: “I think it was three weeks that we were paying full salaries and full rent with no government support and no trade – that cost us significantly, not least because that would historically be our best period of trade of the year.” The trade body UK Hospitality would eventually estimate that the combination of fewer bookings and early closures would cost pubs, bars and restaurants an average of £10,000 each. And now it was January, a month dreaded by restaurateurs. The first month of the year is always a tough sell as customers are recovering from overeating and overspending. But it soon became clear that it had been fear of missing Christmas – rather than Omicron itself – that had been the real deterrent. Now that customers no longer had to worry about a positive test forcing them to cancel Christmas with loved ones, they began to return to the restaurants they had been so studiously avoiding. On 7 January, I paid a visit to Brutto, to find the team in good spirits once again. The first few days back had been better than expected, and another lockdown seemed less likely by the day. There were still staffing issues – Filippo was stuck in Italy, owing to the latest round of border closures – but there had been enough of the core team fit and healthy to reopen earlier that week, and enough part-timers keen for a few extra hours to fill the gap. As the restaurant slowly built towards service – a wine delivery decanted on to shelves, bread ferried over to the service station – Norman’s new puppy, Twig, nosed its way around the unfamiliar floorboards. For Diver, the Christmas break had come at an opportune time, giving him a chance to recharge. Forty minutes before lunch service, he had already put in a shift in the kitchen, but was full of energy, singing the praises of a soon-to-be-delivered pasta boiler, which would both simplify one of the kitchen’s most boring-but-important tasks and free up some much-needed space on the hob. “It constantly tops itself up,” he rhapsodised. “It’s going to be such a dream!” There was a broader optimism, too, a sense that there were finally enough spare hands to deliver the restaurant as originally envisioned. Since launch, Brutto’s menu had barely changed. The first order of business was to start mixing it up a bit, better to channel the spirit of the Tuscan restaurants that inspired the place. “The menu was going to be seasonal, changing,” Diver said. “That was always the idea, but over the last few months there’s been no time to think.” At last, he had the time – and the staff – to do it. He walked back downstairs to show two new trainees the basics, preparing them for life at Brutto. Diver told me that the previous day was the first time they had actually been prepared for dinner service before it started. By 5.30, they were ready, and a new and uncertain peace had descended. “People were asking me what to do,” Diver said. “And I was like: just wait for the customers.” • Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread, listen to our podcasts here and sign up to the long read weekly email here.Scientists at Harvard University have engineered an artificial fish whose flapping tail is powered by cells from a human heart, a groundbreaking project that has ignited hopes for the future of cardiac research. The team of scientists at Harvard, in collaboration with Emory University, built the “biohybrid fish” using paper, plastic, gelatin and two strips of living heart muscle cells, the contractions of which pulled the fish’s tail from side to side and allowed it to swim. The research team published its findings in the journal Science last week, and video released by Harvard School of Engineering and Applied Sciences (Seas) on Twitter shows a small robotic fish flapping its tail and moving about for about 20 seconds. The study marks a hopeful step in the advancement of heart treatments such as pacemakers. “The benefit of this fish project is that we are still trying to master the craft of using live cells as an engineering substrate,” Kit Parker, one of the authors of the study, told the Guardian on Monday. “The heart is extremely complex and it’s not enough to mimic the anatomy,” added Parker, a Seas professor. “One must recreate the biophysics in order to have the robust behavior required of building engineered hearts for children born with malformed hearts.” Earlier, Parker had told NPR that at first scientists were not sure how long the school of artificial fish would function but they swam for more than 100 days. Parker told the Guardian that the team was pleasantly surprised. “By replicating the biophysics of the heart into this fish, we were activating various processes within these cells that are designed to help them sustain themselves,” he said. “We are hoping that in our next endeavor, we will keep these cells and these tissues alive much longer than even four and a half months.” The muscle cells in the experiment reportedly grew stronger with exercise, a positive indication that this could be implemented in treating heart failures. Parker was also previously part of a Harvard team that in 2016 built a small robotic stingray also powered by heart cells from a rat that contracted when exposed to light. Despite the latest extraordinary development, Parker says a lot more work needs to be done. “We learned what we needed to learn, we have adapted the inventions to our current efforts to understand pediatric disease,” he said, “and now we are moving on to try to build a more complex model of a three-dimensional marine organism using human cardiac cells and human cardiac biophysics.”Chevonne Baker does this job because she is good at it, because she cares. She gets a sense of pride when her clients brighten up as she walks into the room. She credits her success as a care worker to her brisk efficiency, tempered with empathy. When a client is difficult, Baker keeps her cool, sometimes stepping outside the room for a few moments to compose herself. She is a master of small talk, keeping up a steady stream of cheerful banalities as she opens curtains, dusts and stacks crockery and attends to personal care. She understands that she may be the only person her elderly clients see all day, so she makes an effort to draw them into conversation. She understands that if they are rude it is because they have no one else at whom they can vent their frustration. She understands that a care worker’s job is about more than personal care. She is a confidante, a support network, a healthcare professional and a companion. Baker is 23 and has been working for the at-home care provider Right at Home in Basingstoke for two and a half years. With her university degree – Baker studied performing arts at the University of Winchester – she could probably earn more in a different sector. She makes between £11 and £12 an hour, depending on whether she is working weekends, and is reimbursed for her mileage. (Relative to other at-home care providers, Right at Home’s pay is generous. Many firms pay only the minimum wage.) Her responsibilities vary. Sometimes she washes and dresses her clients. She may give them their medication and monitor their mood. Other times she prepares meals, or does housework, or takes them to social clubs, or simply sits with them and talks. She makes tea, endless cups of it – so many that she loses count each day. Baker fell into care work. She had planned to become a primary school teacher, but halfway through her final year of university she realised that she had had enough of academia. She moved to Basingstoke with a group of three friends and found a job working in a cafe, but it went bust. “I’ll be honest,” she says. “I really needed money. I thought: ‘I’ll do anything for now.’” A friend suggested care work. She didn’t expect to like it. “And then I came out of my first week and realised I couldn’t stop smiling,” she says. “So I thought I’d stay for a bit longer – and I never left.” Her parents weren’t thrilled; they thought she could do better. “I spent months convincing them I do actually like my job,” she says. Baker finds the perception that care work is low-skilled frustrating. “It takes a certain kind of person to be able to have the level of compassion, but also the technical skills,” she says. “We have to do a lot of manual handling and you want to make sure you do it safely. We use hoists and we give people medication.” Then there is the emotional labour: no matter how Baker feels, she has to control her emotions to project an attitude of cheery professionalism. “About a year and a half ago, I went through a period when I was not a happy bunny,” she says. “I would wake up feeling really sad every morning and cry in the car. But when I pulled up outside the client’s house, I would put a smile on my face, no matter how fake it might be. And just by going in and saying good morning, I would forget I was upset. Because the client doesn’t deserve to know I am upset. They need to know that I am there for them.” When she was driving between appointments, she let the tears flow freely again. As care workers go, Baker is the best. You would trust her with your mother. But this has not been an easy winter for Britain’s beleaguered social care sector. Baker has required all her wit to navigate the past few months. Late November. The care sector is almost permanently short-staffed, with little capacity in the system for people to be off sick, and this year is no exception. People are coming down with coughs and sniffles and, given the Covid risk, having to self‑isolate as they await PCR results. Almost everyone, Baker included, is being asked to cover extra shifts by their managers. Because Right at Home struggles to recruit care workers, it has to turn away new clients often. An office manager tells Baker that they got a call about a client who was taken into hospital. A condition of her discharge was that she got an extra visit in the evenings, but they didn’t have the care workers to meet this demand and provide continuity of care, meaning the woman had to be moved to a different care company. Right at Home recently increased its pay by 7% to help recruit and retain staff. This is a nationwide problem. Providers simply aren’t able to get the staff they need. A November 2021 survey of providers by the Homecare Association found that 85% said recruitment was “the hardest it had ever been”, while 45% of providers were unable to take on new work. Like many providers, Right at Home has lost EU workers who returned to mainland Europe after Brexit. To make matters worse, demand for their services has never been higher. “Across the board, everyone has seen an increase in demand,” says Dr Jane Townson, the chief executive of the Homecare Association. Since 2020, the number of hours of home care purchased by public bodies has increased by 11%. This is because more older and disabled people are living longer, but also due to the pandemic: because of the NHS backlog, some people with chronic conditions deteriorated as they were waiting for hospital care. “Family members have been propping everyone up, but they are at their wits’ end,” says Townson. When people aren’t able to access the social care they need in the community, they are more likely to “block” hospital beds. “When I was on the board of an NHS trust, 80% of our inpatients were over the age of 80,” says Townson. “When you can’t discharge people out of the back door into social care, you end up with ambulances stacking up at the front door.” In desperation, healthcare bosses in Cornwall have been offering families £1,200 cash grants to take elderly relatives out of hospital to free up bed space. Other NHS trusts are discharging people into so-called “care hotels”, to be looked after by live-in carers. Baker visits one of her regular clients, a woman in her mid-80s. Dora is stylish and kind. She jokes that she doesn’t have the waistline she used to. Normally, Baker would take Dora to a social club at a nearby church, but this week she refuses to go. Dora says it is because she is waiting for a phone call, but Baker suspects that she is worried about Covid. “It’s been hard work – not just with her, but with several other clients – to actually get them out of the house, even now the restrictions have eased,” says Baker. “They’ve had a year of being told not to go out because they’re vulnerable, and now they’re being told that it’s actually OK and they won’t get ill.” Not only is Dora unwilling to go out to her social club, but she doesn’t want her family to come to visit her. “She’s so worried about the virus,” Baker says. She insisted on spending Christmas 2020 alone. “It’s for a selfless reason,” Baker says. “She’s worried about giving them the virus. She doesn’t want to cause any risk at all.” Baker bids goodbye to another of her clients, a woman in her 90s who is being moved into a care home. “She told me that I was a literal angel,” Baker says. “I said: ‘You go to church a lot. Are you in touch with the big guy? Is there something I need to know?’” The client cries as she says goodbye. Baker struggles to stay composed. “I form connections with clients really quickly,” she says. The client tells her what a difference she has made to her life. Baker will probably never see her again. Later in November. The office has been getting phone calls, requesting end-of-life care packages, but it is unable to help: they don’t have the staff. End-of-life services are the most labour-intensive they provide, usually requiring two carers, who spend close to 24 hours a day at the client’s bedside. Baker’s first ever end-of-life call was terrifying. The client was a woman in her 90s who had declined sharply in the space of 24 hours before plateauing again. Although Baker was paired with a more experienced carer, she was frightened that she would get something wrong. Now she doesn’t mind the end-of-life calls. If a doctor has determined one of her clients will soon die, Baker always wants to care for them if she can. Last autumn, when England was deep in its second national lockdown, Baker attended to Harry, who was more than 100. “He was lovely,” she says. “He always wanted to know if I was married.” Harry’s wife, Jill, was in hospital at the time. A relative was staying with them, but they would go out for breaks and leave their dog. Baker would sit with Harry, cuddling the dog. He would be asleep almost all of the time, but she would still talk to him, tell him about her day. “You don’t know if they can hear you, but sometimes knowing you are there can make them feel better,” she says. Towards the end, Harry would ask Baker if he was dying and tell her that he wanted to die. She would tell him that he was getting comfortable. When he died, in January 2021, Baker was relieved. “It sounds horrible to say this, but you just want them to be at peace,” she says. “Especially if they’re in pain.” Early December. Baker has been off sick with a chest infection. Although she is on a zero-hours contract, she got sick pay, which she is grateful for. She spent most of her time at home feeling guilty that she wasn’t working. “There were all these messages on the work chat: ‘Can you cover this shift?’ And I wanted to, but I couldn’t.” She kept reading the clients’ notes on the system, to see how they were doing – her boyfriend would tell her off and take the phone out of her hand. “When you don’t see clients, you worry about them,” she says. Now she is back – and working an extra 12 hours a week to make up for staffing shortages. “When new year comes, everything will calm down,” she says, hopefully. Baker has the boundless energy of a children’s TV presenter, but even she is flagging. Her low mood is compounded by the fact that one of her former clients, Jane, has just died. She had been living in a care home. They used to sing I Could Have Danced All Night, from the musical My Fair Lady, together. “That was our song,” she says. Jane was a joy to care for: vivacious and straight-talking. She would tell Baker she needed to get her roots done and chastised her for laying out outfits with clashing colours. But the lockdown hit Jane hard. She missed her daughter, who was unable to visit due to the restrictions. Baker says: “When she was able to visit, you’d never seen joy like it.” Baker didn’t get the chance to say goodbye to Jane: she was put into the care home at short notice. Mid-December. Baker is back at Dora’s house. One of her relatives recently died and the funeral is being livestreamed. They sit side by side and watch it, holding hands. Dora sings along to the hymn, which Baker finds so unexpectedly touching that it moves her to tears. Afterwards, they watch Catchphrase. Dora would have attended the funeral, but she is anxious about the Covid risk. Baker is also concerned. Omicron cases are rising and there is talk of another lockdown. “Isolation hit our clients really hard,” she says. “The ones with Alzheimer’s couldn’t understand why their families couldn’t visit. You’d explain it to them, but they wouldn’t remember. You’d have to be three different people to them at once: a care worker, a housekeeper and as close to a family member as possible, so they didn’t feel lonely.” Christmas Eve. Omicron is surging across the country, with 102,729 cases reported in England alone that day. Lateral flow tests seem to be unavailable to the general public. There are long queues at PCR testing centres. Baker works a 12-hour shift, from 7am to 7pm. She dresses in a sequined Christmas jumper featuring a dog wearing antlers. Her first client is a woman in her mid-80s who lives alone. The woman is distressed. Her relatives were meant to come to visit, but they can’t, because they have just tested positive for Covid. The woman tries to put on a brave face and tells Baker that it will be nice to have a quiet Christmas. “It breaks my heart,” she says. “I just wanted to scoop her up and bring her with me, as unfeasible as that is. I felt horrific leaving her.” Her second visit is to Jill. This will be her first Christmas without Harry. Baker talks to Jill while she showers, to take away the awkwardness, before rolling on her compression stockings and bringing her tea and toast. The walls of her one-bedroom flat in an assisted‑living facility are covered in black‑and-white photos of her and Harry on their wedding day. There is a framed letter from the Queen to commemorate their diamond anniversary. Baker runs home for a slice of pizza at lunch. She rarely eats lunch out; she can’t afford it on a care worker’s wage. If she must pick up something in between clients, it is a Tesco meal deal, which she eats in her car. Her phone pings constantly with messages from her family about Christmas plans. Baker will work Christmas morning and then drive to her parents’ house in Portsmouth for lunch. Care workers’ clients need them all year round, even on Christmas Day. “It only hits you when you stop,” she says. “Whenever I go to visit my family, I just sleep.” In the first week of January, four members of Baker’s team are off with Covid. Baker gets her booster, but she has a bad reaction. She is hot and can’t move her arm. She calls the office, but they tell her they can’t afford to be another care worker down, as they are so short-staffed. Baker pushes through, surviving on a few bites of food and cups of tea, then gets home and collapses into bed. “It was OK,” she insists, in a tone that suggests it was not. This is characteristic of Baker, who is a relentlessly sunny presence and fond of an archaic turn of phrase, referring to her favourite clients as “crackers” and telling them she will be back in a “tickety-boo”. Her sugary-sweet manner seldom slips; if it does, it is only for a second. (“I said to my boyfriend the other day: ‘I feel like an old lady. All I do is talk about the weather,’” she says.) When pressed, Baker will reluctantly suggest things that could make her life better. “It sounds really superficial, but I want a house and a family, and I don’t think I can do that on a job with an hourly wage,” she says, apologetically. More money would be helpful for lots of reasons, of course. When her car failed its MOT in 2019, her dad had to loan her £2,000 to buy a replacement. She can’t afford to go on foreign holidays and seldom takes time off; because she accrues holiday pay while working, it is too tempting to take the money instead of having a break. In her two and a half years of care work, her longest break has been a six-day camping trip in the UK. It is for this reason that she sometimes considers leaving for a better-paid job. Nursing would be the obvious choice: the care sector routinely loses staff to the NHS. “Because nursing is a regulated profession that requires qualifications, they are able to negotiate for higher pay,” says Prof Adam Gordon, an expert in the care of older people at the University of Nottingham. “There are no specific qualifications required to be a care worker. Historically, they have not unionised and haven’t been able to negotiate better pay.” Another factor, he says, is the makeup of the workforce. “It’s a predominantly female sector that’s been dependent on migrant labour. This type of work is undervalued in our society.” Because the domiciliary care sector is run on low margins, it is difficult for employers to increase pay and maintain profitability. “Conditions in the market are tempered by what local authorities are willing to pay,” explains Gordon. According to the market intelligence firm LaingBuisson, councils typically buy about 70% of home care hours from private providers. These rates are non‑negotiable and set by councils under considerable financial pressure, due to a decade of austerity – amounting to a real-world cut of about 50% to English local authority funding between 2010 and 2017. English councils pay an average of £18.54 an hour for social care. The minimum needed to comply with minimum wage laws and other associated costs is £21.43 an hour, meaning that many providers are making a loss when providing state-funded home care. “This is why employers struggle to increase wages,” says Townson at the Homecare Association. “Many would really love to do that. It’s actually no fun having your workforce leave every five minutes.” Turnover in the sector is chronically high, which creates a negative cycle: new care workers join, become overworked due to staff shortages, then leave almost immediately. “People tend to leave in the first month,” Baker says. “They try it, decide it’s not for them and move on.” Any leavers the NHS doesn’t vacuum up go to work in retail or hospitality, which offers similar pay without the stress and unsociable hours. “When I speak to people who run these agencies, the biggest threat to their employment is an Amazon opening down the road,” says Gordon. “Amazon offers golden handshake incentives of thousands of pounds. Domiciliary care can’t compete with that.” Of course, one way to stop care workers jumping ship would be to increase funding for the sector. But this is impossible without a significant investment from national governments. “Social care is the poor relative of the health service in the UK,” says Gordon. In September 2021, the UK government announced plans to raise the rate of national insurance by 1.25 percentage points, to raise an additional £12bn a year for health and social care. However, only £1.8bn a year of this will go to social care. The Health Foundation estimates that additional funding of between £3bn and £5bn a year is needed simply to stabilise the social care system over the coming years, without increasing pay or meeting future demand. To build resilience into the system and pay care workers a higher wage, £7bn to £9bn a year would be necessary. “That sounds like a big number to you or me,” says Townson. “But to put that into context, the government has spent at least £10bn on Covid [PPE] contracts. It is amazing how they can find the money when they want to.” The problems in the social care sector will only get worse, as our ageing population lives longer due to advances in medical science. “There will be more and more people needing complex care,” says Gordon. “We’re already struggling to recruit the staff we need.” But Baker isn’t planning to jump ship, at least for now. “Nursing seems more stressful and you spend less time with people,” she says. “And there’s more regulation.” She hasn’t ruled out teaching, but the training is expensive and time-consuming. Baker thinks she will stay in the care sector, but try to move into the office, in a salaried position. “I’d miss my clients, though,” she says. *** Baker bustles into Jill’s house. It is the second week of January and she has been up since 6am, –she had to de-ice the car because it is so cold. “Minus two when I got up this morning,” she bellows. (She has to project her voice, as most of her clients are hard of hearing.) They talk about the news: the lawsuit against Prince Andrew, mostly. Older people love to talk about the royal family. Baker finds it amusing when they say they feel sorry for the Queen, as if they know her personally. Her next visit is with Angie, who can be difficult, says Baker, euphemistically. Angie has dementia. “The last time I was there, she told me to go away. That is the polite way of putting it.” Angie would refuse care and tell Baker that she was an annoying child. Baker would sometimes have to leave the room to compose herself. “I don’t like being shouted at,” she says. “I will just cry.” The office placed a more experienced care worker into the call, to assist – such visits are called “double-ups” – and this helped to calm the situation. Angie’s husband, Jake, answers the door. He is a slim man, dressed neatly in a grey wool jumper. He is devoted to his wife. Angie’s care costs are considerable and the family is meeting them personally, out of her pension; she isn’t eligible for local authority support. The family didn’t want external help, but Angie had a few falls and they realised they had no choice. Even now, Jake rarely leaves her side for more than a few minutes. Sometimes he walks around the block for 30 minutes, when she is being washed by the evening carers. “She has been good to me,” he says, stroking Angie’s face lovingly. “Now it’s my turn to be good to her.” Baker washes and dresses Angie, apologising that her hands are cold. Later, she visits Tom, a 95-year-old second world war veteran who lives with his stepson. Tom is funny, independent and needs very little support. He cycles on his stationary exercise bike every day. Baker makes him lunch and they play rummy in the conservatory. He always insists on making her a cup of tea. Today, they talk about the allegations that Boris Johnson broke the lockdown rules. “I’m guilty, because I voted for him,” says Tom. They talk about the royal family. Tom once saw the Queen Mother stepping out of a Rolls-Royce in Brighton, when he was a child. He went home and told his mother, but she didn’t believe him. These are the moments when Baker truly loves her job. “He is the sweetest man,” she says. “You never see him upset. The whole team loves him. Just seeing him brightens your day.” Sometimes Tom plays Baker the piano. Sometimes they talk about the past. Tom served in the navy. He was on the first ship into Singapore after the atomic bombs. He saw the Australian prisoners of war, who had been held in the notorious Changi jail, lined up along the quay. “Sorry souls,” he says. At times like this, Baker feels that she has her hand in the cooling bathwater of the past. “I get to live through history with them,” she says. Baker knows that it is a privilege to do this job. She wishes that other people would see it the same way. Some names and identifying details have been changedIf you happen to imagine that there’s not much left to discover of Britain’s stone age, or that its relics consist of hard-to-love postholes and scraps of bones, then you need to find your way to Orkney, that scatter of islands off Scotland’s north-east coast. On the archipelago’s Mainland, out towards the windswept west coast with its wave-battered cliffs, you will come to the Ness of Brodgar, an isthmus separating a pair of sparkling lochs, one of saltwater and one of freshwater. Just before the way narrows you’ll see the Stones of Stenness rising up before you. This ancient stone circle’s monoliths were once more numerous, but they remain elegant and imposing. Like a gateway into a liminal world of theatricality and magic, they lead the eye to another, even larger neolithic monument beyond the isthmus, elevated in the landscape as if on a stage. This is the Ring of Brodgar, its sharply individuated stones like giant dancers arrested mid-step – as local legend, indeed, has it. It’s between these two stone circles that archaeologist Nick Card and his team are excavating a huge settlement of neolithic stone buildings. The earliest date from about 3300BC, their walls and hearths crisply intact, their pots and stone tools in remarkable profusion, the whole bounded by six-metre-wide monumental walls. “You could continue for several lifetimes and not get to the bottom of it,” says the neatly white-bearded, laconic Card as we gaze out over the site, presently covered with tarpaulin to protect it from the winter storms. “Every year it never fails to produce something that astounds us.” After nearly two decades of digging, they have excavated only about 10% of its area, and about 5% of its volume. It goes deep: buildings are stacked on the ruins of older ones; the place was in use for 1,000 years. When summer comes, they’ll dig again. When the coverings come off each July, says Card’s colleague, Anne Mitchell, “down you go and you’re among the ghosts of the past”. Many of the most intriguing finds from the Ness of Brodgar will be on show at the British Museum this month in a new exhibition, the World of Stonehenge, a survey of northern-European prehistory from the era of the hunter-gatherers to the early bronze age, using the long, complex history of Britain’s most celebrated neolithic monument as the story’s spine. The landscape around the ness reminds me of the barrow-studded downs around Stonehenge, in fact – both have the feel of a vast stage, ready to be used for ritual or performance. The earliest buildings here are older than Stonehenge, though. “For neolithic stone architecture, Orkney blows everywhere else out of the water,” says Neil Wilkin, curator of the British Museum show. Elsewhere in Europe – including the settlement at Durrington Walls in Wiltshire, now thought to be where the builders of Stonehenge lived – wood was the favoured construction material for neolithic domestic buildings. But in Orkney the inhabitants also built their houses from stone. (There were perhaps many wooden structures too, but stone architecture around here is so profuse that the search for postholes feels less urgent; there are few trees on Orkney now, but maybe more then, as well as a plentiful supply of driftwood.) It means the whole archipelago is dotted not just with incredibly well preserved neolithic tombs, neatly built out of the local flagstone, but also villages – construction of a scale and quality that would not be repeated until well into the medieval era, 4,000 years later. These include the famous Skara Brae, a coastal settlement revealed when a storm whipped away the great blanket of sand that had hidden it until 1850. But there are other, more ghostly places, too, like the unexcavated village on the eroding coastline of Sanday that Mark Edmonds, local resident and York University archaeology professor emeritus, describes at the start of his book, Orcadia. Orkney was not peripheral or cut off in the stone age; its surrounding waters were not barriers but pathways, to Ireland, to mainland Britain, and beyond. Neolithic axes made of jadeite, quarried in the Italian Alps, have been found in Scotland: the most beautiful example, on loan from the National Museum of Scotland, will be in the World of Stonehenge show. “It’s so simple and so exquisite,” says the exhibition’s assistant curator, Jennifer Wexler, “with a kind of modernist feel to it. And it just sparkles in the light.” Aesthetics were important in this world. The characteristic pottery – “grooved ware” – used by the builders of Stonehenge was first made in Orkney, it is thought. Card and his team have found 100,000 sherds of it so far. Mitchell explains how they tease it out of the middens (ancient refuse heaps) using a cake slice and an aluminium sheet salvaged from an old helicopter. A lot of these sherds are in boxes stacked floor-to-ceiling in their HQ, a bungalow on the site bursting with material. Some of the pottery is rather crumbly – like “digestive biscuits”, says ceramics expert Roy Towers, one of the volunteers on this donations-funded dig. Jan Blatchford, another highly skilled volunteer, shows me how reflectance transformation imaging – a digital photography technique using multiple camera angles – can expose details barely visible to the naked eye. Here is the mark where a plaited mat made its imprint on the base of one newly made, unfired pot; here are the whorls of the maker’s thumbprint on another, bringing the dizzyingly intimate sense of a human hand shaping the vessel 5,000 years ago. It was out of the window of this little house that, washing vegetables at her sink one day in 2003, the former owner saw a plough stutter as a piece of masonry got lodged between its blades. It was worked, neolithic stone. The farmer contacted the local archaeologists. “We’d all been driving past the place for years assuming it was a natural ridge,” says Edmonds – rather than ancient ruins, hiding in plain sight. The immense settlement is an ongoing revelation – and yet, perhaps, not entirely surprising. The islands are teeming with neolithic remains. Edmonds tells me he once interviewed Orcadian families, asking them about the ancient stone axes and other finds they have on their mantelpieces, rich with stories of discovery by this or that great-grandparent. Some of these neolithic finds, like the intricately carved stone balls that turn up here and elsewhere, or the incredible newly discovered Burton Agnes and Folkton “drums”, little stone cylinders found buried with children in North Yorkshire, have no obvious practical purpose, and are decorated with designs that are obscure to our eyes, dense with irrecoverable significance. The same goes for the ancient “cup and ring” marks that exist on naturally occurring outcrops in the British landscape, in great quantity in places like Kilmartin Glen in Argyll. “I like the idea that each is a prayer or a mantra … I think the meaning may be in the making,” muses Wilkin of the patterns. The buildings of the Ness of Brodgar are also decorated and inscribed, thickly but often subtly, with patterns – lozenges, cross-hatching, sometimes a kind of butterfly shape. At times the marks can be hard to make out. “One building had been exposed for several years and it wasn’t until the sun hit it in a particular way that we began to see it,” Card says. “We find more in August than July, in the raking light,” adds Mitchell. These patterns, these subtle strokes in the stone, have their echoes throughout the British Museum exhibition. Wilkin tells me he wanted to tell a story of influence and connection, of ideas travelling beyond the horizon, of people on the move. That starts with those who trudged across Doggerland when Britain’s east coast was still connected to continental Europe, and continues with those who brought farming to Britain from across the Channel about 6,000 years ago, to the “Beaker people” who arrived from around 2500BC, all but replacing them. The story is almost unimaginably long, told through artefacts from the haunting headdress fashioned by hunter-gatherers from deer antlers 11,000 years ago in Star Carr, Yorkshire, all the way to the outrageously strange conical hats fashioned from gold in France and Germany up to 8,000 years later. Not to mention the spellbinding teacup-size vessel, shaped from a single lump of amber about 1750BC, that’s a treasure of the Hove Museum and ought to be better known, and what I can’t help thinking of as “the amber spyglass” – a disk of translucent amber set in bronze, made in Denmark around 1200BC, that might once, possibly, have been use to “catch” the sun. Why the peoples of Orkney, and Wiltshire, and many other places in Britain, built vast monuments of stone 5,000 years ago, is a question that can never be definitively answered – and when we try, we almost certainly say more about ourselves than the real intentions of our distant ancestors. When I ask Edmonds what he thinks – we are standing in the little reconstructed neolithic house at Skara Brae at the time, sheltering from a hailstorm with a flask of coffee – he offers one word, albeit with a question mark: “Hubris?” Humans, he argues, seem to build remarkable monuments when they are either establishing power – or feeling under threat or pressure. Maybe these far distant people, their lives so alien and so unreachable, would find something to recognise in us, after all. • This article was amended on 16 February 2022. The time difference between the deer antler headdress and the gold conical hats is up to 8,000 years based on the date range of the discoveries, not 10,000 as stated in an earlier version. The World of Stonehenge is at the British Museum, London, 17 February to 17 July. For information about the neolithic remains of Orkney, visit orkney.com.Sandwiched between two huge and populous nations: China to the north and India to the south, the landlocked Kingdom of Bhutan is crossed on its northern edge by the vast Himalayan mountain range. Indeed, its highest point, Gangkhar Puensum, is the highest unclimbed mountain in the world, at 7,570 metres (almost 25,000ft) above sea level. As a result of the country’s topography, where the altitude rises gradually from south to north, Bhutan has three distinct climate zones. In the southern lowlands, near the border with India, the climate is subtropical, with mild winters and temperatures rarely dropping into single figures and very hot summers, peaking from April through to September at about 30C to 32C. In the hilly centre of the country, winters can be cold, while summers are warm and wet, especially during the summer monsoon; though some sheltered valleys escape the worst of the rains. Finally, at locations above 2,000 metres (6,500ft), such as the country’s largest city and capital, Thimphu, mean temperatures are about 5C in January, but can drop below freezing; but then rise to the low 20Cs in the summer months. Winters can bring snowfalls, while annual rainfall is about 1,400mm (55in) – again, because of the heavy rainfall during the summer monsoon. In the mountainous north, snow lies all year round on the highest peaks, which are often shrouded in layers of cloud.Traces 9pm, Alibi The watchable Scottish forensics drama returns for a second season (back on Alibi, after its short transfer to the BBC during the pandemic) and things kick off with a literal bang: the women of the Scottish Institute of Forensic Science and Anatomy get stuck in to finding out who’s behind a Dundee bombing. Meanwhile, Daniel (Martin Compston) prepares for his dad’s murder trial, but is also celebrating some good news (though others think it’s terrible). Just watch out for the clunky, often cringeworthy dialogue. Hollie Richardson This Is Going to Hurt 9pm, BBC One Not a single second is wasted in this comedy-drama about the reality of being an NHS doctor. Tonight’s highlights: an excruciating dinner party with a friend and his pregnant fiance (“We’re going to ‘play it safe’ and go private,” she announces); the rediscovery of a “misplaced” Kinder Surprise egg; and a flurry of razor-sharp quips to camera from Ben Whishaw. HR The Gilded Age 9pm, Sky Atlantic “I haven’t been thrilled since 1865.” Christine Baranski is still in fine, sharp-tongued form here. Episode four picks up in the aftermath of the tragedy – will Mr Russell suffer any moral consequences? He is too busy dealing with an indecent proposal (the raunch factor goes up a notch). Meanwhile, Marian is thinking about a future with Mr Raikes without her aunts’ approval. HR The Devil’s Advocate 9pm, Sky Documentaries Nice man, Giovanni di Stefano … In case we haven’t had enough of appalling liars and frauds recently, this sprawling three-parter interrogates the bizarre life of the would-be movie mogul and convicted conman who claims to have acted as criminal defence lawyer for the likes of Harold Shipman and Ian Brady (albeit without any formal legal qualifications). Ali Catterall Cheaters 9.45pm, BBC One The perfectly paced storytelling of this comedy about two neighbours’ infidelity is so satisfying it’s hard not to wish that all sitcoms adopted its 10-minute-long format. In tonight’s trio of instalments, Fola and Josh continue to pack sex-based laughs into their ever more messily intertwined lives. Alexi Duggins Lazy Susan 10.45pm, BBC Three Celeste Dring and Freya Parker’s sketch show features them as Teesside teen boys and the leads in a mid-century Hollywood musical, as well as in more conventional skits set in restaurants and bars. Tonight: the very real danger of laughing one’s ass off. Jack Seale Today’s live sport Winter Olympics 2022 Men’s slalom, 12.55am, BBC One. The British skier Dave Ryding goes for gold.The 2021 Australian of the Year, Grace Tame, has once again been dragged into the media cycle, this time for *checks notes* sitting in close proximity to a bong eight years ago. Let’s break down what actually happened, and if this is really a big deal. What happened? Well, the news site Daily Mail Australia on Monday unearthed a photo that appears to imply that when Tame – a dedicated advocate for sexual assault education and a survivor herself – was 19, she hung out with people who possibly smoked weed and may even have partaken herself. The Instagram photo – which, in true 2014 style, has a heavy sepia filter over it – shows a young Tame sitting on a couch with a large weed smoking device, next to a man who appears to be rolling a cigarette with what may or may not be (whispers) marijuana. Some real buzzkills seemed to have spent their time scrolling back far enough in Tame’s Instagram feed, finding the photos and commenting: “Australian of the year?” The photo was deleted shortly afterwards, but not before the Daily Mail grabbed a screenshot and published an article. Did anyone care? It really doesn’t seem like it, no. Besides the original commenters quoted in the article, and the editorial team at the Daily Mail who felt this was newsworthy to begin with, the reception to the photo has been surprisingly un-boomers-ish. In fact, dozens of people, including some in public office, have come to Tame’s defence by exposing their own teenage run-ins with the wacky-tobaccy. Despite the Liberal party’s previous stance on drug testing welfare recipients, federal MP Dave Sharma chimed in, stating he felt “this stuff isn’t remotely in the public interest”, and that he was sure there was a “photo of [him] like that”. The deputy mayor of Port Phillip, Tim Baxter, proclaimed himself to be a former bong user. Others, including former prime minister Malcolm Turnbull’s son, Alex Turnbull, were quick to point out that they knew people currently in politics who had dabbled with much more serious substances; understandably, they weren’t as forthcoming with specific names. And of course, some showed their solidarity in a less political and more practical way. How has Grace Tame reacted? Despite deleting the photograph at first, Tame appears to have taken Bong-gate in her stride, using the bizarre situation as an opportunity to poke fun at Scott Morrison for allegedly soiling himself at an Engadine McDonald’s restaurant after the 1997 NRL grand final. (I’m legally obliged to remind you there is no actual evidence to back up this longstanding urban legend sparked by a joke tweet in 2018). “But did she shit herself at Maccas after the ‘97 NRL GF?” one Twitter user asked. “Quite possibly, I would’ve been 2 years old. I shit myself a lot back then,” Tame replied. She later suggested she was actually playing a “cover of April Sun in Cuba. On the oboe,” referencing the prime minister’s widely mocked ukulele rendition on 60 Minutes on Sunday night. So how does Australia feel about weed? If this whole ordeal shows us anything, it’s that Australian society doesn’t really view cannabis use as a moral crime any more. The Daily Mail has seemingly backpedalled on its bong coverage, publishing articles showing the glowing response Tame received on social media. Even the regular conservative think pieces on the photo have been rather reserved. According to data from the Australian Institute of Health and Welfare, 36% of Australians aged 14 and over had used cannabis in their lifetime, 11.6% in the last year. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning And the latest National Drug Strategy Household Survey showed that 41.1% of respondents supported the legalisation of cannabis for personal use in 2019 – a significant rise from 25.5% in 2013, though health experts are wary, warning of the potential risks associated with cannabis use. Cannabis-related arrests have been on the rise, growing by 30% in the last decade according to the Australian Crime Commission’s 2019-2020 report. In the 2019-20 financial year, Australian police made 76,669 weed-related arrests, the third-highest number on record. But with the photo prompting many high-profile figures to publicly engage in discussions about the normality of cannabis use in Australian life, some have suggested this could be the beginning of a larger conversation.Top story: ‘Invasion could begin at any time’ Hello, Tuesday has arrived as promised, and here is a briefing by way of accompaniment. My name is Warren Murray – welcome along. Boris Johnson and Joe Biden believe there remains “a crucial window for diplomacy and for Russia to step back from its threats towards Ukraine” after a 40-minute call between the two leaders overnight. Russia is sending thousands more troops to its border with Ukraine in a sign that Vladimir Putin could extend the crisis for weeks, as Johnson warned the situation had become “very, very dangerous”. The US is moving its remaining embassy staff in Ukraine from the capital, Kyiv, to the city of Lviv, further west. A White House spokeswoman said: “We are in the window when an invasion could begin at any time.” The British ambassador has remained in Kyiv, along with a core team. Join us for live coverage of the crisis. A video address from the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, said: “We are told that February 16 will be the day of attack.” In another message he said: “They are trying to frighten us by yet again naming a date for the start of military action … We strive for peace and want to solve all issues exclusively through negotiations.” Putin’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, said in a meeting with Putin staged for the cameras: “It seems to me that our possibilities [for negotiation] are far from being exhausted. They certainly should not continue indefinitely. But at this stage I would suggest that they continue and be intensified,” to which Putin assented. At the same time, a senior Russian diplomat told the Guardian that Russia would be within its rights to “counterattack” against a Ukrainian attack on the population in “Donbas or wherever”. Donbas is the region of eastern Ukraine where Russia has armed and funded an insurgency since 2014, and where the Kremlin has handed out hundreds of thousands of Russian passports. US officials have said they believe Russia is preparing a “false flag” incident that could be used as a pretext for an intervention. Western diplomatic efforts have continued. The German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, is due to meet Putin in Moscow today while Johnson is to chair a Cobra emergency meeting. * * * PM answers to Met – Boris Johnson is expected to deny wrongdoing to the police over partygate, arguing his presence at Downing Street gatherings in lockdown was part of the working day. The prime minister has until Friday to answer a questionnaire that may lead to a fixed penalty notice. No 10 said his response to the Metropolitan police would remain private. Scotland Yard will reportedly reveal the number of people fined at each partygate event that is being investigated and explain why the decision was taken, civil servants have been told. Speaking on a visit in Scotland, Johnson said he would have “a lot more in due course” to say on the partygate row once the police investigation was concluded, at which point the full investigation by Sue Gray is expected to be published. Any penalty awarded by the police has the potential to spark fresh expressions of no confidence in Johnson from Tory MPs. * * * Canada emergency – Justin Trudeau has invoked an emergency law giving his Canadian government sweeping, month-long powers to fight a growing number of “illegal and dangerous” blockades. The Royal Canadian Mounted Police in Alberta announced they had seized a truck full of firearms at a blockade near the US border. The deputy prime minister, Chrystia Freeland, said the Act would bar the use of crowdfunding websites for illegal activities and punish companies whose trucks were being used in the protests. It comes after a hack of the crowdfunding site GiveSendGo revealed substantial financial support from outside Canada, which Freeland called an attack on democracy. Both the city of Ottawa and the province of Ontario had already declared states of emergency before Trudeau invoked the Emergencies Act. * * * More help for abuse victims – Domestic abuse survivors would find it easier to move away from perpetrators under proposals unveiled by ministers. The plans, which are being put out to consultation, would scrap the so-called local connection qualification for social housing, which potentially forces victims to remain in the same community as their abuser. Making it easier for victims to remove perpetrators from joint tenancies will also be considered. Further funding for councils will help ensure safe accommodation spaces such as refuges and shelters that can provide healthcare, social workers and benefits, interpreters, immigration advice, drug or alcohol support and other specialist services. * * * ‘Unfortunate editorialising’ – A judge has thrown out Sarah Palin’s lawsuit accusing the New York Times of defaming her by incorrectly linking her to a mass murder. But unusually, the jury has not been told of the judge’s decision and is continuing its deliberations. The judge said he expected Palin to appeal, and the appeals court “would greatly benefit from knowing how the jury would decide it”. Palin, the 2008 Republican vice-presidential candidate, sued over an editorial linking her to a mass shooting that wounded the Democratic congresswoman Gabby Giffords. Judge Jed Rakoff said it was “an example of very unfortunate editorialising” by the paper but “the law here sets a very high standard [for actual malice]. The court finds that that standard has not been met.” The New York Times has not lost a libel case in a US courtroom in more than 50 years. * * * Heart in the whitebait’s place – Scientists at Harvard and Emory universities have engineered an artificial fish whose tail is powered by cells from a human heart. It doesn’t sound all that necessary, but they say the “biohybrid” of paper, plastic, gelatin and two strips of living heart muscle cells marks a hopeful step in the advancement of heart treatments. “The heart is extremely complex and it’s not enough to mimic the anatomy,” said Kit Parker, one of the authors of the study. “One must recreate the biophysics in order to have the robust behaviour required of building engineered hearts for children born with malformed hearts.” The artificial fish swam for more than 100 days, during which the muscle cells even grew stronger. Today in Focus podcast: The view from Kyiv right now As US intelligence sources warn of an imminent Russian invasion, residents of the Ukrainian capital are refusing to be cowed, reports Shaun Walker. Lunchtime read: ‘Every year it astounds us’ Archaeologists excavating the windswept Ness of Brodgar are unearthing a treasure trove of neolithic villages, tombs, weapons and mysterious religious artefacts, some to be displayed in a blockbuster exhibition. Sport On day 11 of the Winter Olympics, Russian Kamila Valieva returns to the ice after being cleared to compete again at the Beijing Games despite a positive doping test hanging over her head. The 15-year-old figure skater has been caught in a complicated mess that has been coming for years, writes Sean Ingle, while Bryan Armen Graham argues that the blame lies with the coaches and organisations who have failed her. Meanwhile, the US sprinter Sha’Carri Richardson, who was banned from the summer Olympics for a similar offence, questioned the decision. Eddie Jones is hopeful of unleashing Manu Tuilagi and Courtney Lawes against Wales when England’s Six Nations campaign resumes on Saturday week. Stuart Broad has hit out at his “unjust” omission from England’s Test squad, describing the “five-minute” phone call from Andrew Strauss that delivered the news as a case of being “blindsided”. The FIA has chosen not to disclose the findings of its inquiry into the controversial climax of the Formula One world championship-deciding Abu Dhabi Grand Prix last season. And Ralf Rangnick has turned to his sports psychologist Sascha Lense to try to rebuild Manchester United’s confidence and end their habits of losing leads. Business It could be another turbulent day on the markets after Asian stocks fell sharply today in line with the big losses in London and Europe yesterday. The FTSE is due to lose about 0.4% at the opening although hopes of more diplomacy in Ukraine could take the edge off investor nerves. Oil has dropped about 1% today while the pound is flat at $1.353 and €1.196. Our economics team look at whether the Bank of England is right to be pushing interest rates higher or whether the denizens of Threadneedle Street are merely laying the groundwork for the next recession. The papers Our Guardian splash headline today says “‘Very, very dangerous’: PM’s warning on Russia build-up”. The i has “Last-ditch efforts to stop war in Europe” while the Mirror’s read is “Final warning from west: Last chance to stop war”. Not the least bit inflammatory is the Express: “Final warning Putin! It’s peace or you’ll pay high price”. “Lavrov’s hint at ‘way forward’ lifts hopes on averting war in Ukraine” – that’s the Financial Times, and the Times and Telegraph have similar headlines but attributed to Boris Johnson and Joe Biden instead. The Metro’s tack is a little different: “PM: just say ‘no’ … ‘Europe hooked on Russian gas supplies’” – Johnson said countries like France and Germany needed to stand up to Putin and “get Nord Stream out of the bloodstream”. There’s a basement strapline for Ukraine in the Mail but its lead is “33 die without justice in post office scandal”, which is about people running post offices being wrongly accused of fraud and theft. As on other fronts, Naomi Campbell is shown holding her baby daughter. Sign up The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekendHong Kong has turned newly built public housing and 10,000 hotel rooms into quarantine accommodation as authorities strive to control an Omicron outbreak that has overwhelmed the city. Recent days have seen record daily highs of more than 2,000 cases, but experts have warned the outbreak could reach about 30,000 a day. Already hospitals, testing facilities, and isolation centres have been swamped, with local media publishing photos of spillover tents set up in hospital carparks. Thousands of people infected with Covid-19 are on a waiting list for isolation rooms, with another 5,400 preliminary positive cases reported on Tuesday morning. The move to repurpose social housing in Fanling and Kwai Chung will accommodate more than 3,000 people, chief executive Carrie Lam said. It mirrors a decision in February 2020 to convert a newly built block in Sha Tin, reversing a pledge not to repurpose the sought-after public housing and sparking small protests. The hotel rooms were not yet identified, and Lam warned she had emergency legal powers to compel hotels if not enough were cooperating. Lam also said there were “no plans whatsoever” for any widespread city lockdowns, instead continuing with district-level and estate-specific localised lockdowns. Although the city’s fifth wave of infection had “outgrown our capacity”, Lam said the government remained committed to fully containing the outbreak, in contrast to many other countries which have since abandoned “zero Covid” strategies after being hit by the highly transmissible Omicron variant. “It is not an option to surrender to the virus,” Lam said. Last week the government ended its policy of sending all diagnosed cases to hospital for isolation, opening rooms at Penny’s Bay quarantine facility for mild or asymptomatic people to recover. To address a backlog of PCR tests created by mandatory testing orders which sent hundreds of thousands of residents to hours-long queues, Lam also announced authorities would start handing out 100m rapid testing kits on Tuesday, beginning with staff at aged care homes. The government has established taskforces to work with their mainland counterparts after China’s central government offered the city help with its outbreak. The new taskforces will focus on epidemiology, boosting testing capacity, ensuring medical and food supplies, and building isolation and treatment facilities. Hong Kong has produced one of the world’s most effective responses during the pandemic, but has been criticised over both its inconsistency and harshness, and even sparked a rare protest on Tuesday. The city is once again under tough social restrictions not seen since mid 2020, with near-daily additions or alterations. Vaccination rates remain comparatively low, especially among the elderly demographics. About 55% of people aged 70-79 have received two doses, and for those 80 and older the figure is just 22.6%. . Less than 15% of the adult population has received a booster short. • This article was amended on 16 February 2022 to remove an incorrect claim that Hong Kong has not released data on the proportion of different vaccines used.Singapore has been urged to halt the scheduled execution of two men convicted of a drug trafficking offence, with campaigners describing the plans as cruel and inhumane. Roslan bin Bakar and Pausi bin Jefridin, who were arrested in 2008, are due to be executed as early as Wednesday. Campaigners have raised numerous concerns about the handling of their cases, and say that Pausi, a Malaysian national, has an IQ of 67, and so should be protected under international law. Singapore has some of the world’s harshest drugs laws, and its application of the death penalty has drawn increased international scrutiny. Pausi’s case has drawn comparisons with that of Nagaenthran K Dharmalingam, a Malaysian man with learning difficulties who was sentenced to the death penalty for smuggling a small amount of heroin. He was told he would face execution in November 2021, prompting an international outcry from UN experts and international rights groups. At the time Singapore’s high court maintained that Nagaenthran had been accorded due process in line with the law. Nagaenthran was later given an indefinite stay of execution after testing positive for Covid. Roslan bin Bakar and Pausi bin Jefridin were found guilty of trafficking 96.07 grams of diamorphine and 76.37 grams of methamphetamine, according to Transformative Justice Collective, which campaigns for reform of Singapore’s criminal justice system and provides support to people on death row. Roslan’s lawyer also argued that he had reduced intellectual functioning, according to TJC, though his IQ was not mentioned in the court judgment. Malaysian group Lawyers for Liberty said Singapore was ignoring its international obligations. “Imposing the death penalty on persons with mental disability is contrary to customary international law, inhumane and sickening. Both international law and the Singapore constitution prohibits the execution of anyone who suffers from a mental disorder,” the group said in a statement. Amnesty International said the executions, if they proceed, would be the first to be carried out in more than two years in Singapore. Rachel Chhoa-Howard, Amnesty International’s Singapore researcher, said: “It is appalling that the Singapore government is planning to resume this cruel practice imminently. Executing individuals who have been sentenced for drug related offences and to the mandatory death penalty is in breach of restrictions under international law.” “It is high time for Singapore to re-establish a moratorium on the death penalty as a first step towards full abolition. The global trend towards abolition continues unabated, with the majority of the world’s governments having abolished the cruel punishment in law or in practice.”This is the story of a band that’s always on the brink: of stardom, of madness, of brilliance, of disgrace. Fat White Family, the cult indie band started in 2011 by brothers Lias and Nathan Saoudi, along with Saul Adamczewski, have had an unsettled lineup and a bumpy career. Based in grimy south London and feted as a brilliant, incendiary live act, the band’s records have earned mixed reviews, and their antics – sometimes naked, often provocative, usually drug-fuelled – tend to overshadow their art and their ambitions. Ten Thousand Apologies, with its detailed descriptions of fuck-ups and come-downs, of opportunities missed and decisions untaken, isn’t going to change this reputation. Towards the end, author Adelle Stripe, who co-writes with Lias, describes the FWF as “a drug band with a rock problem”; a great line that could be applied to many excellent bands but is especially accurate here. The latter part of the book describes a gradually tightening noose of drug excess and utter chaos. If that sounds sexy, well, Stripe understands the Fat Whites’ scummy romantic appeal. The bleak and the funny overlap throughout. Stripe is known for her imaginative novel/biography of Andrea Dunbar, Black Teeth and a Brilliant Smile, and this book, too, though it reads pretty close to the truth, emphasises that “fact has been used to create fiction” and that people remember events differently. The difference here is Stripe is writing with, as well as about, her subject. Though she has done her work, interviewing Nathan and Saul extensively, as well as others, this book both starts and ends with Lias. He’s the main source of what happened when and to whom, and personally takes over the storytelling in the italicised parts of the book. We hear about the Saoudis’ background: their mum, Michelle, grew up in working-class Huddersfield; their dad, Bashir, came to England from Algeria. (Some of the book’s strongest sections are the descriptions of the Saoudis’ visits to their dad’s extended family.) After their parents split up, the young Saoudi boys move with their mother to Northern Ireland, to Cookstown, a narrow-minded loyalist stronghold. Lias turns to art to save himself from the grimness (there is an excellent Schiele-esque self-portrait in the book); it leads him to London and the Slade art school. Grim, too, is Saul’s south London childhood: bullied, suicidal, defiant, he ends up, aged 14, in a boarding school for troubled youths. Self-immolation and extreme attention-seeking are, you could argue, the logical adult result. When they meet, the central relationship of Lias and Saul starts badly (of course), but they soon bond: “Despite the respective shadiness of both our characters, it was something you could have a bit of faith in,” writes Lias. I once interviewed Lias and Saul for the Observer (a precis of the interview is in the book). I liked them a lot, though they argued from start to finish, and Saul eventually stormed off, supposedly because he couldn’t stand to be in the interview any longer, but really because he needed to score. Days later, he checked into rehab in the US for a crippling heroin problem. When he leaves, “clean and sober for the first time since he was 12”, according to Ten Thousand Apologies, he is welcomed back to the fold with a few lines of cocaine. If you’re doing drugs, the difference between smack and coke seems vast and obvious; if you’re not, such actions seem completely mad. And madness reigns for much of this book, where, at most points, at least one member is having some form of chemically induced mental or physical breakdown. The anecdotes pile up. Laugh! As a band member ignores the active threat of the Bataclan terrorist attack in order to score! Weep! As a woman with cancer has her last days ruined by the Fat Whites’ noise and chaos next door! Gibber! At a Glastonbury where Nathan has champagne chucked in his face by band hero Mark E Smith and retaliates by chucking some cider into Smith’s face! Actually, Lias’s description of that festival – the grubby glamour, the sweaty tent – is so accurate that it could bring on a sympathetic nervous breakdown. The excess disguises the true heart of Ten Thousand Apologies, which is a sort of yearning: a search for enlightenment, a way to live, but especially for a home. The Saoudis feel the disconnect of the offspring of an immigrant parent; Adamczewski is unsettled, in all senses. They are restless, without respite. Still, Brixton is made for people like the Fat Whites, and for a while they survive there, in squats and drug dens and, in one of the funniest sections, in the Queen’s Head pub on Stockwell Road, where the landlord lets them live. Gradually, rental prices soar so high that they’re squeezed out. You could see the entire Fat Whites’ story as a quest – an epic, swashbuckling, decade-long battle – simply to bag some affordable housing. There isn’t much peace in this book, which is what makes it such an interesting read. But interesting lives are hard to live. Just as the band finally seem to be breaking through to the mainstream, Covid lockdowns stop their momentum and they’re back on their uppers again, skint, nowhere to live. “We were at liberty to heap ridicule and scorn upon anyone and everything that didn’t quite add up in the world,” writes Lias about the band’s early years. It can take time to realise that the happiness that you sneer at in others is available to you. I sincerely hope that this book, along with everything else the Fat Whites create, is a world-beating success, and that mass adoration and cold hard cash will be theirs. And that they find the right way to soothe the turmoil in their sarcastic, artistic, political, absolutely nutted, still homeless souls. Ten Thousand Apologies: Fat White Family and the Miracle of Failure by Adelle Stripe and Lias Saoudi is published by Orion (£20). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applySt Tudy Inn, Cornwall The 17th-century St Tudy Inn, in the village of the same name west of Bodmin moor, is under new management and has reopened with a new look, a new menu and a new head chef. The inviting bar has an open fire, stools made from beer kegs and bookshelves converted from old crates; it serves pints of home-brewed St Tudy ale and a lighter bar menu. In the restaurant, dishes include goats’ cheese bonbons with squash and sage, Cornish sole with shrimps, and sticky toffee pudding with clotted cream. The derelict barn next door has been converted into four elegant rooms, with two more rooms above the pub opening soon. Doubles from £111 room-only, sttudyinn.com Chartists 1770 at the Trewythen, Llanidloes, Powys The former Trewythen Arms in Llanidloes, a market town in mid-Wales, was renovated last year. Chartists 1770 at the Trewythen – named after the Chartist riots of 1839 and the year of the building’s construction – is now a modern Welsh restaurant with seven bedrooms over three floors. There are also four heated dining pods in the walled garden. Welsh produce includes sea bass with cockles and samphire (£16) and lamb with creamed cabbage and smoked bacon (£17). There is a separate plant-based menu with dishes including a starter of risotto with British grains and wild mushrooms (£8) and a courgette, chickpea and hazelnut loaf as a main (£14). Doubles from £110 B&amp;B, trewythenhotel.wales Wild Thyme &amp; Honey and The Crown, Ampney Crucis, Cotswolds A 16th-century pub a couple of miles east of Cirencester has been transformed into a boutique inn, pub and dining room. Wild Thyme &amp; Honey has 24 bedrooms and suites – some with freestanding baths, all with decanters of sloe gin – and a VIP apartment with a deck, sauna and hot tub. Across the courtyard is the Crown pub, which serves everything from a pint of Cotswold lager and “proper” pork scratchings to jazzed-up classics: posh prawn cocktail and cheese souffle; steaks, sole and celeriac cooked on a charcoal grill; venison cottage pie and ox-cheek bourguignon. There is a cocktail menu and lots of wines by the glass. Doubles from £150 B&amp;B, wildthymeandhoney.co.uk/crownampneybrook.co.uk Bell &amp; Crown, Zeals, Wiltshire The Bell &amp; Crown was the first pub bought by Chickpea, which now has a handful of pubs and pizza places in the south-west. It is also the cosiest, with wood panelling and open fires, plus a heated, covered outdoor dining area. The hearty menu, which changes often, features produce from small, family-run suppliers. Liver and bacon is always popular; other pub favourites include fish and chips, steak and ale pie, sticky toffee pudding, and rhubarb and custard. Good-value, well-chosen wine is from Gardner and Beadle in nearby Tisbury, with most bottles under £30. This spring – around mid-March – six simple, stylish rooms will open upstairs. From £90 B&amp;B, bellandcrown.com The Crusoe, Lower Largo, Fife Graham and Rachel Bucknall, a couple who own the Bridge Inn at Ratho and the Ship Inn at Elie, have taken over a third pub, the Crusoe in Lower Largo. Like the others, the Crusoe is a pub with a view – it is right on the edge of the beach. In winter, drinkers can have a pint of local ale by the fire, and in summer they can sit out on the pier with a pint of Crusoe lager. All meat and fish on the menu is Scottish, with lots of shellfish (Orkney scallops, Shetland mussels) and game (pheasant schnitzel, Balmoral venison). The first seven of 14 planned rooms opened on 11 February; all have sea views. Doubles from £110 B&amp;B, thecrusoe.com Hare and Hounds, Bowland Bridge, Lake District This 17th-century coaching inn was once the heart of Bowland Bridge, but it went into decline and eventually closed. Now it has been reinvented as a modern country pub, and reopened in September. All the original features have been retained – beams, exposed stone, fireplace – with a smart new paint scheme inspired by the Cumbrian countryside, pops of pattern and cosy nooks such as the snug. The dinner menu features classic pub grub (steak and ale pie £17.95) and more unexpected dishes (Lakeland lamb tagine £18.95), while the retro lunchtime menu includes chicken or scampi in a basket. Upstairs are five calming rooms with rolltop baths. From £145 B&amp;B, hareandhoundslakes.com Bull’s Head Inn, Craswall, Herefordshire The Bull’s Head, a traditional drovers’ inn at the foot of the Black Hill close to the border with Wales, had been closed for six years when the owners of Lower House Farm took it over. It reopened in November 2021 after a restoration that retained its whitewashed walls, flagstone floors and open fire. It now serves well-kept ales, natural and organic wines, all-day bar snacks, and lunch and dinner from Thursday to Sunday. Food, much of which is grown on the farm, might include hogget chop with anchovy and caper butter (£22), or roast crown prince squash with sheep’s curd and pickled mushrooms (£16). Four rooms are due to open in spring, followed by cabins in the grounds in summer. Doubles from £80 B&amp;B, cabins £120, wildbynaturellp.com Bottle &amp; Glass Inn, Binfield Heath, Oxfordshire This thatched inn near Henley-on-Thames reopened in 2017 and has had several new additions over the past year. Three rooms have opened above the restaurant, one with a roll-top bath, and there are plans to add five shepherd’s huts in the spring. The Dutch barn was converted into an open-fire cooking space last summer, and serves all-day pizza and burger menus. The barn also had a pastry counter, and a farm shop was added in December. The main restaurant specialises in game from the surrounding Phillimore Estate, such as partridge wellington (£24), and 32-day aged steaks (from £18) from nearby Paddock Farm. Doubles from £140 B&amp;B, bottleandglassinn.com The Bear Inn, Hodnet, Shropshire The Bear Inn, a 16th-century coaching inn near Market Drayton, reopened in August after a £2m makeover. It is an atmospheric place: interconnected rooms with panelled walls, beams and fires – and even a resident ghost. There are 12 folk-inspired bedrooms by the interior designer Octavia Dickinson, seven above the pub and five in the coach house. On the menu are fruit and vegetables grown in Hodnet Hall’s walled garden, meat from the owners’ own cattle and ales from Shropshire brewers. Dishes change regularly but might include artichoke ravioli, butternut pithivier or ox cheek with bone marrow mash. Doubles from £110, thebearinnhodnet.com The Jolly Sportsman, East Chiltington, East Sussex This renowned foodie pub near Lewes reopened last year under new management. It now has four bright rooms above the pub, plus a roof terrace. Guests can eat by one of two fires in winter and in the lovely garden in summer. Almost all produce is sourced within a 20-mile radius, including fish caught off the Sussex coast. Dishes could include a poached monkfish, crab, chickpea and chorizo stew (£22), grilled lemon sole (£22.50) or wild mushroom, spinach and truffle risotto (£16). Harvey’s best bitter is always on tap, plus local guest beers and sparkling wine from Bluebell Vineyard. Doubles from £120 B&amp;B, coolstays.comThe US could see loosened guidance around prescribing opioids, as the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) considers relaxing some of its guidelines in a move that could signal a new direction for managing chronic pain. The CDC last Thursday released proposed changes to its guidance on prescribing opioids, rolling back limits on which doses can be prescribed and for how many days in cases of acute pain. The agency created rules in 2016 to reduce prescriptions that were fueling the opioid overdose epidemic. But as rules like these were put in place, opioid overdose deaths rose instead of falling. New laws in several states were drafted to codify the restrictions, and some insurers began basing their coverage of medications on the guidance. The sweeping actions cut off medications for some patients battling chronic pain and substance disorders, sometimes without the option of tapering down the medications or undergoing substance dependence treatment. As the sources of medications dried up, some patients turned to illicit substances like heroin and fentanyl. “You’re inadvertently driving people to an illicit supply if they’re being cut off,” said Kate Nicholson, executive director of the National Pain Advocacy Center. “The street supply is so tainted that you’re really pushing people to a very dangerous thing.” Fatal overdoses rose from 63,000 in 2016 to more than 100,000 last year, many of them driven by the powerful synthetic opioid fentanyl. Deaths from fentanyl have doubled in the US in the past two years – but teens in particular have been hit hard by fentanyl overdoses, with the death rate tripling in that time. Yet harm reduction groups have struggled to access affordable naloxone, the drug that reverses opioid overdoses. And only one state, Arizona, had enough naloxone in 2017 to prevent a majority of overdose deaths, according to a study published in the Lancet on Thursday. ‘It was being used against me’ For patients like Bev Schechtman, the 2016 CDC rules made what would have been a routine hospitalization traumatic. Schechtman has Crohn’s disease, and frequently suffers from kidney stones – sometimes several times a month. In 2017, a case of kidney stones grew too difficult to treat at home. She checked into the hospital because she was worried she was developing an infection and she was vomiting too much to keep food, water and prescribed painkillers down. It was something she’d done several times before. But on this visit, Schechtman said, she was inexplicably denied intravenous painkillers because the doctor believed she was at higher risk of addiction since she had survived abuse as a child. “He said, ‘Childhood sexual abuse changes your brain chemistry, and so do IV opioids, and so I can’t be part of that,’” Schechtman recalled. She was floored – and horrified. “They’re using something that was already traumatic from my childhood, something that already is this painful experience that wasn’t my fault. And I felt like it was being used against me to punish me for – for what?” That question nagged at her. When she was home and finally recovered, she started digging. “Until then, I had no idea what the CDC guidelines were, I didn’t know any of this stuff,” Schechtman said. Since then, she has become an outspoken proponent of pain management and the vice-president of the non-profit Doctor Patient Forum. She believes her experience happened because of an over-reliance on the stringent rules, and she applauded the new direction in guidance. But the changes shouldn’t stop there, she said. “If these guidelines go through the way they are, then we have a lot of work ahead of us, because now we have to get them removed from state laws, we have to get them removed from the insurance companies.” Caught in the pendulum swing Drugmakers in the 1990s marketed new opioids as less addictive and pushed for wider use among patients. “We overdid it with prescription medications – we were kind of sold a bill of goods by pharmaceutical companies that told us, no, these things are not addictive,” said Bryce Pardo, associate director of the Rand Corporation’s Drug Policy Research Center. In reaction to the rising opioid overdose crisis, new rules in the late 2000s made it more difficult to prescribe the drugs – and around the same time, overdose deaths from illicit opioids began rising. “We turned the tap off too quickly without really trying to increase the access to drug treatment programs,” Pardo said. Substance dependence treatment didn’t expand as quickly as patients needed. “I think that’s what CDC is trying to do by relaxing some of the prescription guidelines now because they realize, well, we may have overdone it by trying to cut people off too quickly,” Pardo said. But, he argued, the guidance shouldn’t go too far in the other direction: “We ping-pong back and forth between extremes.” The new guidelines need to strike a delicate balance between making sure patients with serious pain have access to the medications they need, but also not introducing new patients unnecessarily to opioids, he said. People in chronic pain can “manage their lives fine on an opioid – that’s fine. What we don’t want is a 19-year-old who blew out his knee at football practice getting 90 days’ worth of prescription medication.” It’s difficult to reach that balance, said Nicholson, who called it “the Goldilocks solution”. “There was a harm from overly liberal prescribing, so I do think the CDC stepped in in order to try and stem that harm,” she said. But “the people who actually needed it got caught in the crosshairs of this pendulum swing.” She was on an advisory board to review an earlier draft of CDC guidelines last year. She said the new guidance, which incorporated the independent advisers’ feedback, is “a tremendous improvement for people with chronic pain”.There was a huge response from readers across Europe to the letter two weeks ago from GH from Sheffield – all decrying the lottery that posting parcels to Europe has become post-Brexit. GH had asked why her son in Berlin was always asked for extra payments of €6 (£5) and €10 to take delivery of small gifts she had sent. Gifts valued at less than €45 are supposed not to attract VAT or duty. These are just some of the stories we have heard since publishing her letter. “I live in Italy and I have been charged every time something from the UK arrives. If you don’t have the cash there and then to give the delivery driver you are then given a form to head to the post office, which, as you can imagine, is never a joy. A birthday card sent on 11 October 2021 from the UK arrived this week ... I have stopped buying things from the UK and have asked friends and family to stop sending parcels,” wrote B from Italy. “It’s very similar here in Spain: I pay every time I receive something from the UK regardless of what’s on the declaration. For Christmas my mum sent me a couple of books and some cards with a declared value of about £35, on top of which I then had to pay the post office €20. The breakdown on the receipt said half of it was from customs fees with VAT added and the other half was just listed as additional,” wrote RW. Germany and Austria appear to be a particular problem, with readers reporting being asked for extra fees before the item is handed over. Those in other countries have reported their parcels made it through unscathed after they declared “no commercial value”. We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at consumer.champions@theguardian.com or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Please include a daytime phone number. Submission and publication of all letters is subject to our terms and conditionsThere are some general rules around surprising surveys, such as: when a result isn’t what you’d expect, it’s often because the question was posed in a peculiar way, or the conclusion has taken an unreasonable leap. Then there are some specific rules, such as: if you want to know the truth about what makes a marriage last, don’t necessarily go first to a thinktank that is avowedly pro-marriage – maybe try a more neutral source. These rules collided, or should have done, at the weekend, when the Marriage Foundation announced that couples who had really expensive weddings were less likely to stay together than those who did it on the cheap. One in 10 marriages that cost over £20,000 had ended within three years. So, some people, at least, have escaped the sunk cost fallacy. Marriage and divorce experts were quick to comment: it was surely down to the fairytale expectation that £20,000 creates. After that much white tulle and the delightful country house, the brutal reality of life in athleisure, and a not-country house, was too much to take. And it brings a certain narratorial satisfaction: anyone who blows a fortune on a single day must surely be shallow, and incapable of doing dreary or lasting work. But the Marriage Foundation is missing something major, here, which is weird because it comes from their own research: second marriages are more likely to last than the first ones, with 31% ending in divorce against 45%. If there’s one thing all second marriages have in common, it’s not the age and definitely not the wisdom of the participants, but rather, that they’re definitely, positively still skint from the dissolution of the first marriage. So they can’t have a massive, meringue-style wedding, and their no-frills, pay-bar nuptials have skewed the data. This is how to make a marriage last – not with small economies, but by taking the precaution of a previous, failed marriage. Zoe Williams is a Guardian columnistStart early Most people don’t want to talk about money on a first date, and it can be a bigger taboo in relationships than sex, politics or religion. But however unromantic, having conversations about how you manage your cash is important. According to counselling service Relate, money worries are the most common reason for relationship difficulties. “Tackling the topic early on avoids the potential for resentments to emerge later and lead to more destructive arguments,” says a Relate counsellor, Peter Saddington. Early on you could start by, for example, asking someone if they are a spender or saver, or what they dream of achieving with their money, in order to understand your respective financial situations. “If there are issues later – debts, bills, or how much you want to save, or not – it’s more likely to be something you can do successfully, without rupturing the relationship, as money is already a topic you discuss,” adds Saddington. Draw up an agreement As a relationship becomes more serious and your lives more entwined, there will be conversations about money that must be had. You will need to find a way to be clear about your expectations – for example, whether and to what extent you want to merge your finances, and what expenses will be shared. If you are struggling to start these conversations, take the pressure off by suggesting you both write down, separately, how you want to manage your finances as a couple, before sitting down to compare and agree on anything. “Money can be an emotional issue, so it needs a practical approach, where each partner feels listened to,” says Arabella Russell, a couples psychotherapist. “I’d encourage drawing up a plan of the points you need to address so that you’re prepared for the conversation, and approach it almost like a business meeting.” You might ultimately agree, for example, to have a pot for joint spending and bills, and work out your contributions, although these may change over time. You may also want to set spending limits, where anything above a certain figure requires a joint decision. If you are unmarried, this can be set out in a cohabitation agreement when you move in or at a later date. This is a legal document setting out financial contributions and who owns what. Set money ‘dates’ Schedule a time to talk to your partner about money – perhaps once a month – and use the conversation to cover everything from bills and spending to savings. However, keep these “dates” brief, ideally about 20 minutes. “This will make it more likely you’ll stick to the points and avoid old arguments,” says Saddington, who stresses that talking about money can feel threatening and make us defensive. “Limiting the time potentially avoids it becoming a heated conversation, and don’t have the discussion late at night, or when you’ve been drinking alcohol.” Avoid bringing any resentments into the conversation, or shame if your partner is struggling, and stick to facts. You can also use this time to address any money worries, and future goals, such as where you want to live and what you want to do, and create a joint long-term plan. Ensure you have enough time to talk and listen to each other. Be honest and open The foundations of a relationship are built on trust, so fibbing about finances is never wise. However, two-fifths of Britons are keeping “money secrets”, including hiding debt problems, according to research by the Money and Pensions Service. James Jones, the head of consumer affairs at the credit agency Experian, says that shared accounts can make it more difficult to keep debts hidden. “Although credit checks are on the person, not the address, many couples’ credit histories will be linked by shared accounts, such as a joint mortgage or current account,” he explains. “Any hidden debts could surface during a future credit application and, as a result, cause an unpleasant surprise.” Remember that you may well take a different approach to money to your partner. You may be a cautious saver, for example, while your partner is a spontaneous and impulsive spender, and being honest about your personal circumstances will encourage your partner to be the same. Recognise ‘money stories’ We all have different “money stories” that are linked to our upbringing and play out in our relationships, Russell says. But, she adds, often couples don’t realise this, which is why conversations about the issue sometimes go wrong. “Perhaps one partner was brought up with tension around money and financial difficulties, and that could lead to fear of living in that uncertainty again,” she says. She suggests asking about your partner’s experiences growing up and, if you have repetitive arguments, trying to find out what’s at the root of these. “The more you can have conversations that go well and there’s understanding and no shame involved, the easier it is to be honest,” she says. You are also more likely to go to each other for help with a problem if you understand where you are each coming from. Seek help If you are having trouble tackling financial issues as a couple, there is help available. Go to your local Citizens Advice to talk about practical matters together, such as being unable to afford escalating bills, and managing debts. You may want to try a counsellor or couples coach specialising in financial issues. Use the Counselling Directory search tool to find a couples counsellor, with sessions online, by telephone or in person. You can eavesdrop on a relationship counsellor helping couples talk about money in BBC Radio 4’s The Money Clinic. There are also lots of free financial lessons and budgeting tools you could do together. Relate’s website features quizzes, while the government-sponsored MoneyHelper website has guides to help trigger conversations with your partner. “If you can work on honing communication, this will have advantages across your whole relationship,” Russell says. Your relationship, and your bank balance, will hopefully be stronger as a result.Kamila Valieva’s legal team has claimed that her positive drugs test may have come from a contaminated glass of water that contained traces of her grandfather’s heart medication. Speaking after the daily media briefing in Beijing, International Olympic Committee (IOC) member Denis Oswald confirmed the 15-year-old Russian’s explanation for her positive test for the banned angina drug trimetazidine was “contamination which happened with a product her grandfather was taking”. The Russian newspaper Pravda said that Valieva’s lawyer Anna Kozmenko made a similar argument when the skater’s court of arbitration for sport hearing took place on Sunday. “There can be completely different ways how it got into her body,” Kozmenko is reported to have said. “For example, grandfather drank something from a glass, saliva got in, this glass was somehow later used by an athlete. Or the drug lay down on some surface, traces remained, the drug lay down on this surface, which the athlete then drank.” On Monday, the court of arbitration for sport (Cas) cleared Valieva to compete in the women’s skating event, which starts on Tuesday and concludes Thursday, and for which she is the heavy favourite for gold. However, if she does claim a medal the IOC has already said there will be no ceremony afterwards. Meanwhile, the Russian’s doping case is ongoing and it could mean that her results – and any medals – from Beijing are stripped from her in the months ahead. On Tuesday Valieva, who helped the Russian team win gold last week, broke her silence by saying that the trimetazidine doping scandal has left her tearful and “emotionally fatigued”. She told Russia’s TV Channel One: “These days have been very difficult for me, emotionally. I am happy but emotionally fatigued. That is why these tears of joy and a little bit of sadness. But, of course, I am happy to take part in the Olympic Games. I will do my utmost to represent our country. “Apparently, this is a stage I have to live through,” she added. “I hear so many good wishes. I have seen outdoor banners in Moscow. It is very pleasing, this support is very important for me in this difficult time. I thought I was alone but my closest friends and family will never abandon me.” Cas has confirmed that Valieva testified during its lengthy hearing, which ended at about 3am on Monday. Valieva said she watched the entire hearing by video link from the Olympic Village. “I sat there for seven hours, we had one 20-minute break, and I sat there and watched. It was very difficult, but it is apparently one of the moments, of the phases, that I have to go through,” Valieva said, adding that the entire process had taught her that adult life “can be unfair to some extent”. Valieva and her entourage will be investigated by the Russian Anti-Doping Agency and the World Anti-Doping Agency after the Olympics. But even if the Russian investigation clears her, the ruling will likely be appealed. Meanwhile Oswald confirmed that the IOC has still not received the reasoned decision from Cas on Valieva. He also defended the IOC’s decision not to ban Russia and its athletes completely from the Olympics after the discovery of a massive state-sponsored doping programme in 2016. Oswald said the IOC did all that it could, and that sanctions had to be proportionate. “We took very tough measures after the 2014 Games, when the situation with doping in Russia came to light,” he added. “And 29 athletes were punished. We cannot punish clean athletes, even if they are Russians.”The attorney general, Michaelia Cash, has confirmed the commonwealth integrity commission is off the agenda until at least after the election, as the government can’t pass it without Labor support. The government is “not progressing with it at this stage”, the attorney general told Senate estimates on Tuesday, also confirming that despite two years of consultation no changes had been made to the Coalition model. Earlier in February the prime minister, Scott Morrison, suggested there may still be a chance to legislate the anti-corruption body before the May election, a possible reference to a final attempt to get cabinet to agree to a beefed-up version of the integrity commission to boost the chances of passing the religious discrimination bill. Labor and the crossbench have all called for a tougher national integrity commission, with a Greens bill already having passed the Senate, and a crossbench bill supported by MP Helen Haines and Senator Rex Patrick also a viable model to pass parliament. But despite Liberal MP Bridget Archer crossing the floor to progress the national integrity commission, the government refuses to introduce its own bill to parliament to set the body up. Under questioning from Labor senators on Tuesday, Cash said: “In the terms of the model of the integrity commission in the legislation that is drafted, you don’t support our bill, you have not put forward an alternative to that bill. “And on that basis, at this point in time, we won’t be proceeding with it, because you do not support it. And we’ve always said we would require bipartisan support.” The shadow attorney general, Mark Dreyfus, described the admission as “another broken promise” from the Morrison government. “To this day, Mr Morrison has still not even brought a bill before the Parliament,” he said in a statement. “Instead, all we’ve seen is scandal after scandal go unchecked, endless excuses and a weak, pathetic, desultory ‘exposure draft’ which was so bad, the Centre for Public Integrity denounced it is ‘a sham designed to cover up corruption’.” The Morrison government promised a national integrity commission in December 2018, ahead of the 2019 election, after months of dismissing it as a “fringe issue”. After missing its self-imposed 2019 deadline for draft legislation, the Coalition unveiled its proposed body in November 2020 for a commission that will not conduct public hearings or release reports into alleged corruption by public servants and politicians. The model was also panned by experts for the narrow definition of corruption and high bar to start investigations. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Officials from the attorney general’s department at the hearing confirmed no changes were made to the draft legislation after consultation. Cash said: “The government believes that the model it has is the appropriate model.” Greens senator Larissa Waters, said the model was unchanged despite “experts [saying] it is a protection racket for MPs”. Cash said the government could “work cooperatively with you to pass that as quickly as we can” if Labor or the Greens reversed their opposition, although there are just two Senate sitting days left in late March before the 2022 election.Novak Djokovic said he would rather miss out on grand slam tournaments than be vaccinated against Covid as he spoke in depth for the first time since being deported from Australia last month because of his vaccination status. In an interview with the BBC on Tuesday Djokovic said he was not anti-vaccination but believed people had the right to choose whether they received it or not. Asked if he would miss the French Open over his vaccine stance, he replied: “That is the price that I’m willing to pay.” Asked if this was also his attitude towards Wimbledon, he said: “Yes.” “The principles of decision-making on my body are more important than any title or anything else,” Djokovic said. While Djokovic is unable to play at the French Open as things stand because of its recent adoption of Covid passports, it is believed he should be able to compete at Wimbledon in June. In the UK unvaccinated visitors are required to be tested only before and after arrival in the UK. Speaking with BBC Four on Tuesday, Tim Henman, a member of the All England Club Committee, said Wimbledon will follow government guidelines. “To get into the United Kingdom at the moment those are the guidelines the Championship will be following at this stage,” Henman said. “At this moment in time [entry regulations are] going to be government-led.” An ATP spokesperson confirmed on Tuesday that 99% of the top 100 players are now fully vaccinated, which means Djokovic is the only unvaccinated player at the top of the men’s game. Djokovic explained his refusal to be vaccinated by saying he “supports fully the freedom to choose” what enters his body. However, he did not elaborate on what his problem is with the various types of vaccines available to those who wish to be protected against Covid. “I’m trying to be in tune with my body as much as I possibly can,” he said. During the interview Djokovic said he is not against vaccination in general even though he declined himself. “I understand that, globally, everyone is trying to put a big effort into handling this virus and seeing, hopefully, an end soon to this virus,” he said. Djokovic acknowledged it would be difficult to compete in “most of the tournaments” on the tennis calendar because of Covid vaccination entry rules. “I’m part of a very global sport that is played every single week in a different location. So I understand the consequences of my decision.” In January Djokovic was twice detained in an immigration facility when he arrived in Melbourne for the Australian Open. After two legal challenges, the situation was resolved with his deportation on the eve of the Australian Open. In his absence Rafael Nadal won a record breaking 21st grand slam title in Melbourne. The Serb was ultimately deported after the Australian immigration minister, Alex Hawke, exercised his ministerial discretion to cancel the world No 1’s visa. Hawke’s determination that Djokovic’s participation in the Australian Open “may foster anti-vaccination” sentiment and cause “civil unrest” was upheld by the full federal court after the tennis star lodged a last-ditch appeal. In the BBC interview Djokovic rejected Hawke’s reasoning. “The minister for immigration used his discretion to cancel my visa based on his perception that I might create some anti-vax sentiment in the country or in the city, which I completely disagree with,” he said. Asked what he would say to anti-vaccination activists who claim he supports their cause, Djokovic said: “Everyone has the right to choose to act or say whatever they feel is appropriate for them and I have never said that I’m part of that movement.”A jury member has been discharged nearly a week into the four-week trial of a Northern Territory police officer charged with murder. Soon after the seventh day of Constable Zachary Rolfe’s trial started in the Northern Territory supreme court on Tuesday, Justice John Burns closed the court to discuss a matter related to the jury. About an hour later, Burns said a juror had been discharged, and one of the reserve jury members would be used. “Both the accused and the Crown have accepted the assurances given by the remaining members of the jury that they are able to address the issues in this trial in an unbiased fashion,” he said. “So on that basis the trial will proceed.” No further information was given about the reason for the decision. Rolfe, 30, is charged with murdering Kumanjayi Walker while trying to arrest him in the remote community of Yuendumu, 300km north-west of Alice Springs, on 9 November, 2019. About 7.20pm, Rolfe and his colleague Constable Adam Eberl confronted Walker in a house in the community, the court has heard. Walker, a 19-year-old Warlpiri man, then stabbed Rolfe with a pair of surgical scissors shortly before being shot by Rolfe three times. The second and third shots are subject to the murder charge. Rolfe has pleaded not guilty to murder and two alternate charges. On Tuesday, the trial also heard for the first time from two other officers who were deployed from Alice Springs along with Rolfe on the day of the shooting. Both officers, like Rolfe, had served in the defence force before joining the NT police, the court heard. Constable James Kirstenfeldt gave evidence that he travelled with Rolfe from Alice Springs to Yuendumu on the afternoon of 9 November 2019. He said he had not seen an email sent by Sergeant Julie Frost, the officer in charge of Yuendumu station, about the operational plan for the Alice Springs officers once they arrived in the community. According to that plan, which has been tendered in evidence, Frost requested assistance from the Immediate Response Team (IRT), a unit based in Alice Springs that had tactical capabilities, and from the police dog squad, to deal with multiple issues in the community in the context of insufficient local resources. These issues included increased break-ins, including at the homes of local medical staff, which had prompted them to tell Frost they planned to evacuate from Yuendumu, and the need to arrest Walker, a fugitive who had threatened police with an axe three days earlier. The email referred to a plan to arrest Walker on the morning of 10 November, the day after the officers arrived in Yuendumu. But Kirstenfeldt gave evidence he had never seen the email, nor been shown a printout of it. He said a five-minute briefing that Frost conducted for the officers shortly before they left Yuendumu station mostly related to the IRT officers setting up the police radios at the station, and not on the detail of that email. Frost told them she did not use the radios and could not connect them to a territory-wide system, Kirstenfeldt said, but the officers did not want to deploy into the field without them. About 15 minutes after the IRT members left Yuendumu station, Walker had been shot dead. Senior Constable Adam Donaldson, a trained dog handler who also travelled to Yuendumu on 9 November, arrived at the station before the IRT members. He told the court Frost gave him a printout of the operational plan, and then discussed its contents with him. Donaldson said it was clear to him the priority on 9 November was to assist with the unlawful entries at the nurses quarters, and then look for Walker early the next morning. But he agreed with David Edwardson QC, for Rolfe, that the plan also referred to him and the IRT members not going on duty until 11pm – four hours after they were ready to deploy – and there was no intelligence about where Walker actually was, despite the reference to an operation to arrest him the following morning. Senior Aboriginal community police officer Derek Williams also gave evidence on Tuesday that he had seen Walker earlier on 9 November 2019 attending a funeral of a family member – the first time the trial has heard evidence about where Walker was between threatening police on 6 November 2019 and being killed. The court has previously heard family members believed Walker had escaped from an alcohol treatment centre in Alice Springs and removed an electronic monitoring device, breaching the conditions of his parole, because he wanted to attend the funeral. It has also heard that police considered arresting Walker at the funeral but decided against it, and that police had told Walker’s family to urge him to hand himself in. Williams and another police officer who had previously arrested Walker, Acting Sgt Felix Alefaio, both gave evidence that in their experience Walker was not violent towards police. According to the plan, Alefaio was expected to be involved in the arrest of Walker so that he could help the IRT members identify him. He said in his evidence that he was in Yuendumu station when the IRT members arrived from Alice Springs. He recalled Frost telling Rolfe and Kirstenfeldt to do patrols in the community on the night of 9 November until midnight, before being relieved by the other IRT pair, and that Walker would be arrested the following morning after police met back up at the station about 5am. The trial continues.UK wage growth picked up in January as job vacancies hit a new record high, but pay failed to keep pace with the highest inflation rate for three decades. The Office for National Statistics said the annual growth rate for average total pay, including bonuses, increased to 4.3% in the three months to December, up from a rate of 4.2% in the three months to November. The rate was boosted by bonus payments in December, with the strongest pay growth for workers in finance, insurance and the property industry. Regular wage growth excluding bonuses eased by 0.1 percentage points to an annual rate of 3.7%. The performance beat City economists’ expectations for total wage growth of 3.8% and a rise of 3.6% for regular pay. However, taking into account inflation – which is at the highest level since the early 1990s amid a dramatic increase in household energy costs and wider cost of living crisis – real pay fell on the year by 0.1%. Wages excluding bonuses fell by 0.8%. The figures highlight how rates of pay growth are stronger in some sectors of the economy than others, with annual wage increases of 4.6% on average compared with just 2.9% for public sector staff. Suggesting that key workers on the pandemic frontline could bear the brunt of Britain’s cost of living crisis while bankers are insulated, pay rose by 7% for workers in financial services and 14% in the property sector, significantly above inflation. Pay in education rose by just 0.4%, the lowest since 2013, while wages in health and social work rose by 4.5%. The number of job vacancies across the UK increased in January to a fresh record high of almost 1.3m, after two consecutive monthly falls when some employers paused their hiring plans amid increased uncertainty over the economic outlook due to Omicron. In a sign of rising confidence among firms, the number of employees on UK company payrolls increased by 108,000 in January to a record 29.5 million. The unemployment rate for the three months to December fell by 0.2 percentage points to 4.1%, although remains 0.1 percentage points higher than before the coronavirus pandemic. Rishi Sunak said the latest figures showed the jobs market was healthier than most could have hoped for. “We’re continuing to help more people into work, and are providing support for the cost of living worth over £20bn across this financial year and next,” the chancellor said. However, analysts said the strong headline figures masked significant underlying challenges for workers and the British economy as employers struggle to find staff and inflation heaps pressure on households and businesses. Suren Thiru, the head of economics at the British Chambers of Commerce, said there was limited scope for companies to increase pay despite chronic staff shortages. “While Omicron is having little impact on employment, the squeeze on firms’ finances from high inflation, soaring energy bills and the looming national insurance hike is likely to weaken job creation and further restrain pay growth in the coming months.” In a sign of the pressure on households, the ONS said inflation-adjusted regular pay, excluding bonuses, plunged in the month of December by 1.2%, the biggest decline for eight years. Frances O’Grady, the general secretary of the TUC, said: “Working families need financial security. But they face a perfect cost-of-living storm. Pay packets are plummeting in value as bills and prices sky-rocket.” The figures come after the governor of the Bank of England urged employers to show restraint when setting pay this year to prevent high rates of inflation from becoming embedded after record energy prices subside. Threadneedle Street forecasts inflation will increase from the current rate of 5.4% to a peak of 7.25% by April, driven by a surge in household energy costs amid Britain’s cost of living squeeze. Hannah Slaughter, a senior economist at the Resolution Foundation, said there were “nascent signs” that a rebound in hiring activity at the start of 2022 could be starting to feed through into stronger pay growth. Figures from HM Revenue and Customs showed median wages rose by 6.3% in January compared with a year earlier before taking account of inflation. However, questions remain over the amount of bargaining power workers have to demand higher wages, with a risk that Britain’s squeeze on living standards could surpass a 2.7% fall in real-terms pay experienced in 1991. “While some policymakers are rightly worried about accelerating nominal wages boosting UK inflation, they should also be worried about Britain simultaneously experiencing the tightest real wage squeeze in generations. To square this circle, the UK needs faster productivity growth,” she said.When Sporting parted company with their manager, Silas, on 4 March 2020, it was easy to wonder when the upheaval would end. The Lisbon club sat fourth in the Primeira Liga, four points off third-placed Braga and 20 behind the leaders, Porto, and were about to appoint their fourth manager of the season. He would be the sixth of the presidency of Frederico Varandas, who had taken over in September 2018 from the controversial Bruno de Carvalho. Sporting remained haunted by the notorious training-ground attack of May 2018, when 50 hooligans – incensed by poor results – stormed the premises to beat up players and staff. In May of last year, a Portuguese court made 41 convictions for assault and threatening behaviour, with nine men receiving five-year prison sentences. De Carvalho was cleared of having helped to mastermind the episode. Sporting said it had left “an indelible mark on the club and its fans”. Varandas and his sporting director, Hugo Viana, a former Newcastle midfielder, had to get the managerial appointment right. The climate was edgy and not only because the pandemic was coming. It was accurate to describe the relationship between the board and supporters as awful. What Varandas and Viana did was risky. They turned to Rúben Amorim, a former Portugal midfielder, who had spent much of his playing career at Sporting’s crosstown rivals, Benfica. He was 35 years old and a veteran of two months of top-flight management with Braga, albeit spectacular ones. He had won eight and drawn one of his nine league matches and won the Taça da Liga, beating Sporting in the semi-final and Porto in the final. Sporting had to pay the €10m release clause in Amorim’s contract and it only added to the pressure on him and the club to make it work. Just under two years on, with Sporting ready to host Manchester City in the Champions League last 16 first leg on Tuesday, the decision has come to look inspired. It is Sporting’s second appearance at this stage of the competition and stemmed from their stunning domestic title success of last season – their first since 2001-02. They also won the Taça da Liga, which they have retained this time out. They sit second in the league, six points behind Porto, after a 2-2 away draw against them last Friday – a game that ended with a mass brawl. There were five red cards, three for Sporting. Amorim has become a superstar in Portugal, his leadership style marked by strength of personality and charisma, the ability to encourage players to buy in rather than ruling by decree. Sporting have wanted to follow a particular path for some years only to lack a manager to push them along it. In Amorim, who started his coaching career at the third-tier side Casa Pia and went to Braga B before being promoted to the first team, they have found the ideal fit. The Sporting project has been shaped by three guidelines: the recruitment of a small number of experienced players (mainly from outside Portugal), a drive to sign younger ones from the domestic league and the promotion of academy talent. What the onset of the pandemic and the suspension of football in Portugal for three months allowed Amorim to do was bed in and understand the dressing room, including some of the weaknesses. When the championship resumed in June 2020, Sporting won five and drew three of 10 games to finish fourth – only the fourth time this century they had been outside the top three. But Amorim had begun to formulate a plan for the market with Viana, one of his closest friends, and to make progress in one of the priority areas. Amorim gave debuts to a number of academy youngsters in those final matches, including Nuno Mendes and Matheus Nunes, who were 17 and 21. They would be important parts of the title-winning team, particularly the former at left wing-back in Amorim’s 3-4-3, which is compact without the ball, quick and direct with it; defined by aggressive pressing. Mendes would get a move to Paris Saint-Germain last summer in a deal that took the Spain winger Pablo Sarabia the other way on a season’s loan. Nunes, born in Brazil but now a Portuguese citizen and international for them, has locked down a starting spot in midfield this season. The Sporting academy is famous for having produced Luís Figo and Cristiano Ronaldo and the club want roughly a third of Amorim’s squad to have come up from it. Amorim wants that, too. He is obsessed by blooding homegrown players and he has been singularly unafraid to pitch them in. Gonçalo Inácio, now 20, a central defender with a burgeoning reputation, is a good example. He has been guided by the talismanic captain, Sebastián Coates, who plays in the centre of the back three. Amorim brought the midfielder João Palhinha back to the club in the summer of 2020; the academy product had been out on loan, latterly with the manager at Braga, and he was key to the title win. Palhinha has been tipped for a Premier League move at the end of the season. The right wing-back Ricardo Esgaio is another academy product to have returned and hopes are high for the teenage wing-backs Gonçalo Esteves and Nazinho, and the 22-year-old midfielder Daniel Bragança. A youthful star addition has been the right wing-back Pedro Porro on a two-year loan from Manchester City. He is eligible to face his parent club. Amorim would instigate something of a clearout in his first transfer window, moving on, among others, Marcos Acuña, Wendel and Luciano Vietto. It was who he brought in that made the difference. The goalkeeper Antonio Adán and the centre-half Zou Feddal – seasoned professionals – arrived from Atlético Madrid and Real Betis respectively, while the experienced midfielder João Mário joined on a season’s loan from Internazionale. He had been a youth player at Sporting. Paulinho, a 29-year-old striker, would come from Braga in the winter window of last year. But if there was one signing that served as a spark it came from the project’s other track – the trawl of Portuguese football and clubs of lower stature. Pedro Gonçalves, who is now 23, had starred for the promoted Famalicão in 2019‑20 after they had taken him from the Wolves academy for a nominal fee. The Premier League club did negotiate a sell-on clause. Playing as a No 8, Gonçalves had helped Famalicão to a sixth-placed finish and he was named as the league’s young player of the year. He was to touch the stars after going to Sporting, who paid €6.5m to Famalicão for 50% of his economic rights. Redeployed by Amorim as a wide forward who cuts inside, he scored 23 goals in 32 league games, winning the Golden Boot, another young player of the year award and inclusion in the team of the season and the Portugal squad for the European Championship finals. Sporting had found their heir to Bruno Fernandes, who went to Manchester United in January 2020. This season, Gonçalves has had injuries but he still has 13 goals, including two in the 3-1 home win over Borussia Dortmund that secured Sporting’s passage from the Champions League group stage. He extended his contract last October, with Sporting raising his release clause to €80m, and the feeling within the club is the boy who feels no pressure is destined for a massive move, although not this summer. Some of the big clubs in England and Germany have inquired about him – not to talk numbers, rather to begin their due diligence. Sporting, meanwhile, made a future-proofing move of their own in January, signing Marcus Edwards, the erstwhile Tottenham wonderkid, for €7.5m from Vitória Guimarães. Sporting are aware it will be impossible to keep Sarabia, whose gross salary is about €8m; their next-highest earner grosses €3m. The plan is for Edwards to learn the ropes before replacing Sarabia in the starting lineup next season. Sporting are realistic enough to know they are big underdogs against City. The journey under Amorim has given them hope.If such a thing as a Lazarus-like figure exists in hip-hop, it’s Curtis James Jackson III – better known as 50 Cent. The 46-year-old Queens, New York native appeared poised to pull off a familiar progression from drug dealer to gangsta rapper after signing with Columbia Records in 2000. But just as his debut album was due to be released, Jackson was attacked outside his grandmother’s home and shot nine times at close range, the injuries to his face resulting in a swollen tongue and a slurred voice. Amazingly, Jackson walked out of hospital two weeks later, with a true sense of purpose and a mind set on packing muscle on to his 6ft frame – a physical transformation that laid a foundation for a machiavellian persona. His immediate career prospects dipped after the shooting. Columbia dropped him, and other labels backed away, not wanting to entangle themselves with an artist whose lyrics rang so true. Undeterred, Jackson, a prolific writer and producer, gave his tracks away, inaugurating the era of the record industry-disrupting mixtape. The immensely popular giveaways caught the attention of Eminem, who introduced him to Dr Dre, who quickly signed him to his imprint, Interscope. In 2003, 50 Cent made his commercial debut with Get Rich or Die Tryin’; the lead single, In Da Club, smashed the Billboard record for the most listened-to radio song within a week. After that came 14 Grammy nominations and a 2010 win, a bespoke label, G-Unit, and more commercial prosperity. It seemed as if he might dominate radio for a decade. And he nearly did until he picked a sales fight with a college dropout with a backpack full of beats named Kanye, someone with his own creation myth – a car accident that broke his jaw. That seemed to hasten Jackson’s next pivot from gangsta rapper to business mogul. He published a book with The 48 Laws of Power author Robert Greene called The 50th Law. He made a fortune after being an early investor in Vitaminwater but in 2015 declared bankruptcy. He dabbled in film-making, mostly producing work that either featured him in the cast or was explicitly about him. Television looked like the last place he would end up; the medium seems almost too tame for him. (It’s not as though Jackson, for all his action star ambitions, was known for having a softer side like Will Smith or LL Cool J.) Black crime dramas seemed better suited to the big screen, where “hood films” such as New Jack City (starring Wesley Snipes and Ice-T) and Belly (with Nas and DMX) achieved rarefied cult status. Still, Jackson couldn’t shake the urge to develop a small-screen project that might serve as a vehicle for music too taboo for Apple Music and the like. But it wasn’t until he connected with The Good Wife writer Courtney A Kemp that the idea evolved into a pitch about a Michael Corleone type caught between two worlds. A green light from Starz, then a repeats-heavy channel that sat below HBO and Showtime in the prestige cable tier, didn’t exactly set up the series for an extended run. Nor did the pilot’s lack of household names besides Jackson, who was ultimately cast as a supporting character who doesn’t immediately appear – and even then only occasionally. But when Power premiered in 2014 it quickly became a ratings hit. Black and Latinx viewers in particular bought subscriptions en masse to follow the exploits of James St Patrick (Omari Hardwick), AKA Ghost, a New York drug kingpin caught in a romantically complicated cat-and-mouse game with his high-school sweetheart, an assistant US attorney. By the time of its third season, the show was the second most watched on cable, behind only Game of Thrones. Impressively, that audience was achieved without much in the way of promotion or major acclaim for the series’ actors and writers. That success didn’t only justify five more seasons, it spawned four more spin-off series (or “books”). Power Book II: Ghost explores the life of St Patrick’s son Tariq, Power Book III: Raising Kanan is a 90s-set prequel depicting the early years of Jackson’s character, while the recently released Power Book IV: Force follows St Patrick’s right-hand man Tommy Egan and the forthcoming Power Book V: Influence concerns a crooked councilman. Increasingly, Jackson has become prominent on screen while maintaining a distinct presence behind the camera, not least as a music supervisor and performer on the franchise’s soundtracks. Power’s spin-off structure takes David Simon’s The Wire and stretches into a Marvel-like universe that now forms the cornerstone of Starz’s programming. All the while Jackson has emerged as a super-producer in the style of Law &amp; Order creator Dick Wolf, and Starz made their relationship with him official in 2018 with a four-year, $150m development deal. But, of course, 50 being 50, he won’t hesitate to hop on social media and needle his partners until he gets his way. But the public scrutiny cuts both ways. Fans revolted when Jackson remixed the title song he wrote and performed for the show, Big Rich Town, replacing the singer of the song’s hook Joe with Trey Songz. (He changed it back after one episode.) What’s more, Kemp has proved to be every bit as ruthless as Jackson in her role as Power’s showrunner, unafraid of killing off beloved characters. And why not? The bold moves defend the universe against critics who might feel inclined to write off some episodes as too soapy. It hasn’t cost the Power franchise its following. If anything, the bandwagon is getting bigger. In addition to the two new Power books, Starz also picked up BMF (Black Mafia Family) – Jackson’s Detroit-based crime drama – for a second season, and greenlit another series, Queen Nzinga, about a Dora Milaje-esque warrior, that he likened to the movie 300. And all of that is besides two other series he’s developing, one around his rap feud with the Game, and the other about Snoop Dogg’s 1993 murder case (he was acquitted). So far, the biggest setback he’s had on TV was the cancellation of his ABC series For Life (about a falsely incarcerated man who becomes an attorney behind bars), and even that earned two seasons. The success would be remarkable even if Jackson hadn’t nearly been left for dead two decades ago. It seems there’s no end to the 50 Cent extended universe. Power Book IV: Force is available now on StarzplayI am 50 and my wife is a few years younger. We have been together for more than a decade and have three wonderful and noisy children. I believe we are in one of the sweetest phases of our relationship: we don’t often fight, we sleep without interruption most nights, we care about each other deeply and we share our feelings. The issue is that our sex drives are unsynchronised. I would like to have sex more often (once a week) and she prefers to wait a couple of weeks (or a month). Lately, she feels our sex moments are a toll she needs to pay to keep me satisfied or happy. And I feel she has sex just for me. We tried some sex toys and it worked well when we used them, but this doesn’t give her a desire to have sex more often. I tried to talk to her, but she refused to continue talking, arguing that I make her feel that sex is an obligation not an optional pleasure inside the marriage. What can I do to gain sex appeal? It will be important to find a way to discuss this with your wife without her feeling blamed, or that you have marital expectations. Try to truly understand how she feels. She may have physical, psychological or medical reasons for lowered desire, or it may just be that you two – understandably – cannot manage to find enough privacy. Bear in mind that many people are experiencing depression as a result of Covid fears and restrictions, and depression can lower desire. Focusing on children can really affect a couple’s ability to kindle erotic contact, and this has been even more true during the confinement of the past two years. Be creative – individually and in partnership with your wife – in finding strategies for greater relaxation, more private time, and a prioritisation of love-making. Pamela Stephenson Connolly is a US-based psychotherapist who specialises in treating sexual disorders. If you would like advice from Pamela on sexual matters, send us a brief description of your concerns to private.lives@theguardian.com (please don’t send attachments). Each week, Pamela chooses one problem to answer, which will be published online. She regrets that she cannot enter into personal correspondence. Submissions are subject to our terms and conditions: see gu.com/letters-terms. Comments on this piece are premoderated to ensure discussion remains on topics raised by the writer. Please be aware there may be a short delay in comments appearing on the site.In 1998, Sir Paul Condon, the then Metropolitan police commissioner, wrote a letter to the Macpherson inquiry into the response to the murder of Stephen Lawrence. “Racism in the police is much more than ‘bad apples’,” he wrote. “The debate about defining this evil … is cathartic in leading us to recognise that it can occur almost unknowingly, as a matter of neglect, in an institution. I acknowledge the danger of institutionalisation of racism. However, labels can cause more problems than they solve.” In one sense, Condon’s words were insightful – his rejection of the “bad apple” argument strikes a contrast with Cressida Dick’s words about her own officers years later. But the fact that Dick would eventually be forced to resign amid a similarly fractious debate about problems of culture and institutional behaviour within the Met shows just how much work there is still to be done. Dick was internally popular, but ultimately failed to convince Sadiq Khan that she would address the Met’s problems with the urgency and on the scale that was required – particularly in light of the recent Charing Cross report by the Independent Office for Police Conduct. That contained shocking details of police officers sharing racist and misogynistic messages with each other. But the sad truth is that it also revealed nothing new. It was released after a period of consultation with the Met and related to investigations that were several years old. In April 2021, the director general of the IOPC had cause to write to the National Police Chiefs’ Council raising a concern that they were seeing cases that “may be indicative of broader cultural issues within some police forces”. The letter referred to a number of cases in which officers shared inappropriate images or content on social media that was “racist, misogynistic or homophobic”. It drew the NPCC’s attention to the fact that often the cases would start by “looking at the conduct of one officer but were then broadened to include the actions of others because inappropriate content was shared widely”. A corresponding statement was placed on the IOPC’s website, listing examples of cases the regulator had seen since replacing the IPCC in 2018. This referred to cases in the Met, south Wales, Cheshire, Warwickshire and Kent. The highlighted Met case dated back to December 2020 and dealt with several officers receiving “final written warnings for gross misconduct after sharing text messages which contained offensive references to people with disabilities and jokes about rape, paedophilia, racism, and homophobia.” There was very little press coverage of that letter and statement. The NPCC responded with a general commitment to “actively [work] with the IOPC to put further guidance and safeguards in place” around use of social media and messaging. There was no public outcry, and no push for the highlighted forces to respond with substantive measures they would take to deal with those problems. Yet those cases identified the same poisonous culture that allowed Wayne Couzens to continue to serve as a police officer despite co-workers nicknaming him “the rapist” due to his outrageous behaviour; and that allowed two police officers not only to take photographs of Bibaa Henry and Nicole Smallman’s bodies, but also to share them with impunity in WhatsApp groups with colleagues. Dick’s resignation has symbolic significance. The Met is England and Wales’ largest police force and it serves the most diverse population in Britain. Not only does it have regional responsibility, it holds national portfolios and heads counter-terrorism. The direction of policing in the Met can have a huge impact on national policing. However, substantive transformation requires more than a change at the top. It needs commitment from all levels of officers; scrutiny from the press; public engagement and demand for change; and the mandate from the Home Office. So far, frankly, those elements have not come together for a long enough period to apply the required pressure. This is despite the fact that trust and confidence among certain groups is extremely low. In December 2021, a YouGov survey found that more than half of Britons from minority ethnic backgrounds no longer trust the police; in October 2021, YouGov found that 47% of women and 40% of men said trust in police had decreased since the murder of Sarah Everard. Instilling confidence entails a willingness to call cultural and institutional problems exactly what they are and then doing something radical about it. This doesn’t detract from the fact that many officers are in the job for positive reasons, or that some progress has been made in these areas. Engaging with criticism of an institution does not undermine it, it legitimises it and keeps it relevant. It shows a willingness to be held accountable. Since last August, I’ve been in post as chair of the independent scrutiny and oversight board for the police’s action plan on inclusion and race. My role is to hold all 43 police chiefs across England and Wales accountable while they, with the College of Policing, develop and implement an action plan to create an “anti-racist police service” – their words. The plan focuses in particular on the experiences of Black communities with the police. By committing to it, each police chief accepts the need to deal with these problems. That acceptance reflects an acknowldgement that racial disparities are present in most areas of policing, and that conscious steps need to be taken to deal with them. The initiative was announced in June 2020; however, we’re now in February 2022 and discussions about institutional racism remain ongoing. I hope that this resignation, and the clear gauntlet that has been thrown down by the mayor of London, will provide the next Met chief with the mandate to push for reform internally, while externally acknowledging the extent of the issue. It shows that the elected officials really do have the power to hold police chiefs to account. I hope that other chiefs will be galvanised and inspired to undertake the charge – some of them already have. Dick’s resignation marks an opportunity for us, the public, and the media to make sure police reform stays at the top of the agenda. Abimbola Johnson is a barrister at 25 Bedford Row, and chair of the independent scrutiny and oversight board on the police’s action plan on inclusion and raceAustralian motorists may soon have to dig a little deeper to pay for their fuel after global prices rose to fresh seven-year highs amid mounting worries about a Russian invasion of Ukraine. Oil prices rose more than 2% overnight, with benchmark indices near the symbolic US$100 a barrel mark. Brent crude, for instance, rose 2.2% to US$96.48 in US trading before easing back slightly in Asia on Tuesday. Australian’s retail petrol prices are already at record levels, averaging 176.9 cents a litre in the week to 13 February, according to the Australian Institute of Petroleum. Peter Khoury, the head of media at NRMA in New South Wales, expects average prices to rise to 180 cents a litre or higher in coming days, noting Brisbane prices had already reached 192 cents for unleaded. “It’s not going to be pretty,” he said. “It’s going to continue to go up.” Quite apart from any immediate disruptions to supply should Russia invade Ukraine, the likelihood of heavy sanctions being slapped on one of the world’s biggest oil producers would likely push oil prices higher. “There’s some real concern now that oil is going to breach $US100 per barrel,” Khoury said. “We’re hoping the average in Australia doesn’t hit $2 a litre but we’ll be monitoring it.” Robert Rennie, the head of Westpac’s financial markets strategy group, said “the market is pretty much 100% Ukraine-dependent near term”. “If we do see any further developments there, I can easily see US$120 for Brent,” he said. Singapore, where most of Australia’s fuel imports are sourced, is a good guide to what’s coming since there’s typically a week’s lag between changes in that market and Australia’s. Singapore’s current gasoil price “tells you to expect to be paying $1.70-plus on average in the next week or so on a wholesale basis” for fuel, Rennie said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Rennie’s colleague, senior economist Justin Smirk, said that should crude prices be sustained at US$120 per barrel then average pump prices around Australia could get as high as $2.07 a litre. If such levels lasted for some weeks “this would be significantly more inflationary than what we currently have, pointing to upside risks to our [first and second quarter] consumer price index forecasts”, Smirk said. However, any post-tension correction would likely even be larger “so there could be an even larger deflationary pulse in the second half of the year as petrol prices come off the highs”, he said. NRMA’s Khoury says drivers’ best chance for relief is to research to locate their nearest relatively low-cost service station. NRMA has its own app for NSW, as does its counterpart in Victoria – RACV. For Queensland drivers there is RACQ’s version, with similar offerings in other states. Governments, too, provide options, such as NSW’s fuel check, for drivers hunting for lower-priced fuel. Brent and other oil prices were higher a decade ago, topping $US125 a barrel in March 2012. During those years, however, the Australian dollar was much closer to parity if not higher with the US dollar, buffering local motorists from some of the impact. The Australian dollar is now trading a bit above 70 US cents although market economists mostly predict it will strengthen towards 80 US cents by the year’s end – provided there is not some major disruption to the global economy. Australia’s fuel demand has grown during the Covid pandemic save for a brief drop during the first wave when big users were disrupted, according to the latest energy audit published by the Australian National University. “Bulk diesel is used in a wide variety of industries, including agriculture, mining, construction and public transport, all of which have been relatively little affected, in terms of their level of activity, by the pandemic,” the audit said. Frank Jotzo, the director of ANU’s Centre for Climate and Energy Policy, said the threat of supply disruptions should give extra impetus to efforts to decarbonise economies since that would typically have the added advantage of cutting import dependence. “A zero-emissions energy system means that far more of overall energy demand gets fulfilled locally,” Jotzo says. “In particular, decarbonisation means that oil for cars and trucks gets replaced with electricity, and that most electricity is generated from local renewable power rather than coal and gas which in many countries is imported. Similar shifts will take place in industry. “This is particularly relevant for Europe which is a large net importer of all fossil fuels,” Jotzo said. “Well over half of the EU’s total energy is imported. All European countries except Norway are net energy importers.” North-east Asia too relies heavily on energy imports, and while Australia is one of the world’s biggest exporters of coal and gas, it also imports about 37% of the total energy used, Jotzo said. “Australia’s ongoing domestic reserve of diesel and petrol is relatively small, and refining capacity is limited, so we are potentially vulnerable to disruptions in shipping fuels to Australia,” he said. “The more transport is electrified and thereby powered by local energy, the less of a risk this is.”The ex-wife of decorated war veteran Ben Roberts-Smith suspected he had been burying their money in the backyard when she uncovered a secret cache of USBs buried in a child’s lunchbox hidden under a rock, a court has heard. Over two days of evidence in the federal court, Emma Roberts denied in court she was seeking revenge against the Victoria Cross winner, saying: “I hope Ben survives this nightmare.” She told the court she believed Roberts-Smith was withdrawing cash from their joint bank accounts during the breakdown of their marriage and secretly burying it in the garden. “He used to be out in the garden burying things,” she told the court. Roberts described in court a “very obvious” location hidden underneath a rock and a hose reel where she and a family friend, Danielle Scott, dug with a pitchfork, uncovering a child’s lunchbox with pink clasps. Inside were “four or five” USBs inside clear snaplock bags, she said. Scott took the USBs and downloaded their contents on to a laptop before the pair re-buried the USBs, the court was told. “I said ‘I do not want to see what’s on them’,” Roberts told the court. The court was played a 60 Minutes report from 2021 that detailed the alleged burial of the USBs. Roberts denied she was the source of information to Nine’s journalists. Roberts-Smith is suing the Age, the Sydney Morning Herald and the Canberra Times for defamation over a series of reports he alleges are defamatory and portray him as committing war crimes, including murder. The newspapers are pleading a defence of truth. Roberts-Smith denies all wrongdoing. In evidence before court last year, Roberts-Smith said he was anonymously sent a number of USBs containing pictures, video and classified reports from his service in Afghanistan after he asked former colleagues for information that could help his defamation action against three newspapers he alleges defamed him by accusing him of war crimes. Roberts-Smith said he never buried the USBs, but that they were kept in his desk at the home he had shared with his wife. The court has previously heard the USBs contained operational reports from SAS missions in southern Afghanistan, drone footage of military operations and classified photographs. The court heard it included hundreds of photos of SAS soldiers drinking in the Fat Ladies Arms, an unofficial bar at the Australian military base in Afghanistan, including photos of troops (not including Roberts-Smith) drinking from a prosthetic leg allegedly taken from a slain Afghan national, who the newspapers allege was shot by Roberts-Smith. Roberts-Smith says the man was an insurgent killed in the heat of battle. In court Tuesday, Roberts was cross-examined about access to her husband’s email account. As a director of the company she ran with her husband – RS Group – Roberts told the court she had access to all company emails. Roberts told the court Scott was also given the password to access the email address by Roberts-Smith to deal with correspondence from Person 17, the woman with whom Roberts-Smith had allegedly been having an affair. Roberts said she and Roberts-Smith did not want any contact with Person 17 after that relationship ended, and wanted a third party to correspond with Scott. Bruce McClintock, acting for Roberts-Smith, suggested that Scott and Roberts read Roberts-Smith’s emails for months, an act that was “sneaky and dishonest”, an electronic equivalent to “eavesdropping”. “I don’t believe so,” Roberts said. Roberts was questioned about her text message correspondence with Scott, comparing, in one exchange, her husband’s career to the Titanic – that is, destined to sink. “He’s a lying cheating cunt,” Roberts said in another exchange. She told the court: “I was very frustrated with Ben at the time. I was very frustrated in a bitter divorce.” McClintock put it to Roberts her evidence was untrue and “an exercise in rank hypocrisy”. “No.” Roberts rejected assertions she was motivated by revenge, saying she was appearing because she had been subpoenaed. “I hope Ben survives this nightmare,” she said. Roberts was cross-examined over her contacts with journalists, telling the court she had had several meetings with reporters, and their lawyers once she was subpoenaed, but she did not provide information or documents for stories. The trial, before Justice Anthony Besanko, continues.That is where we will leave the live blog for Tuesday. Thanks for following along. Here’s some of what you might have missed today: Thousands of nurses and midwives gathered outside NSW parliament to fight for staff-to-patient ratios on all shifts and a 2.5% pay increase. Asio chief declared that his intelligence agency is “not here to be politicised”, vowing to defend its independence after the leak of details of an alleged foreign interference plot. Former Labor prime minister Kevin Rudd said what Peter Dutton is “asserting about the Australian Labor party and China is a bald-faced lie”. Rudd also accused the Liberal party of hypocrisy on the issue. Attorney general Michaelia Cash confirmed in Senate estimates that the anti-corruption commission bill won’t be coming until after election. The prime minister said his wife could “speak for herself” after 2GB’s Ben Fordham suggested she had taken the tough questions in a 60 Minutes interview. NSW recorded 8,201 new cases and 16 deaths, Victoria recorded 8,162 cases and 20 deaths, Queensland recorded 5,286 new cases and 10 deaths, the ACT reported 455 cases, SA reported 1,138 cases, Tasmania recorded 513 cases and Western Australia reported 62 new cases. Novak Djokovic has said that although he is not against vaccinations, he is willing to sacrifice future trophies if he is told to get the jab. We will be back again tomorrow with all the latest from the House and Senate estimates. Sticking with Alan Tudge and the Network Ten report, here’s a quick situation report. There is a lot of speculation about the minister’s future. The prime minister’s office says there is no decision yet about whether or not he returns to the frontbench – Vivienne Thom’s report is not yet finalised, so it sounds like the ultimate landing point is not imminent. But I understand Tudge did lobby the then prime minister’s office for Rachelle Miller to be promoted (which was referenced in Peter Van Onselen’s news report tonight). I’m told there are records – correspondence or messages to that effect. But to be clear: I don’t know whether or not that information has been assessed by the Thom inquiry or what, if anything, she has recommended. The prime minister at the time was Malcolm Turnbull. Turnbull has said previously he was unaware Tudge was in a relationship with Miller while she worked for him. He learned about it later, after Miller had moved to another office. Turnbull has confirmed those facts to me tonight. To recap, Tudge, the education minister, stood aside in December while the Thom investigation into allegations made by his former staffer, Miller, was carried out. Miller, who worked as Tudge’s press secretary while he was human services minister in the Turnbull government, first admitted to an extramarital affair with her boss in the November 2020 Four Corners episode Inside the Canberra Bubble. Then, in December 2021, just days after the release of the Jenkins review into parliamentary culture, Miller revealed her relationship with Tudge was “more complicated”, saying it was defined by a power imbalance. She alleged it was at times “abusive”. Tudge has denied the allegations. And you can read Tamsin Rose’s piece from today’s nurses and midwives rally outside NSW parliament at the link below: And you can read more on the Djokovic interview in this story from Elias Visontay: And finally, the Northern Territory has recorded 1,086 new cases overnight, with 156 people in hospital and 22 requiring oxygen. The number of active cases in the NT has now reached 7,233. Chau Chak Wing, the Chinese-Australian property developer who was named in a Senate estimates hearing last night, has issued a statement to say he is “shocked and disappointed at the baseless and reckless claim”. He also said he had “never had any involvement or interest in interfering with the democratic election process in Australia”. The Labor senator Kimberley Kitching, under the protection of parliamentary privilege, told the Asio chief, Mike Burgess, at the Senate hearing last night: I am reliably informed that the puppeteer mentioned in your case study in your annual threat assessment speech given last week is Chau Chak Wing. Kitching asked Burgess to confirm it, but the Asio chief replied that he would not comment on “speculation” about identities “and it’s unfair you ask me that question in public”. Burgess had last week said in a speech in Canberra that Asio had foiled an alleged election interference plot, which involved an unnamed “puppeteer” hiring an employee who then allegedly searched for “candidates likely to run in the election who either supported the interests of [a] foreign government or who were assessed as vulnerable to inducements and cultivation”. He did not identify the alleged puppeteer, the candidates targeted or the foreign country responsible. In the statement issued this afternoon, Chau said: I am shocked and disappointed at the baseless and reckless claim made by Senator Kimberley Kitching during a Senate Estimates hearing on Monday. It is always unfortunate when elected representatives use the shield of parliamentary privilege as a platform to vilify and attack Australian citizens without producing a shred of evidence. I am a businessman and philanthropist. I have never had any involvement or interest in interfering with the democratic election process in Australia. Chau said he would “invite Senator Kitching to show some courage and integrity by repeating her claim and revealing the sources she says she relied on, outside the parliament”. In Senate estimates, Labor’s Katy Gallagher has been asking the finance minister, Simon Birmingham, about the Channel 10 report suggesting that Alan Tudge may be dumped from the ministry. Birmingham did not want to give an inch – he said he hadn’t seen the news report, and wouldn’t say whether Tudge would keep his job or not. Birmingham repeatedly said that he “can’t speak for the accuracy of the reporting” and cautioned against “assumptions and assertions” about what was in the review conducted by Dr Vivienne Thom, including the reported conclusion that Tudge will be sacked for lobbying to promote staffer Rachelle Miller without declaring he was in a relationship. He said: We’re not going to respond to a news report in a way that undermines the rights of those who engaged in a review process ... We want to ensure that review is concluded and Mr Tudge and Ms Miller receive the findings of Dr Thom, which will be more substantive than that [news] report if it is accurate. Asked if the prime minister, Scott Morrison, still had confidence in Tudge, Birmingham noted Tudge had “had stood aside pending the Thoms report”. The Australian federal police have announced they have fined a man for posting a “threatening and menacing” comment on Facebook, directed at a federal MP. The 47-year-old was fined $5,000 for likening the politician to a terrorist supporter and “predicted they would be murdered”. The Marangaroo man pleaded guilty yesterday in Perth magistrates court to using a carriage service to menace and was fined $5000. Novak Djokovic has said that although he is not against vaccinations, he is willing to sacrifice future trophies if he is told to get the jab. Speaking to the BBC, Djokovic said he’d accept not being able to compete for Wimbledon or the French Open over his stance on the vaccine. Yes, that is the price that I’m willing to pay. I was never against vaccination, but I’ve always supported the freedom to choose what you put in your body. Because the principles of decision making on my body are more important than any title or anything else. I’m trying to be in tune with my body as much as I possibly can. It’s the first time the tennis star has spoken out since he was deported from Australia in a row over his vaccine status. Djokovic also addressed some of the criticisms that came from the stoush with the Australian government, particularly around the details of his submission to be exempted from getting the vaccine due to a recent Covid infection. I was really sad and disappointed with the way it all ended for me in Australia. It wasn’t easy. I understand that there is a lot of criticism, and I understand that people come out with different theories on how lucky I was or how convenient it is. Absolutely, the visa declaration error was not deliberately made. It was accepted and confirmed by the federal court and the minister himself in the Ministry for Immigration in Australia. So actually, what people probably don’t know is that I was not deported from Australia on the basis that I was not vaccinated, or I broke any rules or that I made an error in my visa declaration. All of that was actually approved and validated by the federal court of Australia and the minister for immigration. The reason why I was deported from Australia was because the minister for immigration used his discretion to cancel my visa based on his perception that I might create some anti-vax sentiment in the country or in the city, which I completely disagree with. Labor’s home affairs spokesperson, Kristina Keneally, spoke to reporters in the press gallery a short time ago. When asked whether it had been appropriate for Labor senator Kimberley Kitching to use parliamentary privilege to name a person as the alleged puppeteer behind a foreign interference plot (the Asio boss has not confirmed this), Keneally replied: I make the point that individual senators can make individual decisions about the questions they ask, and what we heard last night in Senate estimates to our national security agencies were questions from a range of senators from a range of political parties that are questions that I would not ask in a public forum. And I would encourage all members of parliament to take heed of the Asio director general’s advice about the importance of keeping national security information and intelligence information confidential, because if it becomes weaponised as we saw with Peter Dutton’s dangerous and divisive rhetoric last week, if it becomes a tool for political domestic debate, it actually undermines national security and social cohesion. Asked whether she had spoken with Kitching to raise concerns, Keneally said: I have not had the opportunity to, and I’d prefer to keep my conversations with my caucus colleagues private. We have given Kitching an opportunity to comment. Over in finance estimates, the Future Fund is up for a grilling from Greens senator Nick McKim over revelations it invested in a Chinese state-controlled weapons manufacturer that has sold combat aircraft to the Myanmar military, which is accused of crimes against humanity. We hear that the Future Fund has now divested $4.9m in five subsidiaries of the company, Chinese arms conglomerate Aviation Industry Corporation of China (AVIC), due to US treasury sanctions issued against one of the subsidiaries in August last year. The Fund’s chief executive, Dr Raphael Arndt. tells the hearing that they divested from AVIC in November 2021. The Future Fund’s investment in AVIC was revealed through freedom of information a month earlier. Arndt said: In August 2021, the US treasury announced that there would be investment sanctions investing in one AVIC subsidiary, being Avic Shenyang Aviation Company Limited, which is one of the companies we had an investment in. [We] proceeded to divest that position. Under the sanction that was issued, they had until June of this year to do that and I believe the respond to the FOI request was October 2021. In November of 2021 that position was fully divested. McKim asks whether the Future Fund divested due to the embarrassment of the FOI. Arndt says the divestment was made in response to the US sanctions. He also clarifies that the investment was made through an index fund, and that the Future Fund doesn’t look at individual companies it invests in through index positions. That is left to third-party investment managers, he says. Earlier today, WA Premier Mark McGowan told reporters an announcement on border arrangements would be made at the end of the month. The WA border was set to open on 5 February, but due to widespread Omicron outbreaks, McGowan announced that the hard border would remain for the time being. The premier said the government would be reviewing the border restrictions, and suggested the extra time was to allow people to get their third jab: We are reviewing [the border restrictions] as we speak. We are going to review it over February and no doubt we will reach an announcement some time in February. The reality is though that we are getting the third dose vaccination rate up, the eastern states appear to be coming off their peak which is a good thing, we are getting children [vaccinated], and every thing we are doing every single day is saving many West Australian lives. By the time we reopen the interstate and international borders, we will be one of the highest vaccinated places in the world with one of the safest populations in the world, which is a great thing. So, Channel 10 is advertising they have another “leak” from the government tonight: We’ll be keeping our eyes on this one. Good afternoon all, a quick thanks to Tory Shepherd for her epic shift this morning. Mostafa Rachwani with you this afternoon, and there is still much about so let’s get stuck in. Mostafa Rachwani is standing by to take you through the rest of the day. See you all tomorrow! The Sky News interview – in which the foreign minister did not specifically repeat the China appeasement claim – continued as follows. Kieran Gilbert: Isn’t it incumbent upon you and your government to say this is bipartisan territory, you have got a solid partner regardless of who wins the election? Marise Payne: Well we do we have a solid partner in Australia, Kieran – I’ve been extremely clear about that. And I have been working, as I said, with counterparts in the Quad, multiple other groupings, both formal and informal, over the last three years, in fact, six years, including as as minister for defence, on prosecuting the case for Australia as a solid partner. Gilbert: But you’ve got your government, members of cabinet, the prime minister, the defence minister, others, saying that China has chosen Anthony Albanese? Payne: Well, Kieran, I think it is legitimate for governments and for members of this government to point out areas, as I just said, the minister for defence did in question time today, in a short grab that I saw, to point out areas where we believe that there are differences in approach. And, ultimately, we have to work with the material that’s on the record, and the material that’s on the record, Kieran, in relation to defence, for example, is the situation that the previous Labor Government left us with in 2013, for example. Gilbert: The other material is that Anthony Albanese met with [US] Secretary [of State Antony] Blinken last week, with [White House Indo-Pacific coordinator] Kurt Campbell last week with the Japanese ambassador last week. It is bipartisan territory when we’re talking about China, and the government is clutching at straws, isn’t it? Payne: I don’t agree, Kieran, that it is not the role of the government to indicate where we believe our strengths lie and where we believe our record stands. We are consistently doing that. The foreign minister, Marise Payne, has declined to repeat Scott Morrison’s claim that a Labor government would stand for “appeasement” of China. In an interview on Sky News, Payne was repeatedly pressed on the matter. While she repeated the Coalition’s criticism of the former Labor government for a drop in defence spending as a share of GDP, and insisted it was fair enough to indicate “where we believe our strengths lie”, Payne dodged several opportunities to specifically endorse the appeasement claim. When asked whether it was in the national interest for the Coalition to portray Labor as being compromised by China given that it may win government at the election, Payne made a generic statement that consistency was important: What I would say is that it is essential, it is essential for those who wish to govern our nation, to be clear and to be consistent, as we have done in the approach that we take on these issues in Australia’s national interests and to protect Australia’s national security. Asked why she won’t reiterate Morrison’s appeasement line – and whether she was uncomfortable with the prime minister’s language – Payne backed Peter Dutton’s question time comment about defence spending. Payne said she knew, as a former defence minister, about “the repair that needed to be done to Defence’s investment program, and frankly, to the state of personnel numbers and a range of other issues – that was what we inherited from the previous government”. The interviewer Kieran Gilbert noted that Payne had met with her counterparts from the US, Japan and India in Melbourne on Friday. Gilbert read out a tweet from Prof Rory Medcalf, head of the Australian National University’s national security college, that “Australia’s national interests require the foreign minister to reassure her Quad counterparts they can have confidence in Australia as a security partner, no matter who wins government”. Payne said she was a great admirer of Medcalf’s work. She said she had worked with her Quad counterparts over the past three years “to absolutely assure them of Australia’s commitment to the Indo-Pacific”. Pressed on whether it was in the national interest to suggest there was not bipartisanship on the issue, Payne said the Australian democracy was strong, robust and vibrant. Some snaps from question time, thanks to Mike Bowers: If you’re after all the details of the “character test” that the federal government is talking about (no, not the test it keeps referring to in relation to opposition leader Anthony Albanese, but the legislative one), Daniel Hurst and Paul Karp have you covered: That was a spectacularly long question time. Or is that just me? Anyway, it’s done now, thanks for playing along! Labor’s Richard Marles asks: “Why does the prime minister always fail to anticipate problems before they occur, fail to listen to expert warnings and act too little, too late? Why doesn’t he ever do his job?” Scott Morrison launches into a Gish gallop listing everything the government has ever done. Here’s a link to the PM’s press releases if you want all the details. “We’re getting on with the job,” he says. “The cattle don’t use the phones,” Labor’s Tony Burke says, complaining that the prime minister is now talking about the cost of communication instead of the cost of beef. Labor MP Susan Templeman asks about cost of living pressures, and prime minister Scott Morrison refers to the Russian threat to Ukraine. Sigh. He says: There are considerable pressures on costs of living in the inflationary environment we are facing, and economic uncertainty, that is a function of many things, including what we are seeing in the Ukraine. Conflict will force up the price of petrol, he says (in answer to the question, which was about the cost of beef). There’s still more than $5bn in the government’s election war chest in “decisions taken but not yet announced”, the finance department says, setting the scene for a pre-budget cash splash in coming weeks. The Coalition copped some heat last year when the mid year economic fiscal outlook (Myefo) reported the government had noted down nearly $16bn in decisions not yet announced, and those not for publication due to commercial sensitivities. The government wouldn’t confirm the exact breakdown between those two categories but said it was roughly equal, with the NFP measures said to be related to Covid vaccine spending. Labor’s shadow finance minister, Katy Gallagher, tried to drill down on exactly how much of the approximately $8bn in “not yet announced” decisions – basically government decisions that they aren’t ready to announce yet, or ones they’re saving for a rainy day – was still to come. After some back and forth, the finance department confirmed around $927m had been spent in numerous small announcements recently, and finance minister Simon Birmingham said another $1.5bn had been spent in some large announcements in the last few weeks. That leaves around $5.5bn in decisions taken but not yet announced. Labor’s Brendan O’Connor says no one has investigated the leaking of texts between prime minister Scott Morrison and French president Emmanuel Macron. Can the prime minister explain how this text message, which was on his phone, was leaked? Morrison doesn’t refer to the text messages, but says he was upfront with Macron (which Macron denied with the immortal words “I don’t think, I know” when asked if he thought Morrison had lied to him). Morrison talks up the Aukus deal and says: We had to advise the French government that we would not be continuing [with the submarine contract]. And if those opposite think there is a friendly way or an easy way … to tell another country that a $90bn contract cannot be continued, I am all ears. Officials from the attorney general’s department have revealed that the prosecution of Witness K’s lawyer, Bernard Collaery, has cost $424,642 in the period from 19 June, when Witness K was sentenced, to 31 January. Collaery’s case is bogged down in appeals about national security information provisions. The attorney general, Michaelia Cash, said that “to the extent possible” the case will be in open court but the commonwealth always has to seek to protect “national security information”. Labor’s Kim Carr asks if the commonwealth is seeking to introduce “super secret” evidence that Collaery’s lawyer wouldn’t see. Officials confirmed they are asking for “court-only evidence” about the sensitivity of national security information, but it doesn’t go to the guilt or innocence on the primary charge. Labor’s Clare O’Neil asks the minister do “do his job” and fix aged care. Health minister Greg Hunt says they’ve taken a range of actions since the royal commission after the Oakden aged care scandal in South Australia. He says: In terms of the actions taken during the course of the pandemic, we have at this stage delivered 83.4% of booster coverage to the eligible population. 100% of facilities have had visits and over 300 have had a second visit for boosters. In terms of workforce, over 82,000 surge positions have been made available. 50m units of PPE have been provided to aged care homes... beyond that, we have also been able to provide 9m rapid antigen testing to concessional card holders. He’s also talking about overall spending in aged care and those not-so-popular aged care bonus payments. Labor MP Amanda Rishworth says childcare fees have gone up by 40% while real wages haven’t risen, making it harder to make ends meet. Liberal MP Stuart Robert says from 7 March, government changes in response to cost of living concerns will be in place. He says: In just two or three weeks, the average Australian family with a second or third child in childcare will be $2,200 better off. $2,200 better off. Balancing childcare and the childcare need of our society is important … over 240,000 children and their families are benefiting. The government understands the challenges with a second and third child which is why these extra rebates, over $1bn coming through, approaching $2bn, will start earlier than we first hoped. Andrews goes on to say that she “takes on board the concerns people have in relation to swastikas on buildings”, and now her time has expired. Labor MP Terri Butler is asking about the Safer Communities Funding (Sarah Martin wrote about it here). She’s asking why mosques subjected to vandalism that referenced the Christchurch massacre are missing out. Home affairs minister Karen Andrews says the grants are appropriately administered (which is not what the auditor general found): In relation to grant funding, and I make this point very sincerely, in relation to grant funding, and those opposite I understand have not been in government for quite some time ... but it’s very clear that grant funding guidelines to the safer communities fund were complied with. There were instances where ministers “did take specific responsibilities to make sure the programs were able to be supported in various communities”, she says. Labor’s Ed Husic says that was a generic answer and mentions swastikas on mosques. Speaker Andrew Wallace says something about specificity, which was hard to hear because that word makes people laugh out loud (thanks to former prime minister Kevin Rudd’s use of it). Hmmmm Albanese asks if Morrison’s response to questions about the bushfires are what former NSW premier Gladys Berejiklian was referring to when she said “lives are at stake today and he is obsessed with petty political pointscoring”. We’re on those leaked texts again, which involved a mystery minister. Morrison responds with the same template as below, detailing spending on recovery and resilience. Labor MPs are brandishing photocopies of that Falinski article mentioned earlier: Labor’s up with another question about the federal government’s response to last year’s bushfires. Morrison says it was “the most testing of times”: That is why we put in place the actions which were coordinated for some $2bn worth of support to aid the immediate assistance and recovery from those bushfires. [We] also for the first time had a mandatory rollout of the defence forces to support Operation Bushfire Assist … a trial run was conducted and that meant we could move to support our state governments and I thank state governments who accepted that assistance. It was a great crisis and the government responded with clear funding commitments. There’s been a spectacular blowup in Senate estimates, with Labor senator Katy Gallagher accusing finance minister Simon Birmingham of running a “dodgy costing unit” out of his office to scrutinise opposition policies. Birmingham’s office last week released their own set of costings on Labor policies like free rapid antigen tests, after the opposition resisted putting their own price tag on the headline-grabbing policy. In a sign of what we will see through the coming election, Birmingham said “we will continue to scrutinise your announcements in the lead-up to the election, just as I expect you to scrutinise ours”. Some context: last week, the Australian published an article quoting analysis from Birmingham’s office, claiming “Labor’s pandemic policies would have cost taxpayers an extra $81bn”. The finance minister used the numbers to claim Labor would have presided over “unnecessary spending”, as the government looks to fight the election campaign on economic and cost of living grounds. (A reminder that the Coalition government’s spending has Australia on track for $1tn in net debt in coming years.) Birmingham said the calculations had been done between his staff and the office of treasurer Josh Frydenberg, not the finance department. “Unfortunately you’ve announced a policy with no detail, so we put some conservative numbers on it,” Birmingham told Gallagher. “So you just made it up?” Gallagher responded. Labor hasn’t said exactly how its free RAT scheme would work, for example how many tests would be available to each person. The opposition leader, Anthony Albanese, when asked about the price of the scheme, has consistently said costings would be released before the election. So, Birmingham said his team modelled several possible scenarios, coming up with a few different price tags, all north of a few billion. He called it an “ill-defined policy”. “Ill-defined but you managed to define it?” Gallagher shot back. “What a joke.” She accused Birmingham of “cooked-up, dodgy numbers”. “All the policies we take to the election will be costed, but I worry about this, and your dodgy scare campaign, which fell flat,” Gallagher said. Warringah MP Zali Steggall, who has been under fire over campaign donations, asks about the federal government’s support for small business, and says she has heard from one in Manly that is on the brink of closing. Treasurer Josh Frydenberg says he hopes her constituent’s correspondence included a $100,000 cheque. He talks up Australia’s economic recovery from the pandemic, saying: This side of the House has helped deliver more than $60bn of economic support to the people of New South Wales. Record support to the people of New South Wales. Whether it’s the jobkeeper payment, whether it’s been the cash bonus … we did partner with the NSW government on a 50-50 basis to provide business support. Which was very important. But now the economy is recovering strongly. There are definitely businesses and families who continue to be challenged by the current economic conditions. But Australia has outperformed all major advanced economies. And we have been there for the Australian people, we have been there for the people of New South Wales, and they needed our help. Labor MP Kristy McBain says an official has confirmed at Senate estimates that “three years after it was announced, not a single cent of the $4.7bn emergency response fund has been spent on disaster recovery”. What sort of “incompetent government” puts that money aside and doesn’t spend a cent? Morrison says that’s a long-term program, and that $2bn has been spent from other rebuilding and resilience programs. There are more interjections, and the Speaker gives Morrison six seconds to finish his answer. He uses it to talk up Andrew Constance, the Liberal candidate for Gilmore. Another point of order from Burke, then Frydenberg picks up the thread again. He says: Despite protests that you no longer stand for those things, the fact is, you have said those things. Someone says loudly, “oh, no”. (Sorry, I didn’t catch who it was, but it sounded very despondent). Shadow treasurer Jim Chalmers asks treasurer Josh Frydenberg about a report in the Australian Financial Review on inheritance taxes. Again, we covered this earlier. Liberal MP Jason Falinski says he definitely doesn’t back them, despite that report. This is the ongoing fallout from a three decade old speech Anthony Albanese gave about tax. Chalmers says: Now that the treasurer’s desperate scare campaign has blown up in his face, will he stop spending his day poring over speeches from over 30 years ago, stop trolling his opponents websites and start doing his job for once? Frydenberg continues attacking Albanese, saying he has supported inheritance taxes, and so on, ad infinitum. Last week there was much huffing and puffing about dorothy dixer questions that end with a variation of “is the minister aware of alternative approaches”. The government takes that as carte blanche for full scale attacks on the opposition, but the Speaker... well, the Speaker is mostly OK with it. Labor’s Murray Watt has been asking attorney-general Michaelia Cash about reports Scott Morrison considered a last-ditch attempt to get the national integrity commission up to help pass the religious discrimination bill. Watt asked about reports the cabinet rejected the possibility of making the integrity commission retrospective – which led to a classic Cash counterpunch. Cash said Watt had “demeaned” his line of questioning and was getting “political”, then questioned what senator Kim Carr thinks about the proposed expulsion of Victorian MP Kaushaliya Vaghela. Watt objected on the grounds of relevance, but Cash pushed on: Given that Mr Albanese is campaigning on a federal Icac, expelling a member for referring a matter to [Vic] Ibac … is hypocritical and suggests Mr Albanese is not serious about fighting corruption. Speaker Andrew Wallace asks Morrison to reflect on the words he’s using after a point of order from Labor’s Tony Burke, who referred to previous calls on character assassinations in parliament. That deportation legislation detailed earlier will feature all question time, I reckon. Have a look at Christopher Knaus’ piece and prime minister Scott Morrison’s comments, rinse and repeat. And we’re away. Question time is kicked off with a question from the opposition leader, Anthony Albanese, to the prime minister, Scott Morrison. Albanese is asking what Morrison has done to show support for Ukraine. Morrison says they’re working closely with the Ukraine: To send a very clear message to the Russian government that these threats of terrible violence against Ukraine are unacceptable and should be denounced and all effort should be made to prevent Russia taking that step in committing that violence against Ukraine. The national security committee met last night and Morrison says “we will move swiftly with our partners along the lines we were considering and discussing, not for the first time”. And now he’s segueing swiftly into attacking China for not denouncing Russia. Bit of breaking news before question time begins: This just in from Christopher Knaus – a human story, important in context of the federal government’s push to be able to kick out offenders: Case numbers have also come out of Western Australia, with 62 new cases reported overnight, 48 of them locally acquired. There are now 471 active cases in WA. A few more bits and bobs from party room. There was a discussion of the government’s Regional Telecommunications Review report which was tabled in parliament on Monday, with several MPs speaking in support. There was also some discussion about live exports and cost of living. One MP said the government needed to exercise spending restraint, urging an end to the low and middle income tax offset which was always intended to be temporary. Terry Young, the Liberal MP for the seat of Longman, addressed the split over religious discrimination last week, complaining that he had supported net zero because “they accepted that it was for the greater good”, but spoke “disappointingly” of the MPs who had not supported the bill. He also read out an email from a local pastor expressing anger at the government over the failure to legislate religious discrimination. Another spoke on marginal seat campaigns, saying “they were not rocket science, but were hard work” and praised the prime minister and federal director Andrew Hirst for their campaign strategy at the last election. Greg Hunt, who is retiring at the next election, also spoke about his experience in parliament, saying the Coalition had been written off in 2001, 2004 and 2019, but had prevailed because of the leadership of John Howard and Scott Morrison. “We were told we were going to lose, but we didn’t.” He said that if Morrison “pulls this off” and wins the next election, he will be “just above” Howard in his estimation. Case numbers have come in from the Australian Capital Territory, with 455 new cases reported overnight. Forty-nine people are in hospital, four are in intensive care and two require ventilation. Some more on inflation issues. The RBA this morning released the minutes of its first board meeting in 2022. Nothing jumps out as startling. However, CBA, Australia’s biggest lender, has seen enough. It shifted its prediction of when the central bank will lift the official cash rate to June, earlier the August timing it had forecast. Financial markets are already pricing in a June move too, with the rate to lift to 0.25% from its record low 0.1% rate. Gareth Aird, the CBA’s top economist, predicts three further rate rises in 2022 to take it to 1% by the end of 2022. While the rate rise, if the CBA is right, won’t come before the federal elections, the expectation may be firmly in the minds of rate-wary voters. Aird said: We expect the RBA to move to an explicit hiking bias at the May 2022 board meeting. The Labor caucus met this morning – including a lengthy debrief about how the religious discrimination debate went and discussion of some of the wedge tactics the government is using on national security and immigration. Leader Anthony Albanese said: Last week was our party at its best – we made a collective decision and backed it in. There is often a debate about Labor having different constituencies and attitudes between them. We can represent people of faith and still represent that every child should be free from discrimination. If we win, we will act on discrimination on the basis of faith, including an anti-vilification provision, which is stronger than what the government put forward, and we’ll also protect children. Albanese said he’d never seen the government vote against its own legislation before (after it lost the vote on LGBTQ+ student amendments) and also chipped the Greens for pushing for bigger amendments that would not have guaranteed the result. Albanese said “every government scare campaign has blown up in their face”, including Josh Frydenberg’s attacks on a speech he gave in 1991 on inheritance tax, which he compared to “Jason Falinski’s comments in the paper today”. On national security, Albanese noted Asio boss Mike Burgess had backed his account of briefings related to alleged foreign interference. Albanese said Labor was “competitive” in the election and “confident the government does not deserve a second decade in office”. One MP noted that Labor’s anti-vilification amendment was being described in the Muslim community as the “Christchurch amendment” and there is an important national security dimension in ensuring people aren’t vilified on the basis of religion. The NSW Nurse and Midwives Association are striking today, with a list of issues as outlined by my colleagues Michael McGowan and Tamsin Rose here. Interesting to hear a sympathetic Ben Fordham on Sydney’s 2GB this morning (apparently his mother-in-law was a nurse). Fordham did highlight that nurses got a 2.5% pay rise last year but, unless I missed it, made no mention that CPI is running at 3.5% (or 2.6% if you take the RBA’s preferred measure for underlying inflation). Either way, nurses are – like many of us – unlikely to see much in the way of increased pay in real terms, given the jump in inflation. Meanwhile, executives at one prominent Sydney hospital are apparently unhappy with the badges being worn by nurses. A source tells us executives at the Royal Prince Alfred hospital have been overheard criticising nurses for these badges and stickers in front of patients. “Remove it. It is offensive because the sticker has the phrase ‘life and death’ on it. It’s very misleading,” is what one nurse was told, apparently. The nurse said the executives were “basically giving orders to shut [the protest] down instead of creating a solution”. We can expect more tensions between executives and staff, it seems. Victoria’s ombudsman, Deborah Glass, will consider an official referral from state parliament for a new investigation into Labor’s “red shirts” scheme. Last week, Labor MP Kaushaliya Vaghela crossed the floor of the upper house to support a motion by her factional ally, former Victorian government minister Adem Somyurek, for a new probe. She is expected to be expelled from Labor for breaking party rules. In 2018, Glass found 21 Labor MPs had misused almost $400,000 worth of taxpayer funds to pay for campaign work, in what is now referred to as “red shirts”. Labor repaid the money and all MPs involved were cleared of any criminal activity. The latest referral to Glass asks her to examine the alleged role of the premier, Daniel Andrews, in the scheme, as well as matters related to another investigation being conducted in conjunction with the state’s anti-corruption watchdog into branch stacking by Somyurek and his allies. “I will consider the extent to which the matters in the referral have already been investigated or are currently being investigated,” Glass said in a statement on Tuesday. She continued: The public needs to have confidence that public resources are not being misused for political ends, and, as always, any investigation I lead will be independent and based on evidence. I have discretion to investigate as I see fit, and I will refer matters and share information as appropriate and in accordance with the Ombudsman Act. Glass said she would report back to parliament in due course. Treasurer Josh Frydenberg also spoke to the joint party room, saying it was important for MPs to let their constituencies know that Labor had supported a number of taxes. “There isn’t a tax that [opposition leader Anthony] Albanese hasn’t supported,” Frydenberg said. He also urged MPs to “keep going” with their campaign on Albanese’s support for a wealth tax, suggesting the leader of the opposition had been “frothing at the mouth” over their attack: We have got to keep going. These are his words, not just to the Labor party conference, but he was shadow minister when he was talking about wealth taxes as being a priority for Australia. The treasurer’s urging suggests we can expect to see some more of the dirty misinformation campaigning that we saw at the last election, when an unfounded campaign against death taxes gained traction, particularly on Facebook. Prime minister Scott Morrison also spoke a bit about Jenny Morrison’s appearance on 60 Minutes, thanking colleagues for messages of support she had received. The PM said that it was “a brave thing for Jenny to do”: It’s not something that she does naturally or that she likes to do – it’s not in her nature. But she was magnificent, you would expect me to say that, but she was – she was truly amazing. Here are the latest coronavirus numbers from around Australia today, as the country records at least 46 deaths from Covid 19: ACT Deaths: 0 Cases: 455 In hospital: 49 (with 4 people in ICU) NSW Deaths: 16 Cases: 8,201 In hospital: 1,583 (with 96 people in ICU) NT Deaths: 0 Cases: 1,086 In hospital: 156 (with 22people in ICU) Queensland Deaths: 10 Cases: 5,286 In hospital: 491 (with 35 people in ICU) South Australia Deaths: 0 Cases: 1,138 In hospital: 219 Tasmania Deaths: 0 Cases: 513 In hospital: 10 (one person in ICU) Victoria Deaths: 20 Cases: 8,162 In hospital: 441 (with 67 people in ICU) Western Australia Deaths: 0 Cases: 62 (48 local, 14 ‘other’) In hospital: 0 In Tasmania, 513 new Covid cases have been recorded. Ten people are in hospital, one in intensive care. Ten people have died in Queensland, where 5,286 new Covid cases have been reported. There have been 491 hospitalisations and 35 people are in intensive care. The prime minister has told a meeting of Coalition MPs that they need to focus ahead of the election to be successful. Dismissing the division of last week that saw five Liberal MPs cross the floor, Scott Morrison said he knew the path to victory was in exposing the “starkness” of the choice between the Coalition and Labor. He said: To win this election will require the most discipline, focus and professionalism from each of us in all of our roles. Do that, we win, it’s that simple. Morrison said there was “no risk-free change” and urged MPs to work hard in their electorates on the issues that mattered to them: We have a job to do - I’m going to do mine, I need you to do yours. I need you to focus on your seats and what’s happening in your seats. I need you to prosecute every single inch of our agenda in those seats into the channels that that you know. Deputy prime minister Barnaby Joyce also spoke, using a swimming analogy to stress the need to push through the “pain barrier”. He said in a 1500m race, the last three-quarters of the final lap were all that mattered: There’s only one part of the race that it’s really important that you’re in front, and that is the finish line. Joyce warned MPs that some MPs might lose a seat by as few as 60 votes, and said they should go the extra mile by visiting the local bowls club or church and “micro” groups. Another 1,138 Covid cases have been reported in South Australia, and 219 people are in hospital. Eighteen are on ventilators. Morrison says there’s a “very real risk” of a Russian incursion into Ukraine in the next 72 hours although he wouldn’t want to say that is “known”. But it is “real”. He’s again denouncing China for not denouncing Russia. “My preference” would be that aged care services minister Richard Colbeck had been at the Covid meeting (instead of the cricket), Morrison says. But he needs his “corporate knowledge”. “We’ve spoken about it,” Morrison says, when asked if he had reprimanded Colbeck, before dismissing it as a “bubble” issue. Prime minister Scott Morrison is talking about aged care, how “normally” people die every week, even before Covid. He’s reeling off rates of infections around the world. “While all of those lives lost I grieve for, I’m actually thankful for the thousands of lives we’ve saved,” he says. Many of those who’ve died had comorbidities, he says, and many would have died anyway. I’m sure the families will be comforted by that. I heard “metal” and had to think about this for a while. More coffee needed. We haven’t got into this silly story on here, but this is a funny rejoinder: Morrison has gone from talking about China to now talking about Russian troops amassing on the Ukraine border, saying it’s “not a time for weakness”. Hint: We will be hearing about how tough Morrison is, and how soft Labor is by contrast, for the rest of the campaign. I won’t bother repeating it every time he says it. Morrison is equating his deportation laws (see the context below, from Paul Karp) with turning back the boats. He’s saying those who don’t support him are supporting people who commit domestic violence. He’s gone so far as saying Labor’s Kristina Kenneally wants people convicted of domestic violence to stay in the country (which is a complete misrepresentation of Labor’s position). Laws is lapping it up. Prime minister Scott Morrison is on 2SM with John Laws. Laws starts by talking about the PM’s terrible horrible no good very bad week last week, and about opposition leader Anthony Albanese’s “character assassination” of Morrison. (Many would say the Coalition has been doing exactly that to Albanese.) “What a lovely wife you’ve got,” Laws tells Morrison. Morrison says he’s “punching above his weight” and that those criticising him can get in the bin. “There’s always going to be those, John, who have a crack at you,” he says. The esafety commissioner, Julie Inman Grant, has received over 200 complaints about the bullying of adults online since the new Online Safety Act came into effect on 23 January. Under the new cyberbullying reporting scheme, people can report serious bullying online to the commissioner’s office, and she is empowered to compel the social media platforms to remove the bullying content if it meets the threshold of “serious harm”. Inman Grant told Senate estimates on Tuesday that the 200 complaints so far covered a wide range of bullying content: These include complaints about explicit instructions and encouragement to commit suicide, threats of murder, and the menacing publication of personal details online, or doxxing. In response to these and other harmful content, we’ve worked with the platforms to ensure the material is quickly removed. Some posts have been taken down in less than an hour because of esafety’s interventions. Given all the debate today about strengthening the character test bill – it’s worth revisiting that the human rights committee (which has a government MP in the chair, Anne Webster) in December expressed concerns about the bill. The committee said: As the cancellation of a person’s visa subjects a person to mandatory immigration detention prior to removal, this measure limits the right to liberty (and the rights of the child if a child’s visa is cancelled). Further, as the cancellation or refusal of a visa will result in a person’s expulsion from Australia (including potentially those with strong ties with Australia, including family ties), the committee considers the measure also may limit the prohibition on expulsion of aliens without due process; the right to freedom of movement (which includes the right to return to one’s ‘own country’); the right to protection of the family; and the rights of the child. It also noted: The committee considers protecting the safety of the Australian community and the integrity of the migration programme are important objectives. However, to be a legitimate objective for the purposes of international human rights law, the objective must be one that is pressing and substantial and not one that simply seeks an outcome that is desirable or convenient. In this regard, the committee notes that the minister may already cancel or refuse a person’s visa where a person has committed an offence that would fall within the new definition of ‘designated offence’, including having regard to the broad notion of the person’s past or present criminal or general conduct. We’ve checked the cases that Scott Morrison relies on when he says judges are giving out more lenient sentences. It’s certainly true that judges can take into account hardships that a convicted criminal will suffer outside their sentence (or extra-curial punishment), but it’s not a loophole in migration law that judges are exploiting so much as an orthodox principle of sentencing. Nurses and union representatives have been addressing the crowd at the strike in Sydney. New South Wales Nurses and Midwives’ Association assistant general secretary Shaye Candish read out stories from nurses, detailing extreme cases of understaffing and burnout. She vowed nurses would come back “bigger and angrier” if they were ignored today. She said: This government is underresourcing the health system and it’s creating trauma for us. It’s time for the premier to listen. [Nurses] are saying that the system’s not coping and it’s not OK. We are not going away until our demands are met. Police have confirmed they arrested a protester on Saturday in Canberra allegedly with a gun and a map of Parliament House. Australian federal police commissioner Reece Kershaw has told Senate estimates about the arrest of the protester who, police say, had a firearm, ammunition and the map, AAP reports. Kershaw said: We had specific information on some of those [protesters] and that was how we were able to work with the state police intelligence agencies as well, who were able to help us with the numbers coming into Canberra. We were concerned when the number started to swell, and then some of the intentions were not clear, they were not a coordinated group, which actually presents a different challenge for us. Melissa Davey and Laura Murphy-Oates take a terrifying but important look at the aged care crisis in the latest Full Story: Australia Post paid retention bonuses to five senior staff, with one paid $500,000 over three years on top of his base salary and short-term incentive payments, Senate estimates has heard. CEO Paul Graham told Greens senator Sarah Hanson-Young on Tuesday that five senior staff had been paid the bonuses in order to retain them in the business. He said: My view very clearly was that it was appropriate to retain those people. These skills are very, very difficult to find both in the Australian market and, indeed, in the international market. They were being coaxed away by a major competitor and I felt that the damage that their departure would have done would have been significant. And therefore the board approved the potential payment for those three individuals. It is not an unusual process to pay retention when people are under threat of moving to a major competitor. The AFR reported on Tuesday that executives at the government-owned mail service who were on a base salary of between $300,000 and $400,000 per year received an average bonus last year of close to $170,000. The chair of Australia Post, Lucio di Bartolomeo, defended what the company said were “short term incentive” payments and not bonuses, arguing that the board benchmarks of pay showed Australia Post’s remuneration offers were below the median of payments offered in similar sectors in order to attract and retain talent. He said: We certainly don’t see them as bonuses at all … we have contractual arrangements around the remuneration that provides two components for remuneration, one is fixed and paid irrespective of performance and another part is payable subject to performance, identifiable, targeted and measurable performance outcomes. And clearly performance outcomes from year to year may well see different payments being made. They’re not increasing pay, they’re not increasing bonuses … As those packages are set on the basis of what is considered in the marketplace for that sort of positions, and it starts off with the group general manager for Australia Post. As the Omicron wave begins to recede (and we’re yet to see a major uptick in Covid cases from schools going back), consumers are starting to feel more confident. That’s the finding at least, from the latest weekly ANZ-Roy Morgan survey, which shows a 3.3% improvement in sentiment – its largest weekly advance since early April 2021. Among the states, Queensland (which delayed its return to school) rose the most, up 6.5%, with WA coming second (despite the extension of border barriers). David Plank, head of ANZ’s Australian economics, noted the confidence picked up even as petrol prices remain at or near record levels. So far, the weekly inflation expectations component has barely budged, rising 0.2 percentage points in the past week to 5% but that’s close to the four-week moving average of 4.9%. The current economic conditions gauge, meanwhile, rose 9.3%, reaching its highest since mid-December 2021, when Omicron took off. That consumer confidence, though, may be tested by other events – such as a potential Russian attack on Ukraine. And even the threat of an invasion will have its effects sooner to later for Australian motorists, you’d have to think. Overnight, global oil prices rose another 2% or more, with Brent crude reaching about $US96.50 barrel … or closing in on the symbolic $US100 a barrel mark. It was last above $US100 in September 2014. Speaking of inflation, there’s a curious debate over whether the treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, will extend the low- and middle-income tax offset (or LMITO, dubbed the lamington because, well, we’re Aussies). Supposedly, he’s pondering whether pumping $7bn or so more into the economy could make the RBA bring forward any rate rise. Here’s my take on why this lamington lark looks very red herring-ish (to mix food metaphors). Thousands of nurses have gathered outside NSW parliament to fight for staff-to-patient ratios on all shifts and a 2.5% pay increase. Protesters are here despite being told to call the action off by the Industrial Relations Commission. A nurse who has been working for 15 years told the Guardian it had “taken a lot for us to walk off the job today” but it had reached a critical point. She said: The way it’s going, it’s unsustainable. We just want to provide safe care to our patients. Union officials speaking at the rally accused the government, including the premier, Dominic Perrottet, and the health minister, Brad Hazzard, of being disingenuous in “crisis talks” over the past week. The spokesperson said: I will not be lectured about safe staffing by these men. A moment of silence was held to remember those the union representative said had died due to short staffing. In Auspol election world, nothing can be said to be certain, except death, taxes and scare campaigns around death taxes. Liberal and Labor are fighting over the issue very publicly this morning, and it’s been turning a bit silly. To recap, this comes after online misinformation at the 2019 election that wrongly claimed Labor would bring in an inheritance tax, unkindly called a “death tax”. This time around, the campaign is far more front-facing, with the government pointing to opposition leader Anthony Albanese’s comments from 1991 proposing an inheritance tax when he was assistant general secretary of NSW Labor. The government is blasting social media with graphics showing a laundry list of “higher taxes” they claim Albanese has supported. Labor has mocked the Coalition for digging so far back in the archives, and Albanese jokingly tried to table in parliament a 1981 university essay he wrote as an economics student. On Tuesday, the Australian Financial Review reported that Liberal MP Jason Falinski said “the people who aren’t paying tax are the people inheriting their money”, adding it was “problematic” that “more and more money is being accumulated by lazy capital”. It was published under the headline “Liberal MP backs higher inheritance taxes”. But just hours after the story was published, Falinski tweeted “Never have, never will support an inheritance tax. And anyone who knows me knows that I am strongly in favour of lower taxes not higher taxes.” Labor’s shadow treasurer Jim Chalmers ruled out taking an inheritance tax to the election, telling ABC’s Radio National “absolutely not, of course we are not introducing a tax of that kind.” He mocked the furore over Falinski’s comments: “[Treasurer] Josh Frydenberg can’t even organise a decent scare campaign without the wheels falling off it. It is ridiculous. He later took a printout of the AFR’s front page to a press conference, brandishing it to accuse Frydenberg of an “unhinged and dishonest scare campaign”. The only major party who says that the problem that needs to be dealt with here with a death tax is the Liberal party. Guardian Australia asked if he’d read Albanese’s 1981 essay, titled “The Neoclassical Theory of the Competitive Market System”. Chalmers replied “very sharp essay, very neatly written.” “It was very impressive.” Grants awarded to “ineligible” applicants, or not assessed in full accordance with guidelines, Sarah Martin reports: I know you are but what am I? Returning to Kevin Rudd’s virtual media conference – he is outraged by the Coalition government’s rhetoric that an Albanese Labor government would stand for “appeasement” of China. The former prime minister hits back by suggesting the Coalition is the one that has appeased China. Rudd says: Appeasement is a set of actions designed to push core questions of values and security to one side because you see other advantages to be realised. Number one, when the Liberal party attacked my posture on human rights in China, that was seeking to appease Beijing for commercial reasons. Why else would you stand up and attack the position that I took on human rights in Tibet in an address I gave in Beijing as prime minister or the decision to grant a visa to a Xinjiang human rights activist? Why else would you have opposed that as a Liberal party? Those are appeasing actions. Therefore, I don’t use the term lightly and certainly I don’t intend to stand idly by while Peter Dutton smears the party of which I’ve been parliamentary leader, prime minister, and could form the next government of Australia as being somehow soft on China when it comes from a series of actions on the part of the Liberal party in government and in opposition, which constitute a classical definition of appeasing the Chinese. Rudd says he does not use the term lightly, “but I’m sick and tired of being on the receiving end of this appalling set of statements from Dutton who should hang his head in shame given that he’s been part and parcel of these cabinet deliberations over such a long period of time.” Rudd says the forthcoming federal election campaign should be conducted on the basis of facts about modern China and how Australia should engage with it in a balanced fashion “as opposed to the fiction and hypocrisy we’ve been served up by field marshal Dutton”. Rudd says Anthony Albanese and Penny Wong were members of his cabinet when it decided to exclude Chinese telco Huawei from the National Broadband Network. OK. In summary, Rudd is not a Dutton fan. Peter Hannam’s been crunching those Covid numbers: Labor senator Kimberley Kitching has used parliamentary privilege to suggest that a major donor to Australian political parties is the “puppeteer” of an alleged foreign interference plan linked to an election. Asio chief Mike Burgess called the comments “unfair”, refusing to confirm or deny details related to the plot he outlined in a threat assessment to parliament last week, alleging an unnamed foreign national planned to support certain political candidates to be elected in an unspecified Australian election. During Burgess’ appearance before a Senate estimates committee hearing on Monday, Kitching – under the protection of parliamentary privilege – named Chinese-Australian property developer Chau Chak Wing, who has previously been a major donor to both major parties. I am reliably informed that the puppeteer mentioned in your case study in your annual threat assessment speech given last week is Chau Chak Wing. I believe it to be Chau Chak Wing. Are you able to confirm that it is Chau Chak Wing? Burgess refused to give further information, criticising Kitching for the question. As I said before, I will not comment on speculation of who is or isn’t targets, and it’s unfair you ask me that question in public. Burgess confirmed he held no concerns about any Labor candidates at the next federal election. In Victoria, 20 people have died. 441 people have been hospitalised with Covid and 67 of them are in intensive care. 8,162 new cases were recorded. Sixteen people have died with Covid in NSW, and there have been 1,583 hospitalisations, 96 of them in intensive care. NSW has recorded 8,201 new infections. Australia passed a booster milestone on Monday – more than 10m doses have been administered, taking the national rate to almost 60%. Vaccine rollout chief lieutenant general John Frewen told ABC television this morning he is pushing to get more jabs into arms, and encouraged people to get the Novavax vaccine, which recently arrived in Australia. He said he will keep encouraging “other pathways” into aged care homes, using GP facilities as well as in-home clinics. The former Labor prime minister Kevin Rudd is doing an early morning Zoom press conference to hit back at the government over its “outrageous” rhetoric about China. Rudd says what Peter Dutton is “asserting about the Australian Labor party and China is a bald-faced lie”. Rudd also accuses the Liberal party of hypocrisy on the issue. Cue the video tape (yes, there is a video tape, which Rudd labels as “Peter Dutton’s home video collection”). His office has cut together clips of various Liberal party figures making statements – for example, supporting an extradition treaty with China, or questioning the Labor government’s ban on Huawei in the National Broadband Network. Rudd says the 99-year lease of the Port of Darwin to a Chinese company is an “abrogation of the national interest”. Here are some more details on that NSW nurses’ strike, from Michael McGowan and Tamsin Rose: Opposition leader Anthony Albanese says he takes being called “vanilla” as a win. The term is being used as he is accused of running a “small target”, bland campaign. “Vanilla is in fact the most popular flavour of ice cream,” Albanese tells commercial radio. “So I’ll take it as a win.” He’s asked about Jenny Morrison as the prime minister’s “secret weapon”. My secret weapon is the Labor party. We actually like each other. 2GB’s Ben Fordham asks prime minister Scott Morrison about suggestions his wife, Jenny took the tough questions in that 60 Minutes special. “Jenny’s amazing and she can speak for herself,” he says, adding that he’s addressed the questions, particularly about the Hawaii trip. He’s suggesting his responses got cut in favour of including Jenny. Now it’s all chuckles about the ukulele playing. And Morrison says if people want to sneer at him for playing the uke and for cutting hair, those people are sneering at millions of Australians. Morrison tells 2GB’s Ben Fordham that he will be “discreet” discussing that story (mentioned earlier) about a Chinese Communist party “puppeteer”. He’s not so discreet in accusing Labor of being “weak” on China and says his government is the certainty in an uncertain world. People are throwing stones in glass houses, Morrison says, when asked about the Zali Steggall donation story I linked below. Prime minister Scott Morrison has accused judges of handing out sentences that allow foreign-born criminals to dodge deportation. The government will introduce legislation so non-citizens who have been convicted of a crime are easier to kick out. He tells 2GB radio that judges are giving out more lenient sentences so people are not captured under current laws. He says: The judges are handing down sentences that allow people to get around this. We want to make sure we can punt them. He says since the last election the government has expelled 4,000 people, and 10,000 since coming to power. He is, naturally, using the delays in introducing the bill as an attack on Labor, calling them soft on national security. Former treasury secretary, Dr Ken Henry, says the tax system is broken because there are budget deficits as far as the eye can see. Tax reform can encourage faster economic growth, more business investment, and from that investment, growth in real wages. He tells ABC radio that while whichever party is elected next should embark on tax reform, it’s unlikely to feature in the lead up to the election because of “scare campaigns” about taxes that “prey on the most vulnerable in the community”. Having three levels of government makes Australia’s tax system “incredibly messy”, he says, and that the state and territory taxes are “even worse” than the federal taxes, which he says are not fit for purpose. “It should not be easier to deport an international sports star than a convicted criminal,” immigration minister Alex Hawke says, referring to tennis star Novak Djokovic’s visa saga. I mentioned below that the government wants to fast-track the deportation of non-citizen people who’ve been convicted and sentenced of a crime. Hawke says the bill the federal government wants to bring in “broadens existing discretionary powers to cancel and refuse visas under the ‘character test’”. According to AAP, he says: An Australian visa is a privilege that should be denied to those who pose a threat to the safety of Australians. The Senate blocked the bill last year after Labor declared it a “political wedge”. Speaking of the lamington, the Australia Institute has released analysis this morning that shows nine in 10 taxpayers will pay more if it is scrapped. They have projected out to 2024-25, when legislated tax cuts for high income earners will come into effect. The institute’s Richard Dennis says it will predominantly be Liberal seats that benefit from the high income tax cuts, while the LMITO winners are more likely to be in Labor seats. The low and middle income tax offset is set to wind up, which will be fertile fodder in election campaigns. Peter Hannam looks at the fluff, sweeteners and coconut sprinkles of the LMITO: The Asio chief has declared that his intelligence agency is “not here to be politicised”, vowing to defend its independence after the leak of details of an alleged foreign interference plot. Mike Burgess confirmed he held no concerns about any Labor candidates at the next federal election, and people should “definitely not” assume an Asio employee was responsible when news reports attributed information to “security sources”. “I take our reputation very seriously. Asio is not here to be politicised. It should not be,” Burgess told a Senate estimates hearing on Monday night. Without criticising anyone by name, Burgess said he did “recognise that there may be people who choose to misuse [information] – officials or members of parliament or ministers” and “any misuse is a matter for them to answer to, not myself”. He said he was able to “have very robust conversations with all elements of the political class” and with officials “to make it very clear what I think is appropriate and inappropriate”. “I can assure you I will continue to do that when things like this happen,” Burgess said. The Asio chief’s forthright intervention comes days after the defence minister, Peter Dutton, ramped up the government’s political attack on Labor by claiming the Chinese government had picked the opposition leader, Anthony Albanese, “as their candidate”. Dutton later claimed he based Thursday’s inflammatory allegation – ruled by the Speaker on Monday to be out of order – on “open source and other intelligence”. When asked about this comment, Burgess said he would avoid entering the political fray, but added: I can’t speak for the minister what was in his mind and what processes he went through when saying that … I’d suggest that’s a question you should ask the minister not me. The Nine newspapers on Friday reported “multiple security sources” had said a Chinese intelligence service was behind a recently disrupted foreign interference plot that had “attempted to bankroll [New South Wales] Labor candidates in the upcoming federal election”. That report prompted Albanese to tell reporters on Friday that the Asio chief briefed him regularly and had “never raised a concern about any of my candidates”. Burgess confirmed Albanese had given “an accurate account of the conversation I had with him last week when he asked me that question”. Burgess told the Senate committee that when he delivered his annual threat assessment speech last Wednesday, he “deliberately chose not to identify the election, jurisdiction, party, the individuals that were targets, or the country attempting to conduct the interference”. That, the Asio chief said, was because attempts at foreign interference were “not confined to one side of politics” and were being seen “at all levels of government, in all states and territories”. Burgess said it was unfortunate that “media speculation about who was involved” had “missed a key point”. “We stopped the plan before it was executed and the targets were not aware they were in fact targets,” he said. He said he had chosen to use the case study – without disclosing identities – “to raise awareness, in particular because we have a federal election approaching and it’s important that we all understand what political foreign interference looks like”. Burgess said Asio existed “to serve our national interest, not sectional interests or partisan interests or personal interests”. By law, he said, Asio must not “lend favour to one element of society or another or one party or another”. “So, we do not do that, but I can see how some people would be concerned by that media speculation,” he said. During an exchange with the senior Labor frontbencher Kristina Keneally, Burgess said he did not want to say anything that might confirm or deny the particulars of the foiled interference plot – meaning a lot of his comments were general in nature. But Burgess said it would be “totally inappropriate” if classified information was “released publicly without the appropriate process”. He said ministers and their staff with access to classified information were “subject to the same laws of the land that I am”. He said: When Asio product is distributed, people have the appropriate level of clearance and the reporting itself has the appropriate caveats that make it very clear how that information should be handled and what shouldn’t, in fact, by that very definition, happen with it, such as public disclosure. Where it is misused, that’s a problem - but I can assure you where it is misused, if it was hypothetically misused, I would look at whether I needed to do an investigation. On Thursday Dutton told parliament the Chinese Communist Party had “made a decision about who they’re going to back in the next federal election … and they have picked this bloke [Albanese] as their candidate”. When challenged, Dutton insisted he was reflecting “on what has been publicly reported and commented on by the director general of Asio”. The Speaker, Andrew Wallace, ruled on Monday that Dutton’s “insinuation” against Albanese had been out of order and “would ask that such comments not be repeated”, but stopped short of forcing the minister to withdraw. On Monday the prime minister, Scott Morrison, continued to accuse the Labor party of standing for “appeasement” – even though the opposition has given broad bipartisan support to the government on the key flashpoints in the relationship with China. Burgess has previously implored politicians not to bring Asio into political debate, as he disclosed in an interview with Guardian Australia last year. “I have general conversations with politicians about for example … ‘don’t make Asio the political thing, we’ve got a job to do, my organisation is apolitical [and] we’re here to serve the country [so] don’t bring us into it’,” he said in March 2021. In February 2019, the then head of Asio, Duncan Lewis, issued an extraordinary rebuke for the leak of departmental advice on the medevac bill to the Australian newspaper and misrepresentation of the advice as from Asio. Steggall also says claims she was a “hypocrite” accepting money that may have come from the proceeds of fossil fuels were a “hit job”. Past investments should not disqualify people from making future donations, she says. She’s invoking Andrew “Twiggy” Forrest, the mining magnate who is now spruiking green hydrogen, saying he is now seen as the “messiah”. Independent MP for Warringah Zali Steggall says she didn’t try to hide a $100,000 campaign donation, calling it a “rookie error”. “It wasn’t hidden from the public,” she says on ABC radio. Donations from the family trust of a coal investor were split into eight separate pledges, and therefore fell beneath the disclosure cap. Steggall, who advocates for climate change action, says her accountant “failed to raise there’d been a single cheque”. “The record was corrected,” she says. Steggall says donors were worried about being targeted by the Liberal party as she tried to unseat sitting member (and prime minister) Tony Abbott. Read the original story by Sarah Martin here: Last night Australian Border Force officials were asked about the Novak Djokovic visa cancellation saga. The home affairs general counsel, Pip De Veau, revealed the estimated legal costs to taxpayers of the Djokovic court saga is $360,000. Those include internal resources and external lawyers, but the estimate is very approximate because Djokovic won costs in the federal circuit court and the commonwealth won costs in the federal court. ABF officials also revealed for the first time why they reneged on a deal to give Djokovic more time to respond to their concerns about his medical exemption in an early-morning interview – a crucial factor in his first round court win. The ABF chain of command believed Djokovic had been granted time to rest, but when they learned it was to consult lawyers and Tennis Australia they went ahead with visa cancellation, figuring they couldn’t tell them any more about the purported medical exemption from vaccination. Michael Outram, the ABF commissioner, explained that in early November Tennis Australia had asked the health department if a prior Covid infection was a valid exemption for the entry requirement of double vaccination. Outram said both the health department and minister said ‘no – it wasn’t’, but Tennis Australia’s chief medical officer nevertheless produced a letter claiming that tennis players had an exemption on this basis. This letter “confused airlines” and helped players get flights – but ultimately not to enter Australia. Officials denied that doubles player Renata Voracova was strip searched when she was taken into immigration detention and deported. There’s a lot to catch up on from yesterday’s parliamentary goings-on. In Senate estimates, the Australian federal police warned about disinformation and foreign interference as the election approaches. Revelations that the home affairs department paid $16,000 to rent an official’s home through Airbnb were described as “mind blowing”, Asio refused to weigh in on speculation about the identity of a “puppeteer” working on behalf of the Chinese Community Party to influence elections, and there were estimates that the Novak Djokovic visa cancellation saga will cost $360,000. Speaking of booting people out of Australia, the Morrison government is getting ready for another legislative battle after its religious discrimination laws fell over. Character test laws that would speed up the deportation of those deemed to fail them are being readied. Nurses are set to strike in New South Wales – despite orders to stop them. Shadow treasurer Jim Chalmers said this morning Labor was “absolutely not” considering inheritance taxes, but will that stop the Coalition’s attacks? Opposition leader Anthony Albanese yesterday tabled an essay he wrote in 1981, after a three-decade old speech he made was unearthed to claim Labor will bring in “death taxes”. Meanwhile Russia is still threatening an invasion of Ukraine, a situation that prime minister Scott Morrison railed against yesterday, while trade minister Dan Tehan threatened tough sanctions against Putin’s regime. And the week is only just building up a head of steam. Guardian Australia’s Canberra team – Katharine Murphy, Sarah Martin, Daniel Hurst, Josh Butler and Paul Karp are here for you, as is Mike Bowers.The UK foreign secretary, Liz Truss, has warned of a “dangerous moment for the world” as the “highly likely” prospect of a Russian invasion of Ukraine could embolden other countries such as Iran and China to expand their ambitions. Speaking on Sky News, Truss said “we could be on the brink of a war in Europe, which would have severe consequences not just for the people of Russian and Ukraine but for the broader security in Europe”, adding she was “very worried”. Her comments came as last-ditch efforts for a diplomatic situation to the crisis on the Russia-Ukraine border are sought by world leaders including Boris Johnson and Joe Biden. A core pillar of the dispute is Russia’s demand for the west to guarantee Ukraine will not join Nato, the defensive alliance of 30 countries. Truss has said it was not for Russia to determine Ukraine’s security arrangements. She said: “The big risk is if there is an invasion into Ukraine. That would be hugely damaging for Russia and Ukraine, and it would further undermine stability in Europe. “President Putin has actively questioned why other countries in eastern Europe are members of Nato as well, so this I fear would not stop at Ukraine. “This is an attack on the neighbouring states of Russia and other east European countries in trying to undermine the legitimacy of them being part of Nato.” Asked to expand on this point, the foreign secretary said: “If we saw an invasion into Ukraine, there would be severe costs in terms of a long-running conflict. We could see the undermining of security more broadly in Europe, we could also see other aggressors around the world see it as an opportunity to expand their ambitions too so this is a very dangerous moment for the world.” Asked to which other countries she was referring, Truss cited Iran and China as examples of potential aggressors. Russia has amassed at least 130,000 troops on the Ukrainian border and Truss said an invasion of the country “could be imminent and it is highly likely”. She said any conflict could be a “long, protracted war”. When asked on Times Radio whether Russia had the military capacity to take and hold all of Ukraine, Truss said: “What we know is that the Ukrainians will fight. The UK has trained up 20,000 Ukrainian soldiers. “We’ve supplied defensive weapons as have other allies. So, this will not be easy or simple for Vladimir Putin. This could be a long, protracted war, which would, of course, create huge damage for both the people of Ukraine and the people of Russia as well as threatening European security.” However, Truss said Putin could still “change his mind”. She added: “We know or we believe that Vladimir Putin has not yet made a decision about whether to invade Ukraine. We think it’s highly likely. “There are huge numbers of troops lined up on the border. We know that they’re in a position to attack imminently, but he can still change his mind and that is why diplomacy is so vital.”Up to a fifth of UK households have struggled to pay their TV, internet and phone bills in the last year, with some having to cancel services or cut back spending on essentials such as food and clothing to make payments, according to research by Ofcom. The telecoms regulator’s annual affordability report highlights the rising pressure on household finances, with consumers facing a further inflation-busting increase in mobile, telephone and broadband bills of as much as 10% this year. “People rely on their broadband for staying in touch, working and learning from home,” said Lindsey Fussell, group director of network and communications at Ofcom. “But for those who are really struggling with rising bills, every penny counts.” Ofcom warned that with the above-inflation price increases outstripping expected rises in benefits such as universal credit, more than 4m homes are facing the prospect of a further fall in income in real terms. “This could increase the numbers of households that face affordability challenges in accessing internet services and further increase the challenges of those who already face affordability issues,” Ofcom said. “These challenges could be exacerbated by the wider context of cost of living pressures across a range of essential services (including rising energy prices) during the course of 2022.” However, the regulator’s research also found that millions of families under pressure from the rising cost of living are not taking advantage of cheaper “social tariffs” offered by some providers to homes on benefits. Ofcom estimates that 4.2m homes are eligible to move on to social tariffs – offered by seven broadband providers including BT, Virgin Media O2, Community Fibre, Vodafone, G.Network, Hyperoptic and KCOM – which could halve their bills, providing a saving of £144 annually. According to its research, only 55,000 homes have taken advantage of these tariffs, just 1.2% of those eligible. About 5% of households, 1.1m, are struggling to pay for their broadband each month, the same proportion as face issues paying their mobile bills, Ofcom found. Ofcom said that while some firms were offering social tariffs they were not actively promoting them to eligible customers in advertising or price comparison website searches. “Special discounts can make all the difference, and too many broadband firms are failing either to promote their social tariff or to offer one at all,” Fussell said. “We expect companies to step up support for those on low incomes, and we’ll be watching their response.” BT said that its social tariff, called Home Essentials and priced between £10 and £20 a month, is now being sold in its 550 high street stores across the UK. Openreach, which builds and maintains the majority of the UK’s broadband network, is incentivising providers to offer social tariffs by waiving the connection fee it charges companies should they connect a vulnerable household. “While raising awareness plays a large part, there are still too many big broadband providers who are not offering help via social tariffs for their customers,” said Ernest Doku, broadband expert at Uswitch.com. “At a time when the cost of living is soaring for many households, more needs to be done to make people aware of the deals that are available to those customers who struggle the most.”Workers at the Amazon warehouse in Bessemer, Alabama, have begun the rerun of a historic union election after the US labor regulator ruled Amazon’s conduct had interfered with a previous election in 2021 and ordered a new vote. The union drive comes as other large US employers including Starbucks and Target are fighting off union drives. If successful, the warehouse would be the first Amazon facility to unionize in the US. Employees said that Amazon – which now employs more than 1 million people in the US – is fighting hard to make sure this vote also fails, but some are feeling more confident the second time around. Darryl Richardson, an employee at the Amazon warehouse in Bessemer for two years, said workers and organizers are now more apt to resist Amazon’s union-busting efforts. “They’re still using the same scare tactics they used last time, but due to the first election, you have employees who understand and know that Amazon isn’t telling them the truth,” said Richardson. “I feel better this time than I did the first time. Employees have been voicing their opinions and standing strong this election.” More than 6,100 workers are eligible to vote in the union election, which will determine if workers will be represented by the Retail, Wholesale and Department Store Union (RWDSU). Due to high employee turnover, almost half of the eligible workers in this election were not working at Amazon during the first union election. Ballots were sent to Alabama workers on 4 February, with ballots due to be returned by 25 March. Results will be tallied beginning on 28 March. Two other Amazon warehouses, JFK8 and LDJ5 in Staten Island, New York, have filed petitions to hold union elections with the National Labor Relations Board (NLRB), though election dates have not been set by the NLRB regional director. Perry Connelly, 59, who has worked in outbound stowing at the Bessemer warehouse for two years, said that organizing ahead of the first union election started off well, with a majority of workers signing union authorization cards, but that Amazon’s aggressive anti-union campaign and promises of improvements confused or deterred many workers from voting at all or persuaded them to vote against the union. “We just want Amazon to be held accountable for all the things that make the job, the workplace, unbearable,” said Connelly. “What we do and what we put out, Amazon can pay a lot better and not have such a high rate of turnover of employees. A lot of people come in and they’re not there for six or seven months, they don’t make it that long because of the working conditions.” Rerun union elections are relatively rare, with unions prevailing in a slim majority of those elections in recent years. But Connelly claimed this time around, there’s more support for the union. He said many workers switched from voting no in the first election to supporting it, because Amazon didn’t fulfill the promises they made during the first election, and the union organizing campaign has expanded to handing out union T-shirts, door-knocking efforts that weren’t possible earlier in the Covid-19 pandemic, and partnering with other local unions and community groups. Connelly cited issues such as better pay, better promotional opportunities, more respect from management toward workers and less hostility toward productivity rates as a few of the reasons he is supporting the union. “We’re not asking for a lot. We’re just asking for better conditions and less work hassle. We feel like we’re in a hostile work environment day in and day out,” said Connelly. “Working for Amazon, no one should be worried about paying bills when you work for a multibillionaire, and we just want what we think is fair.” US businesses have fought hard against union drives in recent years. A 2019 report by the Economic Policy Institute found that 41.5% of employers had violated federal labor law in union election campaigns and employers spend about $340m annually on union avoidance, issues that have driven campaigns for federal labor law reforms to expand workers’ rights and steepen penalties for employers violating labor laws. As part of the new election ruling, Amazon reached a settlement with the NLRB, agreeing to refrain from threatening workers with discipline or calling the police on workers engaging in union activity outside the warehouse. If Amazon is found to violate the settlement, the NLRB could more easily sue the company. Amazon is once again aggressively opposing the unionization effort at the warehouse, with regular anti-union meetings where outside consultants and managers are encouraging workers to vote against the union. A worker at the Bessemer warehouse has already filed unfair labor practice charges with the NLRB against Amazon, alleging the settlement was violated because he claims management warned him about speaking with co-workers about the union. During the first union election, Amazon installed a United States Postal Service mailbox in front of the warehouse, surrounded by signs encouraging workers to vote no in the election. That mailbox was a significant factor in the first union election being overturned by the NLRB. The union has already made a request for review to the NLRB of objectionable conduct over the mailbox, as it remains on site at the warehouse, but was just moved to a different location. The union argued the mailbox undermined the election as it is subject to constant surveillance by the company, and the stigma surrounding the mailbox as employer-controlled remains. The NLRB ruled the claims would be resolved after the new election. Contacted by the Guardian, Amazon did not comment on how its conduct this election has changed from the previous one. A spokesperson said in an email: “Our employees have always had the choice of whether or not to join a union, and they overwhelmingly chose not to join the RWDSU last year. We look forward to our team in BHM1 having their voices heard again.”Scott Morrison has urged colleagues to ramp up examples of “sharp contrast” with Labor as the opposition signalled it could support a strengthening of the character test legislation despite previously helping to scuttle the proposal in the Senate. The prime minister has revived the Coalition’s character test bill in the hope of wedging Labor on national security in the final sitting weeks of the current parliament. Morrison is attempting to regroup politically after an internal revolt scuttled his signature religious discrimination legislation last week. The “character test” policy as it stands automatically cancels the visas of non-citizens, primarily New Zealand citizens, who are sentenced to more than 12 months in jail. The proposed bill would lower the bar for the automatic failure of the test. Labor has previously objected to elements of the character test proposal and a government-controlled parliamentary committee on human rights concluded in December it was not clear there was a “pressing and substantial need for the measures in this bill”. But Morrison declared candidly in Tuesday’s penultimate party room meeting the character test bill presented the best point of contrast with Labor in the government’s legislative arsenal. It highlighted the “risks” associated with any change of government. Morrison told MPs that in order to win the election contest in May, the government needed to put “the starkness of the choice in front of the Australian people”. The prime minister said: “I know how to do that, and I know that is how you win elections. I know what the path is and I’ll be following it.” Labor – which avoided a wedge on religious discrimination last week because of government division – was meeting on Tuesday afternoon to resolve its position on the character test proposal. Ahead of those deliberations, the shadow home affairs minister, Kristina Keneally, would not rule out waving the visa cancellation bill through parliament. She declared Morrison was pursuing a fight rather than a fix and “playing a political wedge game”. After the public split over religious discrimination last week and subsequent back-biting inside the government, Morrison warned colleagues on Tuesday to pull their heads in. The prime minister said between now and the election, the government had a job to do: “I’m going to do mine, I need you to do yours.” While telling colleagues disunity would cost the Coalition government, Morrison acknowledged his own focus on the looming political battle needed to be sharper. “You haven’t seen me as focused as I can be yet,” he told colleagues, adding “you will see it”. Morrison said if the government was focused and professional, and if MPs supported each other, the Coalition would win the coming election. “I know where we are going,” Morrison declared. “We will get there.” With Labor ahead in the polls, and with the government battling splits and leaks, Morrison and the defence minister, Peter Dutton, have ramped up the rhetoric on security, declaring Beijing wants Labor to win the election. Last week, Dutton said in parliament China had picked Anthony Albanese as its election candidate. The obvious partisanship attracted an implicit rebuke from the head of Australia’s domestic spy, Mike Burgess. During an appearance before Senate estimates on Monday night, Burgess declared that his intelligence agency was “not here to be politicised”. On Tuesday, the foreign affairs minister, Marise Payne, declined to repeat Morrison’s claim that a Labor government would stand for “appeasement” of China. When asked whether it was in the national interest for the Coalition to portray Labor as being compromised by China given that it may win government at the election, Payne made a generic statement that it was “essential for those who wish to govern our nation to be clear and to be consistent”. While she repeated the Coalition’s criticism of the former Labor government for a drop in defence spending as a share of GDP – and insisted it was fair enough to indicate “where we believe our strengths lie” – Payne dodged multiple opportunities to specifically endorse the appeasement claim. Payne met with her counterparts from the US, Japan and India for a Quad meeting in Melbourne on Friday. She was urged by Prof Rory Medcalf, head of the Australian National University’s National Security College, to “reassure her Quad counterparts they can have confidence in Australia as a security partner, no matter who wins government”. For years, Payne said, she had reassured Quad partners and other close partners “of Australia’s commitment to the Indo-Pacific” and that it was “a solid partner”. In Tuesday’s Sky News interview, she did not add any caveats about whether that might change with a change of government.A senior Metropolitan police officer has said racism is a problem in the country’s largest force. Deputy Assistant Commissioner Bas Javid, the brother of the health secretary, Sajid Javid, acknowledged “people who have racist views and are racist” were among the force’s staff. When asked on BBC Newsnight if he accepted racism “is a problem in the Metropolitan police”, Javid replied: “Yes, I do.” His comments came after Cressida Dick resigned as commissioner of the Met amid allegations of a toxic culture within the force including racism and misogyny among officers. Javid told the programme: “Let me be really clear on this: there’s absolutely no room for racism in policing, and especially here in the Metropolitan police. We made that very, very clear to our people, anyone who works for us and demonstrates any type of racism or discrimination behaviour will be removed from the organisation.” Javid, who has served in three police force areas over 28 years as an officer, said he was “extremely disappointed” to hear interviews on the programme with two black colleagues who said discrimination was getting worse. “You know, we’ve done a huge amount of work over a long period of time to make it one absolutely clear stance for anti-racism, and zero tolerance on any form of discrimination,” the officer told Newsnight. “And the fact that you’ve had officers or staff come to you to make allegations, what I’d like to see is an organisation where people feel comfortable to come forward, and report it and deal with it effectively.” He said it would be “wrong for me to stand here and say to you I haven’t seen examples of racism in my 28 years – absolutely I have”. “But my preferred place would be to be in the organisation doing everything I can to root out racism or any form of discrimination,” he said. Javid added: “Now, what I would say is there are people who have racist views and are racist, and they are in the police. But what I won’t do is describe all of the organisation as a racist organisation. I think that’s extremely unfair to so many people who work extremely hard to do what I talked about today, which is rooting out racism and other forms of discrimination.” Dick in August 2020 denied the force was institutionally racist, saying it adopted a zero tolerance approach to the issue. On the issue of police stop and search, she said young black men were “hugely disproportionately stabbed and killed” and “hugely tangled up” in the criminal justice system.The UK labour market was hit by two big shocks towards the end of 2021: the end of the government’s furlough scheme and the arrival of the Omicron variant. The good news from the latest official data is both were negotiated without the feared lengthening of the dole queues. Employment is up, job vacancies are at a new record high and the unemployment rate is down. The bad news is that the challenge posed by rising inflation looks like it will prove to be a tricker hurdle to surmount than the end of the furlough or the restrictions that were imposed by the four nations of the UK in response to Omicron. When the Bank of England held off from raising interest rates last November it did so because it wanted to judge the impact of ending wage subsidies. The evidence is now in: there is nothing in the latest figures to stay the hand of Threadneedle Street’s monetary policy committee. Borrowing costs have been raised at the MPC’s last two meetings and will go up again. The tightness of the labour market means average earnings are rising at an annual rate of more than 4%. That’s because the demand for workers as businesses recover exceeds supply. The number of people in employment is more than 500,000 below its pre-pandemic level, largely because of a fall in self-employment. Older workers have left the workforce, many of them on health grounds. This combination of factors means employees are in a stronger bargaining position than they might have expected a year ago, when the economy was locked down and the furlough still in place. But earnings would need to rise by even more to keep pace with rising prices. Inflation hit a 30-year high of 5.4% in December and will rise still further over the coming months, which means the squeeze on real incomes will intensify. In the circumstances, workers will seek to protect their living standards by asking for higher pay. That pressure will be sufficient to make the Bank of England nervous about a wage-price spiral, but not strong enough to compensate employees when the cost of living exceeds 7% in the spring. Going is tough in post-furlough Britain Government support meant corporate insolvency was a dog that didn’t bark earlier in the pandemic. Help came in a number of forms: firms had their wage bills covered, there were grants and business rates holidays; and companies in trouble were given breathing space from their creditors. Businesses are now being asked to manage on their own, and unsurprisingly a large number of them are finding the going extremely tough. The latest figures for England and Wales in January show the number of company insolvencies more than doubled from the same month in 2021, as did the number of compulsory liquidations. That’s not quite as alarming as it looks given the artificially low levels of business distress during the pandemic. Business failures last month were only slightly up on the pre-pandemic month of January 2020, a better comparison. Even so, the trend is now clearly upwards. Creditors are taking a tougher line now that they can. And, having just about kept going through two years of Covid-19, the owners of some small businesses are giving up because they can’t see things improving with a year of rocketing energy bills, rising inflation and higher interest rates ahead. To some extent, this is perfectly normal. Businesses cease trading all the time, and the failure rate is bound to be higher now given the acceleration of structural changes – the increase in online shopping, for example – seen in the past two years. So while insolvencies are still a dog that hasn’t really barked, they are starting to emit a low growl. They need to be watched. US inflation figures a worry for UK Another day, another set of worrying inflation news from the other side of the Atlantic. US producer prices – a gauge of what businesses charge for their goods and services – rose by 1% last month, double what Wall Street was expecting. There are two points to note here: producer prices are a good early guide to future consumer prices and, as a rule of thumb, what happens in the US happens in the UK with a lag of a few months.Cleopatra and Frankenstein Coco Mellors Fourth Estate, £14.99, 384pp New York City at the start of the 21st-century – pre-financial crisis, pre-Trump, pre-Covid – is captured with near-devotional lushness in this nostalgic debut. It’s an urban playground that struggling painter Cleo, 24 years old and stylishly British, is on the brink of being exiled from, her student visa due to expire in mere months, when she meets Frank, a fortysomething ad agency owner with a nice line in elevator chitchat. They wed on a whim to calamitous effect on both sides. In terms of depth, this novel is more Jay McInerney than Hanya Yanagihara, but Mellors proves herself a poetic chronicler of inky gloom as well as twinkly surfaces. Unattached: Essays on Singlehood Edited by Angelica Malin Square Peg, £14.99, 176pp Sadly, the personal essay is not the established literary genre here that it is in the US, but while this patchy collection doesn’t exactly exceed expectations, it does nevertheless gesture to the potential richness of the female experience of being unattached. Yes, there are tears – heck, there are Fleetwood Mac lyrics – but you’ll also find calls to broaden the definition of romance, to quit thinking of single life as mere prologue and to wonder whether the reason we’re taught to fear going solo might perhaps be that it makes us so very powerful. Try not to mind mantras of “self-care” and tending your inner child and turn instead to essays by Mia Levitin and Rosie Wilby. Dálvi: Six Years in the Arctic Tundra Laura Galloway Allen &amp; Unwin, £8.99, 304pp (paperback) When Manhattanite Galloway accepted delivery of a dozen red roses from her husband one morning, she was thrilled. Then she spotted the divorce papers taped to them. Not long after, she leapt with her two cats into the ultimate void: a Sami community in the Arctic north, a place of whiteness and silence where she’s so clueless about daily life, she doesn’t even know what to worry about. This compulsive account of her time there occasionally falls back on self-help tropes, but not even talk of “soul level” connections and pet psychics can obscure the bracing wonder of its setting, a place that becomes not just her refuge but also her teacher. • To order Cleopatra and Frankenstein, Unattached or Dálvi go to guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyDomestic abuse survivors will find it easier to move away from perpetrators under proposals announced by ministers. The plans, which are being put out to consultation, would see the so-called local connection test scrapped. The test can stop victims from applying for social housing if they do not have a connection to a local area, potentially forcing an abuse survivor to live in the same community as their abuser. A second consultation will consider whether and how to change current rules that make it difficult for victims to remove their perpetrators from joint tenancies, which can mean victims either feel forced to stay in their home or are at risk of being made homeless by their abuser. Commenting on the consultation, Nicole Jacobs, the domestic abuse commissioner for England and Wales, said: “It is vital that victims and survivors can access safe housing regardless of their tenure type. That means staying safely in their own home if they want to, as well as being able to access housing in a new area if they are no longer safe where they live.” The consultation was carried out as part of a wider announcement from the Department for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities, which included further funding for councils to help domestic abuse survivors and their children. The funding will be used to ensure that safe accommodation spaces such as refuges and shelters can provide victims with vital support services including healthcare, social workers and benefits, according to the department. Interpreters, immigration advice, drug or alcohol support and other specialist services will also be funded and made available. The funding will be issued as a non-ringfenced grant to councils, which will then be responsible for making decisions on how the funding is spent to benefit those in need. The safeguarding minister, Rachel Maclean, said: “Home is not the safe place it should be for domestic abuse victims and their families. The extra support provided today will provide a vital lifeline for victims as they try to rebuild their lives positively while feeling supported and protected.” The government’s Domestic Abuse Act 2021 placed a legal duty on councils to fund support in safe accommodation for all victims and their families. The money announced on Tuesday will help pay for these services. Isabelle Younane, the head of policy, campaigns and public affairs at Women’s Aid, said: “Being a victim of abuse often means having every aspect of life being controlled. It is crucial that survivors are given the support they need to take back control after leaving – including deciding where they want to live. Survivors should never be made to stay in the same area as their abuser, or be forced out if they want to remain in their own home. We welcome the upcoming consultations alongside the funding, so that survivors can have the options they deserve when rebuilding their lives.” In the UK, call the national domestic abuse helpline on 0808 2000 247, or visit Women’s Aid. In Australia, the national family violence counselling service is on 1800 737 732. In the US, the domestic violence hotline is 1-800-799-SAFE (7233). Other international helplines may be found via www.befrienders.orgRetroist Since 2009, each episode of this enjoyable podcast has covered a new old curio. There are episodes about The A-Team, Tetris, Candid Camera, Zork, the McRib sandwich and the Atari Jaguar. Nostalgia podcasts have a habit of being goofy, half-remembered affairs, but Retroist host Garry Vander Voort presents each episode like a personal essay, folding in his own memories of the subjects with meticulous research. There should really be a Retroist TV show – but until that gets made, you can lose yourself for weeks in the podcast’s archives. Remember the Game? This is a podcast all about retro gaming. Since gaming is such a constantly evolving beast – and since entire libraries of games are lost with each new console iteration – Canadian standup Adam Blank is smart not to tie himself to a certain era. Some episodes revolve round early Mario titles, others are as recent as Grand Theft Auto: Vice City or the Rock Band series. Blank’s enthusiasm (positive and negative) for these games is unmistakable. If you were there at the time, this podcast is an absolute treat. Missing Richard Simmons For a while in 2017, Missing Richard Simmons was, well, unmissable. A Daily Show producer named Dan Taberski noticed that Simmons, a celebrity fitness instructor who had been a mainstay of American culture in the 1980s, had vanished from public view. Over the course of the podcast’s six-episode run, he sought to find out why. And while the show itself is grippingly told, it also raised wider issues that investigative podcasts in general are still reckoning with. Was this an invasion of privacy? What duty of care do podcasters have for their subjects? At what point do listeners start to become actively complicit? A fascinating, knotty listen. The LOST Boys You could pretty much pick any TV show out of the ether and you’d be guaranteed to find a podcast about it. However, there’s something about Lost that lends itself especially well to retrospective analysis. In The LOST Boys, Jack Shepherd and Jacob Stolworthy dissect the entire series episode by episode; Stolworthy is a fan with multiple rewatches under his belt, while Shepherd is seeing it all for the first time. They work together wonderfully, with Shepherd’s theories and criticisms puncturing Stolworthy’s fervent proselytising. Super 90’s Bros Super 90’s Bros, a podcast where two friends giddily reminisce about 90s culture, is about as far from scholarly as podcasting gets. Still, the sheer power of enthusiasm the hosts Brennon Poynor and Adam Pitzler have for some of these subjects makes this perhaps the most accessible of this bunch. It’s a cliche, but this is just like listening to your friends laugh and squabble about the half-forgotten things you all enjoyed as kids.France The Six Nations can feel very different on home soil, particularly with crowds back. Which is why France should not start celebrating any title wins yet, with trips to Murrayfield and Cardiff set to test whether they are indeed the real deal. Let’s just say, though, that the signs are ominous for their remaining opponents. Unlike some past France sides, the current group do not fade in the closing stages and are way more organised defensively. Their first try against Ireland, scored by Antoine Dupont and beautifully created by Romain Ntamack’s offload, was a classic example of the presence of mind and smart support the half-backs offer each other. Gabin Villière on the wing has been outstanding, Damian Penaud has not been far behind and Melvyn Jaminet looks unlikely to miss too many goal-kicks over the next month. And we haven’t even mentioned the inexhaustible Gregory Alldritt and the dynamism of the front five in front of him. A lesser side than Ireland would probably have folded completely. England The flickers of attacking sharpness shown in Rome offered some succour to England’s supporters after their Murrayfield disappointment. Marcus Smith again seized the chance to impress and there is obvious potential in the 10-9-8 axis of him, Harry Randall and Alex Dombrandt. But to watch England score seven points in the final 35 minutes against inferior opposition was to be reminded how far they still have to go to become a consistently tip-top side. In perfect conditions New Zealand would have scored 60 plus points: so much for the ruthless “finishers” adding second-half oomph. On the other hand England’s next two games are at Twickenham where they take a bit of beating and with Manu Tuilagi and Courtney Lawes due back they will also have some added crunch available. The big decision is what to do at scrum-half against Wales on Saturday week: does Eddie Jones start Ben Youngs for his record-breaking 115th England Test appearance or stick with Randall, a former Wales age-group international? A delicate call but, in all respects, now is the time for England to look forwards. Ireland There is no shame, clearly, in losing narrowly to a very good side in Paris. In many ways their gallant fightback also underlined how tough they remain to put away. But there is a broader question: how are they going to beat France at next year’s World Cup if they are falling just short now? With or without Johnny Sexton on the pitch, it never really felt as though France were likely to lose and Mack Hansen’s brilliantly taken try will not be allowed to happen every week. With Italy next up at home, it surely makes sense to give James Hume and Robert Baloucoune a run and do whatever is necessary to ensure that Sexton, Tadhg Furlong, Tadhg Beirne and Josh van der Flier are in the best possible nick for the visit to England next month. Win that and a final weekend title surge will be perfectly possible. Scotland Scotland’s season goes to show how tight the Six Nations has become. Just as a couple of well-executed pieces of skill can turn a game, as England found to their cost at Murrayfield, a lacklustre 20 minutes can also lose one. Everything was set up for Scotland to put Wales away in Cardiff but, for whatever reason, nothing happened when they put their foot to the floor. More dynamism is required up front before they can think about blowing France away at Murrayfield and Cameron Redpath could give their midfield an extra dimension. On the plus side, Darcy Graham’s footwork has been one of the joys of the tournament and Finn Russell rarely has two quiet games in a row. As an aside, is there a way to enhance the deliberate knock-on law? We have all seen enough of Russell – remember the 38-38 draw in Twickenham? – to know he was going for an interception in Cardiff in the incident that earned him a yellow card. The cynical, deliberate slapdown is a totally different beast but, either way, Wales fully deserved their win. Wales Gloom one day, elation the next. Just another normal campaign for Wayne Pivac’s side who were clearly motivated to show there is more to them than their opening game flop in Dublin suggested. The question is whether they can bottle the same spirit and transport it along the M4 for the game against England. They have enjoyed one or two great days at Twickenham but have not won there in the Six Nations since 2012. Much will depend on the impact their back-row make with and without the ball, the ability of Tomas Francis and friends to hold fast in the scrums and Dan Biggar’s tactical nous. Louis Rees-Zammit has had a quiet tournament and is due a fizzing contribution at some stage; less flashy but increasingly valuable has been the hard-working Nick Tompkins in midfield. England are unlikely to have victory served up on a platter. Italy The good news is that England scored their fewest number of points against the Azzurri since 2013. And Italy’s under-20s beat England, a result that will help to restore some much-needed faith. The bad is that the scoreboard does not lie. Italy have never previously been rendered scoreless in this fixture and must now go to the Aviva Stadium, one of their least happy hunting grounds. Their young side are developing but this looks to be another punishing tournament. World Rugby officials are trying to set up November fixtures that will give Italy the chance of winning a game or two but the Six Nations remains an unforgiving playground. • This is an extract from our weekly rugby union email, the Breakdown. To subscribe, just visit this page and follow the instructions.I have never been catfished by a kitchen appliance before, but I was always going to be vulnerable to the air fryer’s promise of “fabulous chips – just add air”. “Next level amazzzzing,” one Instagrammer panted. Another called it “a total gamechanger when it comes to cooking”, while Gordon Ramsay claimed the results are like food “cooked in oil, but [the air fryer] locks in the juice and the flavour is extraordinary”. Admittedly, Ramsay was starring in an advert for the Philips Airfryer at the time. But if something sounds too good to be true, it usually is: Philips was rapped over the knuckles by the Advertising Standards Authority in 2012 for that “just add air” tagline, given that the small print specified that oil was needed to produce the crisp, golden chips seen on screen (Philips now claims, more modestly, that its product requires “90% less fat”). To be honest, that wasn’t a deal-breaker for me. Anything that significantly reduces the litres of oil required for deep-fat frying is still an attractive prospect. Although air fryers have been around for more than a decade, Google Trends data shows interest climbed vertiginously in 2020, with little sign of slowing. Sales at John Lewis were up 400% in 2021. In January, the New York Times devoted 1,800 words to exploring how the air fryer “crisped its way into America’s heart”, while the Telegraph called it “the must-have kitchen gadget you didn’t know you needed”. Yet the technology for the air fryer is nothing new. It is basically a countertop fan oven. Despite its name, it does not “fry” things. It bakes them, and it bakes them fast, because, like all ovens, it is a well-insulated box – one that heats up quickly because of its size, then cooks quickly thanks to the presence of an extra-powerful, well-located fan to push that heat around. The sleek, black Ninja Air Fryer Max (£149.99) I borrow, with its “max crisp technology” and “super-fast airflow”, looks reassuringly space age. It has roughly the same footprint as the small microwave I have never had room for, but this is the future of cooking, so I make the room. (Clare Andrews, the lockdown convert behind the Air Fryer UK blog, recommends you do your research: “They come in all shapes and sizes. Some are much larger than others, some look more stylish. It’s all about weighing up your needs and preferences.”) As this feels like starting again in the cooking department, I put myself in the capable hands of the nutritionist Jenny Tschiesche, whose Air-Fryer Cookbook (Ryland Peters &amp; Small, £16.99) promises that an all-day breakfast is “possibly the laziest meal … you can prepare in the air-fryer!” I heat the Ninja to 180C, which takes three minutes, and arrange tomatoes on the slotted, non-stick shelf inside. After three minutes, I add bacon, black pudding (Tschiesche calls for a mushroom, but she is a nutritionist and I’m not) and a whole egg, then shut the drawer while I make tea and toast. To my amazement, I end up with a perfect soft‑boiled egg, a well-cooked tomato, crisp bacon and cooked black pudding in under 15 minutes … and just one pan to wash up. One of the best things about my new gadget is how easy it is to play around with it; it would be great for students, or kids taking their first steps into independent cookery. An air-fryer cheesecake recipe went viral recently. I’m tipped off about the magic of air-fryer cheese toasties, corn on the cob, pakoras and reheated pizza. Correspondents report good results with everything from croquetas de jamon to flourless chocolate cake; someone’s mum in Sri Lanka uses it to cook vada (crispy snacks that are usually deep-fried), and reports “total success without all the oiliness”. Tschiesche loves it for how fuss-free it makes cooking fish in particular, and the Manchester chef Zosima Fulwell, who did a Christmas dinner in hers, says: “It’s pretty much replaced my oven.” Four days later, I think I have the measure of the air fryer. Notable wins include a whole (small) red mullet cooked without a whiff of fish, crispy chickpeas and some of the nicest brussels sprouts I have eaten. Failures include chewy calamari and tofu with the texture of a pool float. Frozen chips are crisper than their oven-baked equivalents – and ready in half the time. I’m also able to bake a frozen ball of cookie dough in 15 minutes, which makes the air fryer a potentially dangerous object to have around. Best of all, the short cooking times mean I don’t feel guilty putting the Ninja to work for small amounts of food. Most air fryers run at a considerably lower wattage than the average oven. But when I ask Dr Christian Reynolds, a senior lecturer at the Centre for Food Policy at City, University of London, if they are a good bet for those of us trying to save energy (ie just about everyone), he says the situation is nuanced: “It depends how many people you’re feeding. They can be more energy-efficient for individuals, but it very much depends on your lifestyle.” In other words, because they can’t accommodate as much food as a full-size oven, you may need to put them on twice – once for fish fingers and again for chips, say – and so you might not be saving much money. He calculates that it would cost me 9p to cook a baked potato in the air fryer and 16p to do so in the oven. For maximum energy efficiency, he recommends microwaving the potato first (about 0.26p) and then finishing it in the air fryer, to crisp the skin. The award-winning food writer Melissa Thompson says she often uses the air fryer to reheat things. Unlike a deep-fat fryer, however, it is not capable “of sealing something, cooking the interior and then crisping up the exterior”, she adds. “For me, they’re similar to a Thermomix [a fancy multifunction food processor much beloved of chefs] – you need to start out with one before you buy other gadgets, otherwise you’re just doubling up.” I can confirm, having tried them, that Thompson’s air-fried chips are indeed “as good as deep-fried ones”, but I would also say, from my own experience, that air‑fried chicken wings will probably never quite hit the spot. And really, if you are going to have fried chicken, you may as well make it really good fried chicken. I will be sad to wave goodbye to the Ninja. I can see it being very useful for all sorts of stuff – even if the one thing I wouldn’t actually use it for is frying. It does make a lovely boiled egg, though.Max von Sydow, in his final film role, does what he can to lend gravitas to this odd, stilted and contrived movie, a fictional drama based on a horrendous Nazi atrocity in occupied Greece in 1943, for which the question of reparations still grumbles on. In Kalavryta in the northern Peloponnese, nearly 700 civilians were shot by the Nazi forces, in chilling reprisal for Greek resistance fighters executing 78 German soldiers taken prisoner. Von Sydow plays Nikolas, an ageing Greek writer who as a young boy miraculously escaped the massacre, but has been haunted by it ever since. In the present day, Astrid Roos plays Caroline Martin, an ambitious Berlin lawyer who is tasked by a heartless and cynical German government to go to Greece and to find details that might undermine their case for reparations. The tense occupation and slaughter of 1943 themselves are recounted in flashback, and director Nicholas Dimitropoulos makes a reasonably workmanlike job of this drama. But the film strangely insists on imagining a balancing “good German” who supposedly helps the Greek women and children. It is his existence that Caroline refuses to use against the Greek government, due to that predictable crisis of conscience to which the action had been unsubtly leading from the outset. She, in effect, becomes the film’s second imaginary “good German”, whose behaviour is at odds with the cynical German government. Oddly, Caroline finally goes on a trip to Austria to interview the sad and saintly widow of this fictional good soldier, and she is played by Alice Krige, looking if anything younger than Von Sydow, who was supposed to be a small boy at the time. The film’s one moment of real power comes when Caroline visits the real-life Museum of the Kalavrytan Holocaust and stands in front of the memorial gallery of photographs: the victims’ faces. That has real substance. This film doesn’t. • Echoes of the Past is available on 21 February on digital platforms.When I was five, I would talk to my mother while she was in the bath. When she stood to get out, the water fell from her, her skin pink from the heat. Her body was miraculous to me. Women’s bodies are miraculous, with the things they can do, but I didn’t know any of that then. I just knew that she was soft and perfect, and mine. By the time my mother developed breast cancer, I was 30. She was double that age and there was an ocean between us: I was married and living in New York, so when the news came, I couldn’t hold her to me, or be a practical support. I sat on my bed and cried. The next time I saw her, it was all over. One breast removed and carefully reconstructed. The cancer gone. My husband asked me, as we approached my parents in the airport, whether it was OK to give my mum a hug. The surgery was recent; I wasn’t sure. But it was OK. She seemed the same. It was only five years later that I found my lump. I didn’t have a grownup daughter: my son was a toddler and my daughter was unborn, curled inside, half-gestated. A month later, in May 2016, I was wheeled into theatre and my surgeon cut the tumour out. The surgeon was pregnant too, her rounded belly tight against her scrubs. It helped that we had that in common. It felt like a reason for her to take extra care with me; with us. I knew I should be grateful that the cancer was gone, but when I pulled my bandages off, alone in the bathroom, and saw what was left of my right breast, I wept. I looked uneven, unsightly. An ugly scar where my nipple used to be. My daughter was born into this whirl of sadness. She was early and she had to fight her own battles to live. I stood under a long, hot shower a few hours after giving birth to her, washing away the blood, willing her to survive. Day by day, she gathered strength, while I began to have poison pumped into me in three-week cycles. There is a genetic element to my family’s breast cancer story. My mother and I are not just unlucky; we are predisposed. When I was told that my chances of getting breast cancer again were about 50%, I asked the doctors to take away my breasts and my ovaries. I didn’t need to think it over. I had my ovaries removed in November, 2016, and a double mastectomy the following January. Now my body is more scarred than ever, with angry red lines across my abdomen and my breasts, where I have been cut and cut again. Now my daughter is five, and she talks to me as I step out of the shower. What does she make of my unconventional body? How will it shape her sense of what a woman should be? There are no women like me on the billboards or the TV adverts. No women whose bodies have been hacked and then sewn back together, whose bodies have turned on them. A woman’s body is a powerful thing, in both good and bad ways. I fear that my daughter’s breasts could turn out to be rotten, like mine, like her grandmother’s. That she may need to have them removed. Or, worse still, that she may choose not to, and I will worry every minute that she will become cancer’s victim. I know that, eventually, my daughter will start to understand that there are expectations of her, and of all women. I know that her attitude towards her body will be altered by them – but I hope it will be altered more significantly by my mother and me, by our scarred and miraculous bodies. By our hearts that are still beating, telling her that she is enough, however she looks, however she is. She is enough. Laura Pearson is the author of Missing Pieces, Nobody’s Wife and I Wanted You To Know.American private equity tycoons are profiteering from the global climate crisis by investing in fossil fuels that are driving greenhouse gas emissions, a new investigation reveals. Oil and gas pipelines, coal plants and offshore drilling sites linked to Indigenous land violations, toxic leaks and deadly air pollution are among the dirty energy projects financed by some of the country’s largest private equity firms, according to an investigation by the corporate accountability non-profits LittleSis and the Private Equity Stakeholder Project (Pesp). Private equity refers to an opaque form of financing away from public markets in which funds and investors buy and restructure companies including startups, troubled businesses and real estate. Globally, the industry manages more than $7tn for wealthy individuals and institutional investors such as mutuals, hedge funds, endowments and pensions, investing in every sector from retail chains and healthcare to prisons and weapons. Some of that money finances fossil-fuel projects that release greenhouse gases that cause global heating. Higher atmospheric and ocean temperatures are directly linked to the rise in catastrophic weather events like drought, extreme temperatures and hurricanes. Yet unlike banks and other publicly listed companies, private equity firms are exempt from most financial disclosure rules, making it extremely difficult to track their assets. It means people like firefighters and teachers whose pension funds are invested in private equity funds have little way of knowing if their retirement nest egg is financing coal plants, oil wells or solar farms. The Private Equity’s Dirty Dozen report, shared exclusively with the Guardian, provides a snapshot of the industry’s involvement in some of the country’s most controversial fossil fuel investments, as well as the deep political and cultural ties of its wealthy executives. The investigation found: The Carlyle Group, one of the world’s largest private equity firms, owns dozens of oil and gas companies including a stake in NGP Energy Capital, which boasts its own major portfolio mostly focused on fracking and drilling in states like Texas, Wyoming and Colorado. Carlyle, which recently announced a target of net zero emissions by 2050, also partners with Hilcorp Energy – a major methane emitter with a track record of offshore spills in Alaska and the Gulf of Mexico – on at least $4bn in equity and debt deals. (Methane is more than 25 times as potent as carbon dioxide at trapping heat in the atmosphere, and accounts for about a quarter of today’s global heating.) Kohlberg Kravis Roberts &amp; Co (KKR) has a controlling stake in the Coastal Gaslink pipeline in Canada, a 400-mile multibillion-dollar infrastructure project through unceded Indigenous territories that will transport fracked gas to a Pacific coast port for export to Asia. Police have deployed to evict protests and blockades organised by the hereditary chiefs of the Wet’suwet’en Nation. Co-founder Henry Kravis is a major Republican donor, donating $1m to Trump’s 2017 inauguration fund. Daniel Revers is the managing partner &amp; founder of ArcLight Capital Partners, a top energy-focused private equity firm, who accompanied Trump to China in 2017 – reportedly to help recruit investors for an environmentally disastrous refinery in the US Virgin Islands. Last year the EPA enacted emergency powers to shut down the Limetree Bay oil refinery after multiple toxic leaks led to school closures and adverse health impacts on majority black communities. This was followed by a DoJ complaint alleging the refinery posed an imminent threat to public health and the environment, before Limetree filed for bankruptcy. Richard Kayne is a major Republican donor and co-founder of Kayne Anderson Capital Advisors, the largest investor in energy pipelines in America. Kayne held a stake in the fifth largest oil pipeline developer in the world, the Plains All American Pipeline, when it was fined $60m for spilling 140,000 gallons of crude oil into the Pacific and the California coast in 2015 – the state’s worst oil leak in 25 years. (The company sold its stock in 2021 but still has a seat on the board.) The findings have renewed calls for greater transparency in the booming private equity industry, so that communities bearing the brunt of toxic emissions and extreme weather can track the money behind the misery. “By plowing money into dirty coal plants, offshore drilling and deforestation, private equity threatens to undermine our hard work to tackle the climate crisis and advance environmental justice,” said Elizabeth Warren, former presidential candidate and member of the Senate committee on banking. “It’s just another page from private equity’s standard playbook: boost short-term profits at the expense of the long-term wellbeing of communities.” Alyssa Giachino, Pesp’s climate director and co-author of the report, said: “While communities have shouldered the harms from fossil fuel investments, private equity firms have built vast wealth. Many firms have adopted rhetoric around sustainability, but have yet to provide transparency on their holdings and impacts.” A KKR spokesperson said the company “wholeheartedly disagreed” with the report’s assertions. “Not only do we believe in – and our actions support – the need for a sustainable energy transition, we also believe in the value and importance of transparency, as evidenced by an extensive library of public disclosures including our Climate Action Report and Sustainability Accounting Standards Board Report [among others].” Private equity firms have spawned an elite group of super-rich power brokers with deep ties in politics, the arts, sports and education sectors. In recent years, banks have come under growing criticism for bankrolling fossil fuel projects, while secrecy surrounding private equity has shielded the industry from the same scrutiny. Yet in 2020, state-owned institutions like public pension and sovereign wealth funds invested 22% of the trillions in their portfolios in private equity where – unlike the stock markets – only the wealthy and institutional investors have direct access to this capital. The nature of these investments, let alone their impacts, are notoriously tough to track, though according to financial data analysts PitchBook, there has been at least $1.1tn in private equity energy deals globally since 2010. It’s no secret that the oil and gas industry spends big on politics, contributing more than $700m through individual, Pac and outside donations since 2000, according to Open Secrets. More than 80% of the campaign contributions have benefited Republican coffers. But the financial sector is far and away the largest source of campaign contributions to federal candidates and parties. Stephen Schwarzman, chief executive and founder of Blackstone Group and the world’s 34th richest man according to Forbes, is a major Republican donor who has personally contributed to Donald Trump, Mitch McConnell and former Georgia senator Kelly Loeffler who supported overturning the 2020 presidential result. (Schwarzman recognised Biden’s victory and condemned the January 6 insurrection.) Blackstone, the world’s biggest private equity firm which manages $731bn in assets, co-owns (with ArcLight) one of America’s dirtiest coal plants, the General James Gavin power station in Ohio. Blackstone also has a significant stake in the owner of the Dakota Access pipeline – the oil infrastructure project which triggered the Standing Rock protest camp where Indigenous water protectors were brutalised by law enforcement. A spokesperson said: “Virtually none of the capital Blackstone invested in the last three years was in fossil fuel exploration and production. We have simultaneously invested over $15bn in projects that we believe are consistent with the energy transition.” The company does not make corporate donations. Democratic candidates have also benefited from fossil fuel investors. Adebayo Ogunlesi, founder and managing partner of Global Infrastructure Partners (GIP), has donated to Barack Obama and Joe Manchin, the coal-friendly West Virginia senator currently blocking Biden’s climate spending bill, Build Back Better. Ogunlesi oversees $79bn in assets, with over half of the company’s portfolio in energy investments, according to market data. GIP is part of a consortium which in 2020 bought a 49% stake in the Abu Dhabi National Oil Company’s infrastructure, in a deal worth $10bn that gives them lease rights to gas pipelines for the next 20 years. Ogunlesi, who is the senior director of Goldman Sachs and has sat on various boards at Harvard University, served alongside Blackstone’s Schwarzman on Trump’s business advisory council, which was abandoned after the former president described white supremacist protesters in Charlottesville as “very fine people”. The report details the symbiotic relationships between ultra-rich private equity executives and the rest of America’s elite such as Carlyle’s co-founder David Rubenstein, whose net worth is estimated at $4.6bn and sits on the board of several influential think tanks and arts. “It’s a big problem that ultra-wealthy private equity executives are able to use their fortunes to enmesh themselves on the boards of the most prestigious universities, cultural institutions and thinktanks,” said Derek Seidman, researcher with LittleSis and report co-author. “This helps them burnish their public reputations in ways that obfuscate the fact that they are, in reality, some of the world’s biggest oil barons.” ArcLight, GIP, Carlyle and Kayne Anderson did not respond to requests for comment.When Game of Thrones ended, I promised myself I would never again become invested in a sprawling medieval fantasy where humanity makes a desperate last stand against an apocalyptic foe, at the onset of an endless winter. It felt like a safe bet at the time. Then that trailer dropped. The finale of this grand strategy trilogy, set in the long-running Warhammer fantasy role-playing universe, never quite reaches the cinematic highs of the announcement video, but it comes impressively close; all swords, sorcery and symphonic metal. Too much story would only detract from the strategy sandboxes that define the Total War series anyway, where a Helm’s Deep or Battle of the Bastards can emerge spontaneously from any corner of its improv theatre of war. Still, if Warhammer 3 never hits such epochal fantasy plot beats, it provides one beautiful, batshit box of Lego for building your own. The setup is the typical stuff of operatic fantasy: the roar of a dying god has torn apart the barrier that separates the mortal world from the daemonic realm of chaos. You play as one of eight factions with designs on that god’s power. Some want to protect their homelands. Some want dark glory. Some just want a good meal. Vivid lore snippets and vastly asymmetrical factions contribute to a heady blend of romantic and classical strategy game design. While it certainly helps if you’re already invested in the fate of the Old World on the eve of an onslaught by the ruinous powers, the freedom granted by Warhammer’s glorious silliness ultimately serves the genre by allowing for fantasy to inform tactical diversity. Battles veer towards the cinematic rather than the cerebral, but there’s still plenty of intense and interesting RTS gameplay. Any IP this fleshed out and chronicled still brings its own restrictions, of course. How do you do the chaos god’s reality-bending potential justice while not devolving into an all-out power fantasy? How do you lay out an even playing field for dark deities and squishy mortals? Mate. This is Warhammer. You make each faction so uniquely overpowered that your plague-borne regenerative abilities cancel out my invocation of an ancient bear deity’s icy wrath. The result is a spectacular lateral expansion of the traditional Total War dynamic. The power curve eventually balances out, even if it violently contorts into a few flaming sigils on its way there. There are a few outliers, of course. The game recommends either Slavic, icy Kislev or the undivided Daemons of Chaos as a first pick. Both are narratively satisfying extensions of an excellent story prologue, but Khorne’s destructive momentum and Cathay’s defensive bulwark are far more forgiving starters. A relentless spilling of demonic forces across the map makes for an intense, breathless campaign. Thematically evocative, sure, but also a contributor to the game’s biggest issue: a harsher autoresolve and tighter map means a tiresome number of forced manual battles. Asymmetry aside, all factions share a campaign objective: navigate the four realms of chaos and wrest a Daemon Prince’s soul from each, while building your forces and securing your empire in the interim. It’s a structure that lets you play tall, or roleplay on the defensive, though painting the map and eliminating rivals is an alternate victory condition. The eventual promise of the trilogy is “Immortal Empires” – a combination of all three games’ maps and factions into one grand depiction of the Old World. As such, most additions are quality of life changes rather than dramatic overhauls. The long-requested siege rework is still welcome, with mixed results. Towers and barricades are powerful, if a touch arcadey, but the real upgrade here is improved settlement map design. Open streets, palisades, perches and choke points make for a far more evolved and interesting take on a prevalent series weakness. It’s also a real looker, providing you can find the beauty in blighted, fetid hellscapes and snow-capped crags. The setting’s real trick has always been how it stays tongue-in-cheek about its own excess while still worldbuilding with earnest imagination, and Creative Assembly cap off the trilogy with some of its most gripping – and funniest – writing. The continual design evolution of one project split over three full games and dozens of expansions makes me hesitant to call Warhammer III a landmark strategy game in its own right. But looking back now at that very first trailer, it does feel like a promise kept. • Total War: Warhammer III is released on 17 February; £49.99Many studies have found that there are mental and physical health advantages for grandparents who care for their grandchildren. However, new research, which involved researchers talking to grandparents before and after their caregiving responsibilities began, has appeared to debunk these findings. The new study published by the Journals of Gerontology suggests there is in fact no causal effect between childcare provision and feeling younger. We would like to hear from grandparents who help with childcare about their own experiences. How does childcare affect your sense of wellbeing? What lengths have you gone to to care for your grandkids during the pandemic? Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.In recent years there has been a revived interest in the freedoms and oppressions of the 1970s (Emma Cline’s The Girls was slackly based on the Manson family cult, while Elizabeth Wetmore’s Valentine unfurled in the aftermath of male violence in 1970s Texas), and Welsh-born writer Sally J Morgan’s debut novel also wrestles with how this age of seeming progression was simultaneously a perilous time to be a woman. Morgan’s deep dive into the decade, recently awarded the Portico prize (offered to writing “that best evokes the spirit of the north of England”), reflects on her own close call with two of the UK’s most notorious serial killers. At age 21, while hitchhiking in Yorkshire, she was offered a lift by Fred and Rosemary West. Morgan’s fondness for catching a free ride is shared by her danger-chasing protagonist Jude Totton, nicknamed Toto, for whom “the edge between life and death glitters”. The novel begins as this thrill-seeker moves with two friends, fellow art school graduates Nel and Jo, to the “roughest part of Leeds”, Chapeltown, “full of gangs that prey on the immigrants who can’t afford to live anywhere else”. Though the neighbourhood seems initially hostile – curses are scrawled across the front door – Toto fast befriends a local sex worker, Janice, and happens upon an anarchist alternative school where fugitives are occasionally hidden beneath the floorboards. Toto’s motley hangouts are vividly captured, from the motorway (“a river of metal, a flow of shining paintwork”), to her favourite pub (“a poky collection of fusty rooms, full of art students, anarchists, Irish republicans, homosexuals and prostitutes”), while northern dialects are affectionately threaded into the dialogue. Though Morgan’s writing is bold, it is not subtle, with the emotions of her characters often glaringly on their sleeves: “The intensity of being alive stuns me,” Toto narrates. “It’s so incomprehensible. So fucking unbelievably beautiful.” An ambient smattering of news headlines denoting attacks or disappearances of women gradually crescendos, yet Toto remains uncompromising in her daredevilry. She is nearly assaulted twice, by ex-soldiers implicated in Bloody Sunday, and then by an acquaintance, from which she emerges like a “drunken Boadicea, raising her arms in triumph after a night burning Rome to the ground”. Toto’s encounter with the Wests is comparatively fleeting, but the dread of them lurking in their unobtrusive pale-grey car lingers, finally bringing an end to Toto’s recklessness. Not all Morgan’s cast are left unscathed: housemate Nel’s narrative captures the insidiousness of male violence (on her relationship with boyfriend Simon, she muses that “Weakness and cruelty sit so close together in some people”), while the novel has an uneasy relationship with class and voyeurism, with the poorest residents of Chapeltown (the book’s truest victims) mildly fetishised by Toto but given little narrative space to breathe. Toto Among the Murderers is both propelled and held back by its earnestness, an honesty that is brought to bear on its meanderings around northern England’s “crumpled landscape”, its flirtations with death and on the queer love story that gradually blossoms between its two protagonists. • Toto Among the Murderers by Sally J Morgan is published John Murray Press (£12.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyThousands of Afghans rescued from the Taliban remain stuck in UK hotels, after a minister admitted there was no mechanism to move some of them on without losing government support. The Home Office recently revealed that keeping Afghans in hotels was costing the taxpayer £1.2m a day. Hotel rooms are not suitable for long-term accommodation for traumatised people who have fled persecution, and prove a particularly challenging environment for families with children. On 1 December, the Afghan resettlement minister, Victoria Atkins, told parliament that more than 4,000 Afghans had either been resettled or been matched with accommodation. More than two months later, that figure remains around the 4,000 mark. When the Home Office, working with local authorities, finds accommodation for Afghans brought to safety, it gives councils £20,520 per person in resettlement money over three years to help with community integration. However, any of the 12,000 Afghans still languishing in hotels who find their own accommodation cannot automatically access this support. Tim Naor Hilton, the chief executive of Refugee Action, said this stasis “fails to meet the expectations the British public rightly had” when they “watched Afghans clinging desperately to planes during the fall of Kabul”. In a statement to the Guardian, Atkins said: “We are exploring all options to ensure families who move out of bridging hotels into self-arranged accommodation receive the appropriate support.” She added: “Due to an unprecedented cross-government effort, and in partnership with local authorities and the private rented sector, we have already matched or are matching approximately 4,000 evacuees to homes. “We continue to pursue every avenue to secure permanent homes so Afghan families can settle and rebuild their lives. Afghans recognised as having a legal right to reside in the UK are immediately entitled to access essential services including education, NHS healthcare, employment opportunities and universal credit.” She pledged that all Afghan citizens brought to the UK under the Afghan Relocations and Assistance Policy (ARAP) and the Afghan citizens resettlement scheme (ACRS) would have the right to work, access to education and healthcare and would be able to apply for public funds. On Tuesday Atkins issued a new appeal to landlords to offer homes to Afghan families. She said: “We know these families need a place of their own so they can truly build a life in the UK, but we recognise that finding settled accommodation for so many people is a challenge. That is why today I am urging landlords to join our efforts and come forward with offers of housing so we can help these people settle and thrive.” The charity Asylum Matters has launched a new campaign about failures of the Afghan resettlement scheme, calling it “unforgivably slow”. The campaign also raises concern about the government’s nationality and borders bill, which it says could penalise Afghans, depending on the route they use to seek sanctuary in the UK. Enver Solomon, the chief executive of the Refugee Council, condemned the delays and lack of flexibility in the Afghan resettlement scheme. “The government has clearly struggled to establish an effective partnership with local authorities to quickly move Afghans into long-term homes in the community. “It’s imperative that all families are given the support they need to rebuild their lives and do not miss out on being well settled into local communities regardless of which route they choose to find a home.” Sara Nathan, co-founder and trustee of the charity Refugees at Home, which recruits hosts with spare rooms to provide interim accommodation for asylum seekers and refugees, said her organisationhad not been able to help any resettled Afghans. “When the Afghan evacuation happened, it really touched a sympathetic nerve and 1,600 people applied to host with Refugees at Home,” she said. “It’s incredibly frustrating that, months later, we haven’t been able to place any Afghans because of the risk they will lose Home Office support and local authority sourced housing longer term. “So people are stuck for months in unsuitable, expensive bridging hotels when they could be hosted, cooking for themselves, integrating and becoming used to their new lives.”Krystyna Deuss arrived in the UK at the age of four in 1947 as a refugee from Poland. When she saw headlines about Afghans being airlifted to safety last summer, she wanted to help. Now a Londoner, she had fled with her family during postwar communist rule in the country of her birth. Like many of the Afghans airlifted to safety, her family had had to go into hiding before they fled. Her father was a judge and she said members of the “intelligentsia” such as him were at risk. As her father had been a judge, she was particularly keen to support somebody in the same profession. As such, she offered a flat in central London to a female Afghan judge and her family. Fawzia and her family were being accommodated in a hotel close to the flat by the Home Office, with her four children being given school places in the area. It seemed like an ideal solution – a place to live at a housing benefit rate in the neighbourhood where the children were already settled into school. However, due to the lack of a mechanism for those who have found their own place to live, the family remains stuck in the hotel. Officials from the local council, Hammersmith and Fulham, have inspected the flat Deuss offered. Although she has made some improvements to the property, which was previously on the open market, such as installing a new boiler, they say further work is required and Home Office funds that could be used to make the changes have not been made available. Deuss, 78, said she was “thoroughly fed up” with the whole saga and would now seek private renters. “I’ve been trying to offer my spacious flat, which is in the perfect location, since September,” she said. “I’ve spent a lot of money on improvements to the flat. I’m now going to give up and rent it on the open market again. I just wanted to help an Afghan refugee family but it doesn’t seem possible.” Fawzia said she and her family would like to move into the flat offered by Deuss, but unless the bureaucratic roadblocks can be shifted, they must remain for an indefinite period in the hotel nearby. “We want to work with the Home Office and the council to try to sort this out,” she said. Stephen Cowan, the leader of Hammersmith and Fulham council, said: “It is shameful that despite the government’s commitment last year to work ‘at speed’ the Home Office has failed to develop an effective resettlement programme for Afghan refugees. “Priti Patel must intervene now to ensure they no longer languish in temporary accommodation and are rehoused to suitable homes as soon as possible. We will continue to play a full part in this.”A former Conservative minister, once at the heart of efforts to clamp down on money laundering in London, has revealed that during Theresa May’s premiership, No 10 “leant on him” when he tabled amendments to introduce a public register of overseas property owners. Lord Faulks said he had first tried to put the register into the criminal finances bill in 2017 and then again into a government bill on money laundering in 2018. He had described the overseas ownership of “dirty money” in London as an obscenity. Faulks, a distinguished barrister and now an independent peer, told the Guardian he was rung by Downing Street during May’s tenure and told to go to a meeting where he met civil servants from four government departments including the Foreign Office, business officials and the Home Office. They told him to drop the amendments – for which he had a voting majority in the Lords – because they assured him Whitehall had the issue in hand. He told the Guardian: “I was obviously misled because nothing has subsequently happened. I can only think a deluded desire to protect the City of London has led to all these delays. “It is a real irony that our reputation for protecting the rule of law is one of the things that attracts people who have very little regard for the rule of law themselves and come from countries which ignore it almost altogether. “Quite frankly, I was leant on. I was leant on by No 10 Downing Street and summoned to a meeting of officials from all sorts of different departments, who told me it was very unfortunate that I was going to do this because the matter was in hand.” He recalls that in return for dropping his amendments he was assured in May 2018 by the Foreign Office minister Lord Ahmad that the legislation on a property register would be passed in 2019 in time for it to be functioning no later than early 2021. He was asked to chair a joint committee of both houses to scrutinise the government draft overseas entities bill, the measure that would bring in the register. The Foreign Office has been approached for comment. His joint committee duly reported in May 2019, stressing that time was of the essence, and proposed improvements including verification checks to ensure that trusts could not be used to disguise the ultimate owners of property. On publication of his report he was assured by ministers that they understood the urgency. Faulks, who has just completed a government commissioned report on judicial review, said “over a period of five years successive ministers have offered me emollient promises that the issue was in hand. What has happened? Absolutely nothing. In the meantime, frankly, we look like a laughing stock. We are not responding to the threat of economic crime. Instead, we are giving away golden visas and the rest of the world must think we simply do not care”. He branded unexplained wealth orders as pathetic, pointing out only four had been issued and said the issue of the resourcing of the National Crime Agency was critical. He pointed out that the idea of a register of overseas property owner had first been aired by David Cameron in 2015 and in a speech to an anti-corruption summit he had convened in 2016. He said perhaps “the climate is now changing because we all hate the Russians now”. A growing number of Conservative MPs are seeking unequivocal assurances that an economic crime bill containing the register will be in the next Queen’s speech, regardless of whether Russia invades Ukraine. Tom Tugendhat, the chair of the foreign affairs committee, said the government had done “nothing” to stem the flow of illicit funds entering Britain from Russia and urged ministers to act in order to stand up to the Kremlin. In a Twitter post, he accused Vladimir Putin of running a “mafia-like organisation” and said that ministers should stop turning a “blind eye” to dirty Russian money in Britain. “Dirty money has been an issue for decades but its poison is seeping deeper into our system,” he said. “For decades, Russian companies have used our markets to raise money – equities and debt – to finance the Kremlin.” His committee has reopened its investigation into the breadth of Russian finances in the UK financial system.For years, local gun violence prevention programs have struggled to get long term funding. The people who look out for students on and off US school campus, sit at the bedsides of gunshot wound survivors, and embrace the families of homicide victims, are rarely paid with dedicated public money. Instead many groups survive on unpaid hours, donations and competitive one-off grants. But since 2021 a historic amount of government funding has been made available across the US that can turn the tide. This money comes as US cities are in dire need of intervention and healing resources after a nearly two-year increase in homicides and shootings. Still, this potential windfall also comes with confusion, especially for smaller programs whose staff don’t have the bandwidth to manage tedious, competitive applications without support. “It’s been a headache, but we’re learning,” said Dante Gaines, a co-founder of 1 Hundred Years Enterprises in Richmond, California, of the grant writing and application processes. “It’s all very tedious, especially when you’ve got three brothers who don’t really know what we are doing.” Gaines and his partners, Lejon Reese and Patrick Scott, met while they were serving decades-long sentences in Folsom State Prison and founded the organization in 2018. Since then they’ve started speaking at a local elementary school, helping other formerly incarcerated people find their footing, and building relationships with the young men most at risk of being on either side of a gun. The trio quit their day jobs to throw themselves into their community work and are mainly operating on donations from family and local residents as well as a contract with the county’s Boys and Girls club, a national youth development organization. They’ve had city and nonprofit grant applications denied in the past but are still applying. Scott says that a consistent injection of funding would give the co-founders more time to innovate and expand their reach. “We’re so worried about how to get funded it takes away from us doing what we’re very good at doing,” he said. “A few years worth of funding gives us enough room to be creative.” Community organizations like Reese’s, Gaines’ and Scott’s have long called for long-term funding. These groups reach the majority Black and Latino residents who bear the brunt of the burden of gun violence in the US, using art and yoga to help people heal from trauma and taking young people on trips out of state. The work requires money for supplies and staffing, but many groups have for years eked by on grants and contracts, volunteer work and donations. Yet money has been scarce because of the red tape involved in government grant applications and oversight, organizers said. If someone does get a government contract or other type of public money it is usually allotted only for a few months or a year, which isn’t enough time to develop the relationship necessary to get someone out of the cycle of violence. Donations and philanthropic funds covered gaps but violence prevention advocates say it’s the government’s responsibility to make sure grassroots healing and intervention groups are able to easily access public dollars. “Philanthropy dollars can fill a gap but those government dollars can sustain the organizations for the long arc. This direct investment is critical,” said Michael-Sean Spence, senior director of community safety initiatives for Everytown for Gun Safety. The organization’s appeals have found a more receptive audience, however, as homicides began to climb across the US, coinciding with demands for money to be funnelled away from police and toward holistic violence prevention. The money, activists and interventionists hoped, would go to local groups whose staff was entrenched in the streets and had a proven track record of diverting people from violence and helping families and individuals heal. In 2021, after homicides jumped by 30% over the year before, the Biden administration directed counties to use American Rescue Plan funds for violence prevention work and made millions of dollars available through the health and human services, education and housing departments. In California, the budget for the state’s violence intervention and prevention grant program (CalVIP) has been increased by $200m and is available to more cities and programs than ever before. “It took the pandemic of Covid-19 to exacerbate the already debilitating, but forgotten, pandemic of gun violence,” said Julius Thibodeaux, the co-director of Movement for Life in Sacramento. The group used to be an affiliate of Advance Peace, an organization that is now a national model for violence prevention. Thibodeaux says he and his staff began to see more young people involved in gunplay and points to the loss of school and extracurriculars that gave them refuge. “The money is important because we can get them on the right track, but you need the long term support resources to make sure nothing derails them,” he continued. However, the newly available funds do little good if the barrier to entry is too high for small groups to clear. That’s where national organizations hope they can leave their mark. Spence, of Everytown, said his group is helping local groups take advantage of the historic amount of money available at the local, state and federal levels. “It takes time for that change to occur and community programs are not waiting for governments to figure this funding out – they’re meeting needs today,” he continued. “There’s a learning curve on the ground to find the info,” said Greg Jackson, executive Director of Community Justice Action Fund, a national violence prevention group. “Prior to these executive actions we had $5 to $10 million and now we have billions that people can compete for.” For programs like 1 Hundred Year Enterprises, the support that Jackson and Spence refer to couldn’t come soon enough. The founders plan to start working with youth in juvenile detention, recently partnered with the Richmond officials, to hold a series of meetings between Black men who once contributed to the city’s gun violence. They plan to start taking students on excursions that they hope will open their horizons. “It takes much determination and resolve to run and fund a program,” said Lejon Reese. “We’ve lost sleep and sacrificed family time but we have to keep boots on the ground because we’re trying to deter youth from a path that leads to death or jail.”The debate over a biennial World Cup has been the subject of strong opinions from politicians, sponsors and governing bodies, most commonly in opposition. Now, finally, players have had their say and they appear to be against it too. A survey by the international players’ union Fifpro has found that 75% of players in the men’s game want the tournament to continue on a four-year cycle. It also has good news for organisers Fifa, however, showing that players consider the World Cup to be the most important competition in the professional game, alongside their own domestic leagues. Compiling the response of 1,000 current professionals from across six continents and more than 70 nationalities, the survey found the strongest opposition to changing the tournament was in Europe and Asia with 77% of players preferring a World Cup every four years; 63% of players in the Americas were opposed too, but there was less resistance in Africa with only 49% of players supporting the current format and the rest split between a two- or three-year cycle. In total, 81% of players rank either their domestic league, or the World Cup as their favourite competition. The results are part of a broader Fifpro study into player workload and the football calendar, with the union having expressed frequent concerns that elite players, especially those playing at international level, face greater risk of injury and burnout from overplaying. “The player survey shows most footballers around the world have a clear preference to play the World Cup every four years,” Fifpro’s general secretary, Jonas Baer-Hoffmann, said. “At the same time, the results demonstrate the importance of domestic league competitions to players. These leagues are the bedrock of our game and we have to do more to strengthen them both for the sake of players and the overall stability of professional football.” Fifa’s plans to reform the World Cup cut across a number of issues for stakeholders, not least the potential revenues a new competition could suck in from elsewhere. Player welfare is a concern too, although Fifa’s proposals – as initially drafted by Arsène Wenger – claim to have a focus on this issue by reducing the number of international qualifying matches and placing them within one or two distinct blocks during a season. With criticism from players joining that of other groups – most vocally Uefa and political bodies elsewhere in Europe – any reforms remain uncertain. Before Christmas Fifa’s president, Gianni Infantino, drew back from putting the plans to a vote. Another crucial meeting, the Fifa Congress, is at the end of March. The governing body, meanwhile, is continuing to consult with various stakeholders, including Fifpro and the Professional Footballers’ Association, with whom Infantino met in Manchester three weeks ago. After that meeting, Infantino said: “Fifa is listening to everybody. We took note of the valuable opinions and we’re sure this will lead to more constructive exchanges. This is what we wanted from the beginning of this process, to facilitate an open platform where everyone’s view can be brought to the table.”Good morning. Russia’s defence ministry has announced it is to withdraw some of its troops from the border with Ukraine in a possible de-escalation of the threat of a potential invasion. The size of the withdrawal remains unclear and may involve only a fraction of Russia’s forces at the Ukrainian border, which western officials estimate at more than 60% of the country’s ground forces. The announcement of the withdrawal came in a statement from the defence ministry spokesperson, Igor Konashenkov, who described ongoing exercises that involved forces from “practically all military districts, fleets, and the airborne forces”. Meanwhile, Boris Johnson and Joe Biden believe there remains “a crucial window for diplomacy and for Russia to step back from its threats towards Ukraine” after a 40-minute call between the two leaders last night. Is this really a de-escalation? Russia has previously announced the conclusion of military exercises near the Ukrainian border, but social media and satellite photography taken in the following days have not shown considerable changes to Russia’s force posture. Is this any different? It’s unclear yet but Russia’s rouble currency reportedly posted gains following the announcement, indicating that investors hoped this would mark the beginning of a de-escalation of tensions between Russia and the west. The US private equity firms funding dirty energy projects A report, shared exclusively with the Guardian, provides a snapshot of industry’s involvement in some of the country’s most controversial fossil fuel investments. US private equity tycoons are profiteering from the global climate crisis by investing in fossil fuels that are driving greenhouse gas emissions, an investigation reveals. Oil and gas pipelines, coal plants and offshore drilling sites linked to Indigenous land violations, toxic leaks and deadly air pollution are among the dirty energy projects financed by some of the country’s largest private equity firms, according to an investigation by the corporate accountability non-profits LittleSis and the Private Equity Stakeholder Project (Pesp). Private equity refers to an opaque form of financing away from public markets in which funds and investors buy and restructure companies including startups, troubled businesses and real estate. The findings have renewed calls for greater transparency in the booming private equity industry, so that communities bearing the brunt of toxic emissions and extreme weather can track the money behind the misery. New Yorkers in high stop-and-frisk areas subject to more facial recognition tech New Yorkers who live in areas where controversial stop-and-frisk searches happen most frequently are also more likely to be surveilled by facial recognition technology, according to research by Amnesty International and other researchers. Research also showed that in the Brooklyn, Bronx and Queens boroughs of the city there was a direct correlation between the proportion of non-white residents and the concentration of controversial facial recognition technology. “Our analysis shows that the NYPD’s use of facial recognition technology helps to reinforce discriminatory policing against minority communities in New York City,” said Matt Mahmoudi, an artificial intelligence and human rights researcher at Amnesty International. The research is a part of the global anti-facial recognition technology campaign, Ban the Scan, investigating increasing use of surveillance initiatives in the New York police department (NYPD). How did the researchers work out the link? Using thousands of digital volunteers through the Decode NYC Surveillance project, more than 25,500 CCTV cameras were mapped across New York City. Data scientists and researchers from Amnesty International compared the data on the camera placement with statistics on police stop-and-frisk. In other news … Sarah Palin’s lawsuit accusing the New York Times of defaming her by incorrectly linking her to a mass murder was thrown out on Monday. “I think this is an example of very unfortunate editorializing on the part of the Times but having said that, that’s not the issue before this court,” the judge said. The Canadian prime minister, Justin Trudeau, has invoked legislation that gives his government sweeping powers to fight a growing number of “illegal and dangerous” blockades across the country. Trudeau said the measures would be time-limited and only apply to specific geographic regions. Workers at the Amazon warehouse in Alabama, have begun the rerun of a historic union election after the US labor regulator ruled Amazon’s conduct had interfered with a previous election in 2021 and ordered a new vote. Other large US employers including Starbucks and Target are also fighting off union drives. Novak Djokovic says he would rather miss out on grand slams than be vaccinated against Covid, in his first major interview since being deported from Australia. Djokovic told the BBC he was not anti-vaccination in general but believed people had the right to choose whether they were jabbed or not. Don’t miss this: I want my daughter to be inspired by my miraculous scars “By the time my mother developed breast cancer, I was 30. She was double that age and there was an ocean between us: I was married and living in New York, so when the news came, I couldn’t hold her to me, or be a practical support. I sat on my bed and cried. The next time I saw her, it was all over. One breast removed and carefully reconstructed. The cancer gone. It was only five years later that I found my lump,” writes Laura Pearson. … or this: like Earth, we are changing quickly through the violence of climate collapse “My body understands I take her for granted, and why wouldn’t I? We are conditioned, as women, to believe there is divine purpose in busyness and distraction – forgetting ourselves, forgetting the soul-needs of our children: the soil, the air, savannas and forests, wetlands and oceans. My body is my collaborator, whether I think about her or not. She continues to construct my health and wellbeing in the blood and bones of my body, even as my nervous system registers danger and adrenal glands sound the alarm. Every muscle and organ is inflamed with the heartache of this burning world,” writes Terry Tempest Williams. Climate check: Flourishing plants show warming Antarctica undergoing ‘major change’ Antarctica’s two native flowering plants are spreading rapidly as temperatures warm, according to the first study to show changes in fragile polar ecosystems have accelerated in the past decade. The increase in plants since 2009 has been greater than the previous 50 years combined, coinciding with rapidly rising air temperatures and a reduction in the number of fur seals, according to researchers working on Signy Island in the South Orkney Islands. Last Thing: New Hampshire students launched a boat in 2020. It was just found in Norway A small boat – containing photos, fall leaves, acorns and state quarters – launched in October 2020 by some New Hampshire middle school students has been found 462 days later by a sixth grader in Norway. It had lost its hull and keel on the 8,300-mile journey and was covered in gooseneck barnacles, but the deck and cargo hold were still intact. The student who found it, Karel Nuncic, took the boat to his school, and he and his classmates eagerly opened it last week. The school in Norway plans a call with the Rye Junior High students soon. Sign up First Thing is delivered to thousands of inboxes every weekday. If you’re not already signed up, subscribe now. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.comHe’d hate us saying it, but when it comes to national treasures, Armando Iannucci (Scottish, but born to Italian parents) is up there with the best of them. As writer and producer for 1994’s The Day Today, Iannucci was part of the Britpop of comedy: what the Gallaghers, Damon Albarn and Jarvis Cocker were doing for music, Chris Morris, Peter Baynham and Iannucci were doing for satire. Then there’s a certain Mr Alan Partridge, whom Iannucci helped create with Steve Coogan for radio in the early 90s, and who now … well, who wouldn’t have wanted to be invited to Partridge’s oasthouse for an exclusive, post-lockdown haircut interview? After creating and directing the swear-tastic The Thick of It, Iannucci brought Malcolm “Fuckity Bye” Tucker’s political mishaps to the silver screen in 2009’s tremendous In the Loop. Iannucci’s second film – 2017’s The Death of Stalin (with Michael Palin, Steve Buscemi and Paul Whitehouse) – featured less swearing but enough communism for the Guardian’s Peter Bradshaw to praise it with five stars as “a ruthless force by an A-list line-up” – but the actual Communist Party of the Russian Federation to label it “revolting” and ban the film in Russia, Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan. Iannucci’s third film – the brilliant The Personal History of David Copperfield, featuring Dev Patel – was awarded four stars by Bradshaw as a “bracing, entertaining, richly satisfying experience”. With so much more on his CV: Veep, Avenue 5, the time he was a subject on The South Bank Show in 2006, what would you like to ask him? Post your comment below by midday on Friday 18 February and we’ll print the answers in Film&amp;Music on Friday 25 February and online too, even if the Communist Party of the Russian Federation try to stop us. Iannucci features as one of the “in conversation” guests at this March’s Glasgow film festival. He is also taking part in a Guardian Live event on 30 March, joining Zoe Williams and Jim Waterson to discuss the future of the BBC – book tickets here.The government’s proposed new powers to strip people of their citizenship without notice rang alarm bells in communities across Britain. Despite being the first Muslim woman in our country’s history to serve in the cabinet, my family and I could be deprived of our citizenship without being told about it, and cast out of our home country if the Home Office believed this would be conducive to the public good. Two in five people from ethnic minority backgrounds could be at risk. Successive British governments have torn down the basic belief that all British citizens in this country are and should be equal. The consequences of this government’s unprecedentedly broad use of citizenship-stripping powers have become even more clear to me after hearing directly from the families of British citizens detained in north-east Syria. Last week, the all-party parliamentary group (APPG) on trafficked Britons in Syria, of which I’m a vice-chair, published the findings of its inquiry into the grooming and trafficking of British nationals by Islamic State (IS) in Iraq and Syria. What we found is devastating. Not only did UK authorities fail to protect vulnerable women and girls from being trafficked by IS, but the government has essentially punished some of those women for the crimes committed by their traffickers by stripping them of their citizenship. As far as we know, the government made no attempt to assess how the women reached Syria. It simply sent a letter (or filed a letter in a Home Office drawer) stating that they travelled to IS-held territory “of [their] own volition” and had forfeited their right to British citizenship as a result. We heard family members describe the horrific abuse and enslavement their loved ones endured under IS, and their feelings of abandonment and betrayal by the authorities they looked to for support. Many were interrogated and treated like criminals after they reported their loved ones missing. One family was raided by the police after going to them for help. Authorities stopped answering their calls. At the most difficult time in their lives, they had nowhere to turn. Although British women have managed to escape IS territory, they and their children have been abandoned by the government in detention camps in north-east Syria where their lives are in jeopardy. In one detention camp last year at least 163 people died, including 62 children. Instead of repatriating these families – as many of our European allies and the US have done with their nationals – the government has washed its hands of them, by unilaterally stating that these women, born and raised in Britain, are no longer British. In addition to the life-threatening consequences for these women and children and the severe emotional toll on their families, these discriminatory citizenship-stripping policies are eroding many people’s sense of belonging within the UK, especially in the Muslim community. This sense of a new “hostile environment” will only be exacerbated by clause 9 of the nationality and borders bill, which would introduce the power to deprive millions of Britons of citizenship without notice. This would effectively eviscerate the right of appeal. You don’t stand much chance of challenging the deprivation of your citizenship if you don’t know it’s been taken away in the first place. And it would further the appalling situation in which we find ourselves now in Britain that seeks to sentence a predominantly minority black and brown community differently from the majority white community. When my grandfathers fought for the British Indian army, they did so as British citizens. When the Windrush generation answered the call to rebuild Britain after the second world war, they did so as citizens. When south Asian people took up gruelling jobs in the mills and foundries of Yorkshire, as my family did, they did so as citizens, as equal members of our society, in the continuation of a bond that had started decades earlier. Citizenship-stripping powers may feel abstract, but the government’s unprecedented use of them is already having a terrible impact on British families, including children and trafficking victims, as the APPG’s report makes clear. Their abandonment is a blot on our nation’s conscience and should serve as a warning about the potential consequences of further expansion of this vast, unaccountable executive power. In the wake of the Windrush scandal, the government promised to learn from the failures that led to British citizens being unfairly cast out from their homeland. It must end the dangerous misuse of citizenship-stripping powers, or it is doomed to repeat those failures. Lady Warsi is a former chairman of the Conservative party and vice-chair of the all-party parliamentary group on trafficked Britons in SyriaHospitalizations and deaths from Covid-19 in the US are now driven heavily (although not exclusively) by the small share who remain unvaccinated. According to the latest CDC estimates, an unvaccinated American is 14 times more likely to die of Covid-related complications as compared with someone who has two doses of the vaccine – and they are 68 times more likely to die from Covid-related health problems than someone who is “boosted.” Explanations for persistent vaccine hesitancy abound. An increasingly dominant narrative, especially among progressives, is that failure to comply with the directives of public health officials is absurd and must be driven by some pathology or deficit. Among those who subscribe to this worldview, debates turn around identifying the primary malfunction of “those people”: Are they ignorant? Brainwashed? Stupid? Selfish and apathetic? All of the above? Left off the menu is the possibility that hesitancy and non-compliance may actually be reasonable responses to how experts and other elites have conducted themselves, both before and during the pandemic. Yet there are many powerful and fairly straightforward reasons people cite for why they are suspicious of authorities, both with respect to the Covid-19 vaccine and other pandemic-related public health guidance. In no particular order: The Covid-19 vaccines were developed, approved, mass produced and distributed at record speed. On the one hand, this was a miracle of modern science, state capacity and private sector ingenuity. On the other hand, the rapid process gave rise to questions about whether proper protocols had been followed and exacerbated concerns about how safe and effective the vaccines would be. These rapidly produced vaccines also pioneered the use of “artificial proteins never seen in the natural world”. Again, a miracle of modern science, but one that left many wondering if there was sufficient research on possible long-term problems and side-effects, given that the Pfizer Covid-19 vaccine was the first mRNA vaccine ever to achieve full FDA approval in the US and was a developed and approved on a radically accelerated timetable. During the 2020 US presidential campaign, both Joe Biden and Kamala Harris expressed grave concerns about the “Trump vaccines,” alleging that they may not have been properly developed, vetted, approved or manufactured – and consequently, may not be safe. The Biden administration is now depicting hesitancy around these same vaccines as irrational and immoral. In a recent interview, Anthony Fauci outright acknowledged that he has engaged in “noble lies” with respect to herd immunity vaccination targets in order to encourage more people to take the shots. Pre-Omicron, the vaccines were portrayed as providing more than 90% effectiveness against Covid-19 infection. It turned out that even a two-dose sequence faced precipitous declines in efficacy, dropping to less than 50% effectiveness several months after the second shot. That is, a two-shot regime ended up at the low end of what would be considered “effective” at preventing infection at all, which is why we ended up with boosters. In the wake of Omicron, even people who have been “boosted” with a third shot are regularly experiencing breakthrough infections. And so, over time, the justification for getting vaccinated has shifted. Rather than being sold as a means of preventing infection altogether, it is now argued that people should take the shots in order to reduce hospitalizations and deaths (the vaccines remain very effective at this). That is, the main benefit of vaccination has been revised down dramatically – from outright preventing infections to reducing severe infections – even as people are encouraged to get more and more shots in order to achieve that benefit. It was initially reported that a single shot provided great protection, although a booster could conceivably be suggested down the line. Then two shots became the standard to be “fully vaccinated.” Now, according to Fauci, three shots will soon become a requirement for being considered “fully vaccinated” – and the CDC is urging some Americans to pursue a fourth shot. There does not seem to be a clear end in sight for how many shots may ultimately be suggested. The CDC set a tight three- to four-week dosing schedule between the first and second vaccine doses. Robust evidence has since emerged that waiting eight to 12 weeks between doses provides much better antibody response, reducing the prospect of breakthrough infections while simultaneously extending the window of high infection resistance. That is, many breakthrough infections people are experiencing conceivably could have been avoided – and perhaps many unpleasant vaccine side effects as well – had the government been less aggressive in pumping as many shots, as fast as possible, into as many arms as possible. Nonetheless, CDC guidance remains unchanged to this day. Each additional round of shots generates billions for vaccine manufacturers. Pharmaceutical companies have a clear stake in multiple rounds being mandated or encouraged for as many people as possible, in as many places as possible (at as high a price as possible). They have a clear interest in funding and promoting research suggesting that more rounds of vaccination are needed – and they have been doing just that, while lobbying governments to adopt their vaccines over those of their competitors. The CDC receives immense sums of money from big pharma, while failing to adequately disclose these donations and industry ties, despite obvious conflicts of interest in many of these “gifts.” This was a big problem even before the pandemic. Yet despite vocal calls for reform, no changes were made – even as donations rapidly increased in the midst of the Covid-19 crisis. Through its affiliated foundation, more than $100m was pumped into the CDC by corporations in the fiscal year 2020 alone (not to mention additional donations by anonymous donors and named individuals, foundations or lobbying groups associated with the pharmaceutical industry). The FDA approved the Johnson &amp; Johnson vaccine as safe and effective. It subsequently advised against Americans taking this vaccine due to rare but occasionally fatal side effects. According to the VAERS (vaccine adverse event reporting system) database, nearly 12,000 Americans have died shortly after receiving Covid vaccines, possibly as a result of side-effects or allergic reactions from the vaccines. On the one hand, these casualties represent a minuscule share (0.0022%) of all doses given out, and are radically offset by the immense number of lives saved by vaccination. But at the same time, 12,000 lives are not nothing. There are many, many towns in the US with populations smaller than that. Nonetheless, people expressing concerns about vaccine-related deaths are often mocked or derided. Those who are harmed by vaccines (and their families) are generally not eligible to seek financial recompense. Alex Azar, the Department of Health and Human Services director under Trump, evoked federal powers to completely shield pharmaceutical companies from being sued should their vaccines produce adverse reactions. A former pharma executive, Azar retains deep ties with the industry and stood to profit financially from many policies he enacted as a “public servant” that advanced the interests of pharmaceutical companies. Over the course of the pandemic, legislators and other government officials have invested heavily in the stock of vaccine manufacturers, and reaped significant financial windfalls from these investments. Pharma companies have reciprocally poured millions into the campaign coffers of sympathetic congress members. They have spent even more money on lobbying in order to expand government purchases of their products and resist efforts to render their drugs more accessible or affordable. And their efforts have been paying off: despite Biden rhetorically endorsing a Covid vaccine patent waiver, the administration has not followed through with any concrete action on this front. Following aggressive lobbying by the pharmaceutical industry, Democrats largely abandoned proposed legislation that would have allowed the federal government to negotiate down the price of drugs. All said, lawmakers, government officials and agencies, and pharmaceutical companies have all made vast amounts of cash by cooperating with one another over the course of the pandemic. Any of these factors could reasonably contribute to mistrust and non-compliance. And critically, these have just been issues related specifically to vaccines. There have been many similar tensions with respect to authorities’ approach to Covid more broadly. For instance: In the early days of the pandemic, the CDC insisted that Americans did not need to mask, and went so far as to suggest that masking could actually be harmful under certain circumstances. They later insisted that everyone should mask in public settings, even if they are fully vaccinated. Mask mandates have proliferated. Cloth masks, once deemed effective, are now proclaimed as better than nothing, but not very helpful. Expert modeling and predictions around the Covid-19 pandemic have often been inaccurate. In particular, they tend to wildly overestimate rates of infection, the numbers of deaths, etc, over a given period. There are good reasons for the models to be skewed in this direction. Nonetheless, aggressive policies justified on the basis of these dire projections have been quite costly for many – from “lost years” of learning in schools to devastating financial losses for individuals and businesses and increased social isolation, mental health strain and substance abuse to radical increases in antisocial behaviors resulting from a breakdown of social cohesion. These costs have all been borne most heavily by those who were already relatively disadvantaged and vulnerable – populations already inclined to be skeptical of authorities. Nonetheless, those who express concern about the profound costs of Covid-19 mitigation policies are often derided as myopic and selfish. Statistics on “Covid-19 related hospitalizations” seem to significantly inflate the number of people who are seeking medical care specifically due to health problems related to a Covid infection (even as Covid-related deaths may be significantly undercounted). While Trump was in office, insinuations that Covid-19 may have originated from a lab leak were widely derided as a racist conspiracy theory and media content exploring the possibility of a lab leak was actively censored by Facebook. Nonetheless, significant evidence has continued to build in support of the “lab leak hypothesis,” to the point where senior Biden administration officials now view the lab leak theory as roughly as credible as the natural origins theory – raising questions for many about why some public officials so aggressively (and prematurely) sought to suppress and discredit this hypothesis. Trump continues to be mocked and condemned for allegedly downplaying the severity of the Covid-19 pandemic. However, many in the expert class and mainstream left-aligned media outlets did exactly the same thing, and have apparently memory-holed this fact. Article after article insisted that Covid-19 was little worse than the flu (and people arguing otherwise were engaging in hyperbole and speaking well beyond “the data”). Liberals widely lambasted the Trump administration’s travel restrictions to and from China as both unnecessary and straightforwardly racist. Upon taking office, Joe Biden reimposed some of the same travel restrictions Democrats had previously condemned (on China and certain countries in Europe and Africa) – with the media largely embracing these moves by Democrats as prudent and necessary. Biden has likewise reinstated Trump’s “remain in Mexico” policy to prevent asylum seekers from entering the US, and has revived Trump’s rapid-deportation policy with respect to undocumented migrants in the US – citing Covid-19 transmission concerns to justify both policies, just like his predecessor, despite having previously condemned these same policies as immoral and unnecessary when it was Trump imposing them. With respect to all of these matters – possible adverse side effects, the origins of the virus, pandemic modeling, the efficacy of vaccines, masking, lockdowns, travel restrictions – experts and policymakers have been relying on data that was extremely provisional. They were regularly forced to improvise on the basis of their best judgments and theories. Robust efficacy for many recommended interventions and policies had not been empirically established. And, frankly, they got a lot wrong. This is not unusual – it is how science works. The problem, however, is that spokespeople (and “Trust the Science” stans) regularly concealed uncertainties, suppressed inconvenient information and squashed internal dissent in an ill-conceived effort to seem maximally authoritative. Rather than enhancing confidence among skeptics, these moves often made authorities seem incompetent or dishonest when they were forced to change their positions. Because the bases for possible reconsideration had been largely concealed from public view or debate, new positions often seemed to “come out of nowhere,” or to be products of material or political considerations rather than public health concerns. At times there were blatant political double standards with respect to public health guidance. For instance, religious gatherings or right-aligned protests were widely lambasted as irresponsible public health risks, even as left-aligned protests were widely praised by public health officials – deemed not only low-risk, but also necessary. Indeed, many experts chose to very conspicuously take part in these protests, even as they sought to present themselves as neutral arbiters of “the facts.” A constellation of scholars, bureaucrats and pundits seem invested in Covid remaining a “crisis” indefinitely. As the political scientist Oren Cass put it, many have been granted more money, prestige and institutional power than they have ever had in the wake of the pandemic. For them, a “return to normal” would mean a return to being largely ignored and exerting marginal influence over society. It would mean losing new revenue streams they have grown accustomed to, and so on. In light of this reality, it is perfectly natural that many experts, administrators and “talking heads” would be disinclined to return to “normal” – loss aversion is a powerful cognitive bias. However, recognizing these impulses as banal (rather than nefarious) does not render them unproblematic. They can skew policymaking and expert advice towards continued invasive policies and a continued sense of panic in ways that are excessive and pernicious. Again, any of these factors could easily and quite reasonably generate skepticism about authorities and their advice, including as it relates to the Covid vaccine. In a world where the experts are regularly wrong but continue to project high levels of confidence even as they change their minds and update their policies, where elite narratives about the crisis often seem to be inappropriately colored by political and financial considerations, where those who share one’s own background, values and interests do not seem to have a seat at the table in making the rules – and especially among populations that have a long history of neglect and mistreatment by the elite class (leading to high levels of pre-existing and well-founded mistrust even before the pandemic) – it would actually be bizarre to unquestioningly believe and unwaveringly conform to elite guidance. This would not be a sign of cognitive health. Put another way, there is no need to appeal to Tucker Carlson, Joe Rogan, Donald Trump or internet “fake news” to explain why so many have been skeptical of, or resistant to, recommendation by state officials, experts, journalists, et al. As the sociologist Gil Eyal aptly put it, mistrust of authorities is actually not much of a puzzle. Compelling reasons not to trust elites or conform to their guidance are almost innumerable (I barely scratched the surface in the examples above). Perhaps the real mystery, Eyal argues, is trust rather than mistrust, voluntary compliance not rebellion, effective persuasion not persistent doubt. Overall, the CDC estimates that roughly three-quarters of US adults are fully vaccinated, and 87% have received at least one dose of a Covid-19 vaccine. Outright vaccine refusal, in other words, is relatively rare among Americans (although many seem to have taken one dose of the vaccine and decided not to pursue second doses or boosters). And whether we’re talking about people who have (so far) declined the vaccine altogether or those who declined to pursue second shots or boosters, most who are vaccine hesitant are not resolutely anti-vaccine. Nor do they subscribe to the eccentric theories that get tossed around on the internet and hyped up in the media. Hardcore conspiratorial “anti-vaxxers” occupy a lot of the public discourse and public imagination with respect to vaccine refusal, but they are not representative of most vaccine-hesitant Americans. Rather than being a “lost cause,” the reality is that hesitant people across the country are stepping forward to be vaccinated in ever-larger numbers. Likewise, most of the Covid-related “resistance” movements have not been oriented around opposition to vaccines per se, but rather to vaccine mandates and passports and to Covid-19 related lockdowns, closures and masking requirements. That is, they are typically opposed to coercive (and often quite costly, dubiously effective and legally questionable) state policies intended to contain the pandemic. Irrespective of whether one agrees or disagrees with these campaigns, it is misleading and unhelpful to conflate these dissenters with “anti-vaxxers,” as many have done. All said, despite all the significant problems described above, the Covid-19 campaign has actually been one of the most ambitious and successful rapid vaccination drives in US history. Pockets of skepticism remain. From a public health perspective, this is unfortunate. From a humanitarian perspective, it is often tragic. Yet, it is important to bear in mind that many have legitimate reasons to be apprehensive towards authorities and skeptical of their advice – and it is possible to effectively mitigate their concerns. Most holdouts are persuadable. Indeed, they are being persuaded every day. Musa al-Gharbi is a Paul F Lazarsfeld fellow in sociology at Columbia University. His book We Have Never Been Woke: Social Justice Discourse, Inequality and the Rise of a New Elite is forthcoming with Princeton University Press. He is a Guardian US columnistNew oil and gas licences for the North Sea are incompatible with the UK’s international climate commitments and the Paris climate agreement, analysts have said. The government is considering licences for new oil and gas fields in the North Sea, under pressure from backbench MPs and media commentators, who claim new fossil fuel development is needed to reduce energy bills. But the additional greenhouse gas emissions from developing new oil and gas fields, as existing wells are depleted, would bust the UK’s carbon budgets and set the world on course to exceed the limit of 1.5C targeted at last year’s Cop26 UN climate summit, according to researchers at UCL. Daniel Welsby, a research fellow at UCL and co-author of a research note seen by the Guardian on the UK’s potential new licences, said for the government to justify licensing new fossil fuels, ministers would have to be able to persuade other countries to reduce their production. “There is no need for new oil and gas fields in the UK,” he told the Guardian. “For the UK to produce more oil and gas, another oil producer would need to keep their oil and gas in the ground.” The paper, from UCL scientists and commissioned by the campaign group Uplift, says: “The development of new UK oil and gas fields are not compatible with limiting warming in line with the Paris agreement … We recommend a moratorium be placed on all new oil and gas fields and the government focus its efforts on supporting the transition to a low carbon economy, both domestically and internationally.” Within the next few weeks, the Committee on Climate Change, the statutory advisory body to the government on the climate crisis, will deliver its verdict on whether new exploration and exploitation in the North Sea can be compatible with the UK’s carbon budgets. Last year, in a report commissioned by the UK for Cop26, the International Energy Agency advised that no new fossil fuel exploration and development should take place from this year if the world was to stay within 1.5C. A research paper from UCL, published in the peer-review journal Nature, reached similar conclusions. Tessa Khan, the director of Uplift, said: “If we carry on down this path, we’ll be dependent on a very expensive, highly polluting energy source for decades longer than necessary. A serious response from the government to both unaffordable energy bills and the climate crisis would see all this investment steered into cheaper UK renewables.” The new round of North Sea oil and gas licensing, first announced last year, is an embarrassment for the government as it tries to cement the achievements of the Cop26 summit, held in Glasgow last November. The UK, as host, retains the presidency of the UN talks until this November, when Cop27 will take place in Egypt. That gives the government primary responsibility for ensuring the key promise made in Glasgow – that all of the world’s nations, and especially the G20 group of leading economies, would review their national emissions-cutting plans in line with a 1.5C temperature limit – is met. But rows within the Conservative party and in the media over the UK’s net zero target, which some backbench Tory MPs have attackedand which some commentators have claimed should be scrapped amid the energy price crisis, have overshadowed the UK’s continuing presidency and threaten to undermine the legacy of the talks. Alok Sharma, the president of Cop26 and a cabinet minister, last month told Sky News it was “not realistic” to think new North Sea sources would reduce gas prices and said: “What we need to be doing is more of what we have been doing, which is building forward on renewables and obviously investing in nuclear.” The Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy (BEIS) is consulting on setting out a “climate compatibility checkpoint” that any new licence would have to pass. A spokesperson for BEIS said: “There will continue to be ongoing demand for oil and gas over the coming years as we transition to cleaner, more secure forms of energy generated in this country. As the business secretary has said, turning off our domestic source of gas overnight would put energy security, British jobs and industries at risk, and we would be even more dependent on foreign imports.” About half a dozen field development plans were given consent last year, with a similar number likely this year.The family of a 12-year-old footballer of Asian heritage who was racially abused during a match has criticised his local Football Association for a lack of support and said he has received no apology from the opposition team involved. Sathi Balaguru, was playing in a nine-a-side game for Pitshanger FC in west London, when he was tripped and called an “Indian boy” during a penalty incident. Another player on the opposing side directed a racist Indian accent towards him. Sathi is British and of Sri Lankan heritage. It has left him upset and, 16 months since the incident, he has decided to speak out because he wants “everyone to have an equal chance”. He is concerned the handling of his case suggested his ethnicity may limit his progress in the game. Balaguru was the only player from an Asian background on the pitch and said he now felt as though “having an Asian background will already bring my chances down by about 50% of being a professional footballer”. His experience comes amid concern at the lack of players of south Asian heritage in football’s top flight. The FA describes Asian communities as “the most under-represented in almost every area of the grassroots and professional games”. The Leicester player Hamza Choudhury last year became the first British Asian to win the FA Cup. But in the 2019/20 season only eight out of about 4,000 English professional footballers who played in the top four divisions were British Asian, according to one tally. Sathi’s team was playing Wealdstone Youth FC in October 2020 when the racism flared up and was recorded in the referee’s report. He said he tried to “rise above it”, but after the game he felt “isolated and alone”. “I had never experienced it before,” he said. “I had no way to describe my feelings and I felt paralysed and upset.” Curtis Alleyne, Pitshanger FC’s safeguarding officer, contacted Middlesex FA and Wealdstone but the FA said there could not be any misconduct charges against people under 11, as per the FA rules. A month after the incident Middlesex FA said it was liaising with Wealdstone “who have already begun the education to the players”. Wealdstone’s coach told the referee after the match that he had to shout at a player after hearing Indian accents directed at Balaguru. Alleyne asked Middlesex FA about getting an apology from the club but the FA said this “is not something we get involved with or enforce”. Alleyne complained to the FA that its response “seems to be focused on the accused and education whilst not providing support or assurance of inclusion and anti-discrimination to our player who was the victim”. Middlesex FA told the Guardian it spoke with Sathi, his parents and Alleyne last October and offered help from the Sporting Chance charity, which provides support for victims of discrimination. It said “we fully investigate all allegations of discrimination in line with FA rules”. But Balaguru said: “From the Middlesex FA I have had no support.” By May 2021, Balaguru still had not received an apology and Alleyne complained to Middlesex FA that “no-responses from clubs and governing bodies” were “indefensible”. Wealdstone told the Guardian that it “condemns any instance of racism and deeply regrets the incident involving Sathi and the distress it has caused him and his parents”. It said it apologised to Pitshanger’s team manager shortly after the incident and asked for that to be passed on to Sathi and his family. “We believe the club has apologised to them already but should this apology not have been properly conveyed to them then we would be happy to reinstate it,” it said. Pitshanger said that while Wealdstone was extremely concerned about the incident, its manager did not recall the apology. The match referee later told the Guardian that he had heard Wealdstone’s welfare officer apologise for the racism in a phonecall to Pitshanger’s coach. The call was made, he said, about 30-60 minutes after the match at the Sidmouth playing field where the game took place. Middlesex FA said it was committed to making sure football “truly embraces diversity and inclusion and challenges discriminatory conduct”. It said: “we take a stringent stance against any form of discrimination.” • This article was amended on 25 February 2022 to include subsequent information from the match referee about the Wealdstone welfare officer’s telephoned apology.Wood burning in homes produces more small particle pollution than all road traffic in the UK, according to revised government data. The new data significantly cuts the estimated proportion of small particle pollution that comes from wood burners from 38% to 17%. But wood burning pollution remains a “major contributor” to particle pollution, another government report said. Road transport is responsible for 13% of particle pollution. The data shows tiny particle pollution, called PM2.5, produced by wood burning rose by a third from 2010 to 2020, when it reached 13,900 tonnes a year. This all comes from the 8% of homes that have wood burners, 95% of which have other sources of heating. The data revision was made after a survey of 50,000 homes provided updated information on the use of wood stoves. Particle pollution is well known to damage health and cause early deaths. “These toxins may enter the bloodstream and be transported around the body, lodging in the heart, brain and other organs,” the report said. “Therefore, exposure can result in serious impacts to health.” The report also found that since the late 2000s, significant decreases in particle pollution from coal burning, industry and vehicles have been “largely offset by increases in emissions from wood burning in domestic settings and [biomass] burning by industry”. “Even after this revision, home use of solid fuel is one of the top two sources of particle pollution in the UK, coming from just 8% of UK homes,” said Gary Fuller, at Imperial College London and a member of the Air Quality Expert Group that advises the government. “My in-box is filled with people who are concerned about the wood smoke that is filling the bedroom of their asthmatic child or ill elderly relative.” The government data on wood burning pollution is based on laboratory tests of stoves. Fuller said: “We need to remember the lessons from VW and dieselgate, where the air pollution produced in the real world was much greater than those in official tests. Data from New Zealand tells us that the same applies to wood burners, with the way that we light fires and the fuels that we use tending to lead to more air pollution than we expect from official tests.” “What is staggering is the increase between 2010 and 2020,” said Simon Birkett, of the campaign group Clean Air in London. “There’s still a really big problem. It’s a public health catastrophe, so wood-burning stoves need to be banned urgently. The first step should be to stop the sale or installation of them.” Other recent research has shown that wood-burning stoves in urban areas are responsible for almost half of people’s exposure to the cancer-causing chemicals found in air pollution particles. Even wood-burning stoves meeting the new “ecodesign” standard still emit 750 times more tiny particles than a modern HGV truck, another study found, while wood burners also triple the level of harmful pollution inside homes and should be sold with a health warning, according to scientists. The data revision was made after the government conducted a new survey of wood burning in 50,000 homes, the biggest to date. Its estimate of domestic wood consumption was substantially lower than the previous survey. The government said the reasons for the different results were likely to include previous assumptions that may be wrong, including that most new stoves were not replacements for old stoves and that users did not sometimes mix coal with their wood. Another factor was that the previous estimate included the “Beast from the East” cold period, which the new estimate did not. “However, it is clear that UK residential emissions from domestic combustion will continue to be a major contributor to the UK emissions of particulate matter,” the survey report concluded. The sector producing the biggest proportion of PM2.5 is manufacturing industries and construction, which is responsible for 27%. But Fuller said: “Lots of people live closer to home chimneys than they do to industrial sources and major motorways. This leads to greater exposure to wood burning pollution than we find for many other sources.”Today in a nutshell: Gu just misses out and Goggia makes incredible injury recovery amid a Swiss ski gold rush, while Valieva’s team make an astounding claim Next up: Curling, bobsleigh and ice hockey wrap up today’s events. Tomorrow the men’s ice hockey quarter-finals take place, there is a women’s biathlon relay to enjoy and the prospect of some exciting-looking sprint cross-country skiing Switzerland’s Mathilde Gremaud soared to gold in the Olympic women’s freeski slopestyle final after holding off another last-gasp charge by Eileen Gu, the American-born emerging superstar representing China, who settled for silver by the narrowest of margins but stayed on course for a historic treble at the Beijing Games. Sheffield’s Katie Summerhayes put down three complete runs that pleased the British team by the finish area, but was unable to challenge the frontrunners and finished in eighth, one place ahead of the talented Aberdeen teenager Kirsty Muir. Sofia Goggia, the Pyeongchang 2018 gold medallist and dominant force in downhill this season, injured the cruciate ligament in her left knee during a crash 23 days ago and it was touch-and-go whether she would be able to race in China. Against the odds she took the silver medal in the women’s downhill today for Italy. “Physically I’m not in shape, I couldn’t charge. I’m not able to move as I want. Sometimes things don’t work as you want. But I really gave everything I could ... I had no room for doubts,” she said afterwards. Gold went to Switzerland’s Corinne Suter, herself having recovered from injury at the start of the season. Meanwhile, Kamila Valieva’s legal team has claimed that the figure skater’s positive drugs test may have come from a contaminated glass of water that contained traces of her grandfather’s heart medication. Sean Ingle has more. Canada won 10 golds in Sochi and 11 golds in Pyeongchang, and have won plenty of bronzes in Beijing but it has been slim pickings at the top of the podium so far. The victory of their women’s team pursuit speed skating was only their second win in 2022. They set an Olympic record in the final as a tumble by Japan’s team they faced meant they finished over 11 seconds ahead. In the men’s team pursuit, Norway became champions. Their opponents, ROC, had set an Olympic record along the way to reaching the final but had burnt themselves out with the effort and simply couldn’t reproduce that pace. The USA won the bronze medal race. Convincing wins for Sweden and Switzerland in today’s set of women’s curling matches see them sitting at the top of the round-robin standings. They should go through, which leaves five countries vying for the remaining two semi-final spots. Three nations – Great Britain, Japan and USA – are tied at four wins and three losses apiece. Canada and South Korea are lurking with 3-3 records having played a match fewer. There are three more rounds of matches to go. In the men’s curling competition, Sweden have confirmed their place in the semi-finals with a seventh straight victory on Tuesday morning. They will play Team GB later on, as Bruce Mouat’s crew look to book their final-four spot. Things you might have missed The US beat Finland 4-1 in the second semi-final of the women’s ice hockey competition yesterday to set up a USA-Canada gold medal clash on Thursday. Canada beat the US 4-2 in their group stage match earlier in Beijing. It is a rematch of the 2018 Pyeongchang final which the US team won in a shoot-out. It should be a titanic battle. Slovakia pulled off a bit of an upset in the early men’s ice hockey match today, winning their play-off against Germany 4-0 to book a quarter-final slot against the USA on Wednesday. Denmark beat Latvia 3-2, and they will go on to play ROC. Switzerland will play Finland after defeating Czech Republic in their play-off. “It’s a sense of honour, and a sense of mission fulfilled. I want to say the fans: You wanted an immersive games. Today, I gave you an immersive games,” said China’s Xu Mengtao after winning the women’s freestyle skiing aerials yesterday. Defending champion Hanna Huskova of Belarus took silver and Megan Nick of the US was a surprise bronze medalist. As noisy as it was, you can only imagine how Xu’s victory on home snow would have been greeted with a full crowd. Austria took the men’s team ski jumping gold yesterday ahead of Slovenia in silver and Germany with bronze. Their sixth gold medal of the Games puts Austria fourth in the overall medal table. You might also enjoy: Sean Ingle: Valieva caught in a complicated mess that has been coming for years ‘The difference is I’m black’: Richardson sees double-standard over Valieva Snowboarders attack ‘life-changing’ judging errors at Winter Olympics Australia’s Peel fifth after failing to land back full-full-full in women’s aerials The briefing’s picture of the day Biathlon can be a cruel sport. ROC were comfortably in the lead in the men’s 4 x 7.5km relay until anchorman Eduard Latypov went into the final shooting range and had an absolute nightmare. He picked up two penalty loops for his misses, allowing Norway to come through from 50 seconds behind for the gold. France picked up silver, with Quentin Fillon Maillet earning his fifth medal of these Games, and ROC had to settle for bronze. What to look out for next Times are all in local Beijing time. For Sydney it is +3 hours, for London it is –8 hours, for New York it is –13 hours and San Francisco is –16 hours. Later today – Tuesday 15 February 8.05pm Curling – four more matches in the men’s round robin including Team GB v Sweden 🥌 8.15pm and 9.50pm Bobsleigh – the final two heats for the two-men teams 🥇 9.10pm Ice hockey – Canada’s men beat China 5-0 in the final Group A match on Sunday, and due to the inexplicable way this tournament is organised, they now immediately face each other again as they play-off for a quarter-final spot against Sweden on Wednesday 🏒 Tomorrow – Wednesday 16 February 9.05am and 2.05pm and 8.05pm Curling – more round robin matches in a stage of the competition that appears to last forever but – especially in the women’s contest – has a lot at stake in each match 🥌 9.30am-10.26am and 7pm-8pm Freestyle skiing – the rescheduled men’s freeski slopestyle is in the morning, and the men’s aerials final is in the evening 🥇 10.15am and 1.45pm Alpine skiing – the men’s slalom in two runs on Wednesday 🥇 12.10pm and 2pm and 4.40pm and 9.30pm Men’s ice hockey – the four quarter-final matches. The US are up first 🏒 7.30pm Women’s ice hockey – the bronze medal face-off between Switzerland and Finland 🥉 3.45pm Biathlon – the women’s 4 x 6km relay 🥇 5pm-7.30pm Cross-country skiing – the women’s team sprint and men’s team sprint have their semi-finals and finals 🥇 7.30pm-9.18pm Short track speed skating – this session includes the women’s 1,500m contest and the men’s 5,000m relay 🥇 Full Winter Olympics schedule | Results, sport by sport | Medal table How things stand Here’s what the emoji table looked like at 6pm Beijing time … 1 🇳🇴 Norway 🥇 11 🥈 6 🥉 7 total: 24 2 🇩🇪 Germany 🥇 8 🥈 5 🥉 2 total: 15 3 🇺🇸 United States 🥇 7 🥈 6 🥉 4 total: 17 4 🇦🇹 Austria 🥇 6 🥈 6 🥉 4 total: 16 5 🇳🇱 Netherlands 🥇 6 🥈 4 🥉 3 total: 13 6 🇨🇳 China 🥇 6 🥈 4 🥉 2 total: 12 Selected others 9 ◻️ Not Russia 🥇 4* 🥈 7 🥉 9 total: 20 13 🇨🇦 Canada 🥇 2 🥈 4 🥉 11 total: 17 16 🇦🇺 Australia 🥇 1 🥈 2 🥉 1 total: 4 18 🇳🇿 New Zealand 🥇 1 🥈 1 🥉 0 total: 2 [*this total includes the team figure skating gold. which the IOC has said “will probably not be sorted out during this Games”] I’ll be back tomorrow – by which time we will have all watched Kamila Valieva skate again. Don’t forget you can get in touch with at martin.belam@theguardian.com to let me know what you think of the whole affair. The last word Not so long ago the broken windows theory became popular among politicians. The idea is simple: if you allow damage in a community to linger, it only promotes more crime and disorder. Therefore problems should be eradicated immediately. This, to put it mildly, has not been an approach taken by global sport leaders. At every turn they have talked tough on Russia while applying a homeopathic approach and diluting potential punishments – Sean Ingle, the Guardian’s chief sports reporter.Andrea Riseborough is a powerful actor who could bring emotional complexity to a tomato ketchup advert. Here she is intense in an understated way as a grieving mother who becomes convinced that the girl next door is her daughter, back from the dead. That reincarnation storyline is not unfamiliar, and to be honest it made my heart sink a bit at first. But this atmospheric and unsettling slowburn drama from Northern Ireland pulls it off, just. Riseborough plays a woman called Laura whose daughter Josie died several years earlier; she lives in Antrim with her husband Brendan (Jonjo O’Neill) and their teenage son Tadhg (Lewis McAskie). They are a family getting on with it, bearing the unbearable. But beneath the dinner-table banter, you sense that each of them is alone with their grief. Riseborough signals Laura’s loss and longing in every movement; it’s there in the way she holds herself stiffly upright, like she might fall apart from heartbreak. When 10-year-old Megan (Niamh Dornan) moves in next door, Laura invites her round for tea and picks her up from school in the car. Megan appears to know things that only Josie would know, recalls places that she can’t possibly have seen. Laura starts to believes she is Josie. This authentic-feeling portrait of family grief then unfolds into something more uneasy, and director Stacey Gregg whips up the mood of a horror film. There’s a jangling score and unnerving camerawork: a creepy drone shot of the family’s ordinary semi at the start and interiors shot in a way that makes the house feel eerie. The question of whether this is a ghost story or if Laura is experiencing a kind of psychological breakdown twists and turns in ways that lost me by the end. Still, it’s is a very accomplished debut from Gregg, and acted with subtlety and sensitivity by Riseborough. • Here Before is released on 18 February in cinemas.Norway’s Jarl Magnus Riiber has had a Winter Olympics in Beijing to forget. Having tested positive for Covid he has spent two weeks in isolation, unable to train, and was only released on Monday. Cleared to compete today in the Nordic combined large hill/10km he put himself well in contention for a medal. Having recorded the longest and highest-scoring ski jump earlier in the day, he set off first for the cross-country element with a 44-second time advantage over the rest of the field. And then he took a wrong turn. Unfamiliar with the course, he went the wrong way. He had to turn around, but the time taken virtually wiped out his entire lead, and he eventually faded to finish in eighth place. “It’s a silly mistake,” Riiber said afterwards. “It’s not fun to show the world that I maybe wasted a gold medal. I had been locked inside for two weeks, not breathing fresh air. My body is not working. Normally, I’m one of the better skiers and today I was just bad.” Norway, of course, have winter athletes to spare, and despite Riiber’s misfortune, they still secured a gold-silver one-two with Joergen Graabak finishing 0.4 seconds ahead of Jens Lurås Oftebro. It is possible the cold got to Riiber’s mind. The race was bought forward 30 minutes to try and avoid the worst of the weather, but the temperature still dipped below -20C, officially the temperature below which cross-country races are usually postponed. There was also a last-minute failure in the women’s team pursuit final in the National Speed Skating Oval, as Canada were handed the gold medal on a plate after the Japanese team crashed out while well placed on the final bend. The Canadians eventually took their nation’s second gold of these games with more than 11 seconds to spare. It was Nana Takagi, the last of Japan’s three women, who lost her balance when they looked set not only for the win, but on course to break their own Olympic Record. She was left in tears as her teammates – her sister, Miho, and Ayano Sato – attempted to console her. And on a day in Beijing of extraordinary last-moment drama, a terrible final shooting round by Eduard Latypov of the Russian Olympic Committee in the men’s biathlon 4 x 7.5km relay cost his team a certain gold. They were more than 50 seconds ahead of the Norwegian athletes when anchor leg Latypov went into the shooting range – but he racked up two penalty loops with a series of misses under pressure. “I tried at first to wait, but I understood that I have to work faster. There was this gust of wind and my feeling was not so good, the concentration was not what I wanted it to be. That, with the gusts of wind, made me make the misses,” a distraught Latypov said. “I tried to change things up, but here it was more of a psychological issue.” His teammates and fellow competitors tried to comfort him at the finish line, as the ROC team slumped to bronze position behind both Norway and France. • Agencies contributed to this reportThe American west has spent the last two decades in what scientists are now saying is the most extreme megadrought in at least 1,200 years. In a new study, published on Monday, researchers also noted that human-caused climate change is a significant driver of the destructive conditions and offered a grim prognosis: even drier decades lie ahead. “Anyone who has been paying attention knows that the west has been dry for most of the last couple decades,” says Park Williams, a climate scientist at the University of California, Los Angeles and the study’s lead author. “We now know from these studies that is dry not only from the context of recent memory but in the context of the last millennium.” Turning up the temperature – the result of human caused warming – has played a big part. Other studies show how the climate crisis “will increasingly enhance the odds of long, widespread and severe megadroughts”, the researchers write. Noting that as the west is now in the midst of the driest 22-year period in knowable history, “this worst-case scenario already appears to be coming to pass”. The research builds on conclusions from a previous study, also led by Williams, that ranked the period between 2000 and 2018 as the second driest in 12 centuries. The last two incredibly dry years – which were marked by record-setting heatwaves, receding reservoirs, and a rise in dangerously erratic blazes that burned both uncontrollably and unseasonably – were enough to push this period into first. Looking at moisture levels in soils, the team of climate scientists from UCLA, Nasa, and Columbia University focused on landscapes from Montana to northern Mexico north to south and from the Pacific Ocean to the Rocky Mountains. They analyzed data collected tree ring patterns that offered clues to soil moisture levels throughout the centuries. Rings that appear closer together show the stunted growth patterns occurring during dry times. So-called megadroughts, which are characterized by prolonged periods of dryness that span more than two decades, were woven throughout history, the researchers found. Long before human industry, water availability ebbed and flowed naturally. That variability, however, has been intensified by the climate crisis. According to their findings, soil moisture deficits doubled in the last 22 years compared with levels in the 1900s. Human-caused warming accounted for a 42% increase in severity. Worryingly, the west is experiencing a point on an upward trajectory, the researchers warn. There have been many studies showing the connection between human-caused warming, drought, and how these climate catastrophes compound. A large body of research has shown how heat waves will get larger, more extreme, and more frequent. But the evidence offered in this study casts these conditions into broader historical context, showing just how rapidly – and steeply – these changes are developing. Experts and advocates hope it will serve as a call to arms to prepare for a future that is fast approaching. Already, unsustainable systems have started to crack. “We are watching our bank account of water decline,” Williams says, “and we know that eventually we need to slow our expenditures before the account runs out”. The effects are already being felt across the west. In the summer of 2021, both Lake Mead and Lake Powell – the largest reservoirs in North America – reached record-low levels. Nearly 65% of the American west is experiencing in severe drought according to the US drought monitor, even after record rainfall hit some areas late last year. For the first time, federal official curbed allocations from the Colorado River Basin, which supplies water and power for more than 40 million people. Wildfires in the last two years have left behind more blackened earth than ever before and performed feats never thought possible. So far conditions this year have not helped to turn the situation around. California saw one of the driest Januaries on record. February has already delivered heat waves that broke records across the state. By the start of this month, the snowpack has dwindled to below-average, melting rapidly after reaching 160% of average at the start of the year. Forecasts show there’s little short-term relief in sight. “This study highlights the point that we need to reassess our resources,” says Alvar Escriva-Bou, a senior fellow at the Public Policy Institute of California’s Water Policy Center. “We can no longer assume that we have enough water for all the things that we want.” Escriva-Bou specifically called on California to reduce its agricultural footprint. Escriva-Bou notes that important steps have been taken to better manage the issue and update operation rules. But “climate change is outpacing us”, he says. According to Jason Smerdon, a climate scientist at the Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory of Columbia University who worked with Williams on the study, the crisis is a “slow-motion trainwreck”. “These multi-decade periods of dryness will only increase with the rest of the century,” Smerdon said. Still, Smerdon cast the conclusions in a more hopeful light. The extreme events taking place right in people’s backyards may spur understanding and action. “Knowing is half the battle,” he says. “We have a lot of challenges in front of us but we all have agency in the face of this. And there are pathways we can take that are much more sustainable and involve much less risk than the burn baby burn approach that we would take if we didn’t do anything.”The use of Pegasus spyware should be banned in the EU, the bloc’s data watchdog has advised, as it is a “gamechanger” offering unprecedented powers to intrude into targets’ lives. The European data protection supervisor (EDPS) said a prohibition was necessary as the software, developed by the Israeli NSO Group, was able to secretly turn a mobile phone into a surveillance device. Able to send or receive encrypted messages, download stored photographs, hear voice calls, access messages and secretly film through a phone’s camera, the spyware had the capacity to interfere “with the most intimate aspects of our daily lives”, the authority said. “The mounting evidence shows that highly advanced military grade spyware like Pegasus has the potential to cause unprecedented risks and damages not only to the fundamental freedoms but also to democracy and the rule of law”, a report from the EDPS said. “Pegasus constitutes a paradigm shift in terms of access to private communications and devices, which is able to affect the very essence of our fundamental rights, in particular the right to privacy. This fact makes its use incompatible with our democratic values”. The EDPS said a “ban on the development and deployment of spyware with the capability of Pegasus in the EU” was the best course of action given the software’s capacity for harm. Last year a group of media organisations including the Guardian revealed that Pegasus software was being used against journalists, activists and politicians in numerous countries, including in Europe. The investigation by the Guardian and 16 other media organisations was based on forensic analysis of phones and a leaked database of 50,000 numbers, including that of the French president, Emmanuel Macron, the European Council president, Charles Michel, and other heads of state and senior government, diplomatic and military officials in 34 countries. NSO Group has previously said the figure of 50,000 was “exaggerated” and that the database could not be a list of numbers “targeted by governments using Pegasus”. The EDPS noted in its report that a number of member states had admitted to buying the spyware, and it said the true list of customers “may prove bigger” as “it appears that a number of member states have at least initiated negotiations with NSO Group for the licensing of the product”. The group of media outlets’ analysis of phones in Europe suggested that journalists, activists and lawyers in Hungary had been targeted with Pegasus. A senior Hungarian government official appeared to confirm in November that the state had bought the software, but this was later denied and ministers have since declined to comment. The Hungarian Data Protection Authority has been examining the claims and an investigation has been launched by the Budapest regional office of the Hungarian prosecution service. In Poland, a senate commission saw documents in January that suggested the country’s Central Anti-Corruption Bureau (CBA) had bought Pegasus in 2017 using funds from the justice ministry. Law and Justice, the lead party in the governing coalition, has boycotted the commission in the opposition-led senate. As MEPs in Strasbourg debated the EU’s response to the EDPS report, France’s EU affairs minister, Clément Beaune, condemned the use of surveillance software for infiltrating phones but said limitations on an individual’s privacy could be necessary to fight crime and terrorism. “The use of surveillance software can only be the exception,” he said. “This kind of surveillance constitutes such a severe intrusion into private life that it can only be used under the strictest conditions.” The European commissioner for justice, Didier Reynders, echoed Beaune’s comments but said the commission was monitoring the investigations taking place in Hungary and Poland. He said: “I’m aware that the Hungarian Data Protection Authority knows the conclusion of its investigation into the matter. We understand that an investigation by the Budapest regional office of the Hungarian prosecution service is still ongoing. I am also aware that in Poland, the senate special committee is examining the use of Pegasus. I would like to assure you that the commission continues to closely follow the issue and that we are gathering information in this regard.” The European parliament is expected to launch a committee of inquiry in April into the use of Pegasus within the EU, with intelligence agencies, officials and elected ministers expected to be called to give evidence. NSO Group has said it will not confirm or deny whether particular countries were clients. It also insists its tools are only meant for use against criminals and terrorists and should not be used on dissidents, activists or journalists.Scandal-hit mining companies BHP and Glencore have paid out a record $12bn in dividends to investors as the price of the materials the companies mine continues to boom. BHP, the world’s biggest mining group which scrapped its dual stock market structure dropping London last year for a sole listing in Sydney, announced a record $7.6bn half-year dividend on Tuesday. The company makes most of its profits from mining iron ore in the Pilbara region of Western Australia, where it has ministerial permission to destroy as many as 40 sites of cultural importance to the country’s native Aborigines. Following investor outrage at its mining plans, the company subsequently pledged not to damage any of the sites without “extensive consultation” with native owners. BHP is aiming to transition its business to derive half of revenues from “future facing commodities” – metals needed in a low-carbon economy beyond fossil fuels – by 2030. BHP made $9.7bn in adjusted profits for the half year to the end of December, a 57% year-on-year increase. Anglo-Swiss rival Glencore, one of the world’s biggest miners and commodity traders, has also benefited from the soaring price of oil, gas and metals as economies seek to recover from the pandemic. The company paid a $4bn dividend to shareholders as it reported record adjusted profits of $21.3bn last year, an 83% increase over 2020. Glencore also said it had set aside $1.5bn to pay for the costs of investigations into bribery and market manipulation. The company is facing corruption investigations in the US, UK and Brazil relating to its mining operations in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, home to the world’s largest reserves of cobalt, a crucial metal in electric battery manufacture, as well as Venezuela and Nigeria. “We recognise there has been misconduct in this company historically. We’ve worked hard to correct that,” said Gary Nagle, chief executive at Glencore. “Looking forward, we remain focused on our strategy … while operating in a responsible manner across all aspects of our business.” Glencore, which said it expects to resolve the US, UK and Brazilian investigations this year, still faces potential corruption and bribery investigations by other countries, including Switzerland and the Netherlands. Instead of selling or spinning off its coal operations as a number of its peers are – a strategy activist investor Bluebell Capital Partners has also urged the company to do – Glencore is instead pursuing a strategy of running them down with the aim of closure by the mid-2040s. “Touting the work the company is doing in reducing its exposure to fossil fuels is one thing but while its peers are distancing themselves from coal, Glencore seems happy to hang onto it and deplete its use ‘responsibly’,” said Dan Lane, senior analyst at Freetrade. “The best PR machine out there wouldn’t be able to convince the market that the coal division is a sustainable or responsible one.”The UK startup Britishvolt has gained new investment worth £40m from Glencore in the latest stage in its ambitious plan to build one of the UK’s few large-scale battery factories. It is aiming to treble its funding with £200m in a third funding round, with Glencore serving as the anchor investor. The FTSE 100 miner has already invested millions of pounds in Britishvolt in earlier funding rounds that valued the battery company at more than $1bn (£740m). The battery factory project is seen as key to the prospects for the UK automotive industry as it moves away from internal combustion engines and embraces battery electric vehicles with zero carbon emissions from the exhaust. Global battery supply is dominated by manufacturers in China, Japan and South Korea, but Europe and the US are racing to catch up. The UK government has already backed the Britishvolt project with £100m from its automotive transformation fund, which aims to prevent the car industry and thousands of jobs moving elsewhere. Britishvolt is developing the battery technology before a factory is built at the government-funded UK Battery Industrialisation Centre in Coventry. It has already carried out preparatory work on its site near Blyth in Northumberland, with construction due to start in April. The construction of the site has been backed by Abrdn, an institutional investor formerly known as Standard Life Aberdeen, and Tritax, a property investor part-owned by Abrdn, in a sale-and-leaseback agreement. That deal will eventually be worth £1.7bn to fund the factory, the required infrastructure such as delivering the large amounts of energy needed to make car batteries, plus a supplier park and rail connection alongside the main site. The money will be delivered in tranches as the project develops. Britishvolt was founded in 2019 by Orral Nadjari, a former investment banker. It has so far raised about £100m and it is in talks with Canada’s government over using the same model there. Its latest fundraising efforts will be led by the US investment banks Bank of America and Citibank alongside the London investment bank Peel Hunt, with another bank, Lazard, hired as a financial adviser. Four separate automotive manufacturers, including the sports car maker Lotus, have signed memorandums of understanding with Britishvolt. It said this represented cumulative demand for batteries with 7 gigawatt hours of capacity by 2024 and 2025, a significant portion of the 30GWh it is planning to build annually – although the agreements do not guarantee battery orders. Kasra Pezeshki, Britishvolt’s chief investment officer, said: “We are increasingly excited by the number of potential growth and investment opportunities available to the business. Our interactions with the capital markets and customers show that demand for low-carbon, responsibly manufactured batteries is rapidly growing day by day.” The UK has only one other firm commitment to build batteries in the country: a major expansion of Envision’s plant in Sunderland that was built to serve the Japanese carmaker Nissan’s factory. Projects in Coventry and Somerset are also seeking investors.The website of a UK-based advocacy group appears to have become inaccessible through some networks in Hong Kong, raising fears of mainland-style internet censorship in the Chinese territory. The group, Hong Kong Watch, which monitors human rights, said it worried the censorship could be a part of a wider crackdown on freedom of speech under Hong Kong’s national security law, which allows the police to ask service providers to “delete” information or “provide assistance” on national security cases. Beijing imposed the sweeping security law on Hong Kong in 2020 that punishes what authorities broadly define as subversion, secession, collusion with foreign forces and terrorism with up to life in jail. Opponents condemn the legislation as “draconian”, but the authorities say it is a necessary step in restoring the stability of the financial hub. “If this is not just a technical malfunction, and Hongkongers will no longer be able to access our website because of the national security law, then this is a serious blow to internet freedom,” said Benedict Rogers, the group’s head. “With the steady drip of website removals, there are fears that China could begin introducing its great internet firewall into the city. With time, this could have serious ramifications for the continued presence of western technology companies in the city.” Lokman Tsui, a media researcher based in the Netherlands who until recently taught at the Chinese University of Hong Kong, said that without a reason to block Hong Kong Watch’s website, the authorities risked being seen as “arbitrary, untransparent, and disproportionate. “We can only guess for what reason Hong Kong Watch is being blocked. But whatever reason it is, I imagine the same reason could be applied to lots of other websites,” he said. “Will they be blocked later? Who decides that? Is there any way to appeal? If they remove whatever the offending content is, will they be unblocked?” While the internet in mainland China is heavily censored and access to foreign social media platforms and news sites is blocked, Hong Kong residents were promised greater freedoms under the “one country, two systems” framework agreed when the former British colony returned to Chinese rule in 1997. For many years after the handover, Hong Kong had a vibrant media landscape and hosted the regional headquarters of Chinese and foreign-language media outlets of different political viewpoints. But in the past two years, a number of outlets have announced plans to move. Hong Kong police said in a statement it would not comment on specific cases, but that it had the right to require service providers to “take a disabling action on electronic messages… if their publication were likely to constitute an offence endangering national security.” The apparent blocking of Hong Kong Watch by some service providers this week came after reports of similar action encountered by a few other websites, such as the Taiwan-based website Transitional Justice Commission, in recent months. Last May, the website of HKChronicles was blocked, too. HKChronicles had operated as an anti-government doxing platform, publicising personal information of some people in Beijing and members of the Hong Kong police force it accused of brutality. The same year, a website commemorating the 1989 killings of protesters in and around Beijing’s Tiananmen Square also became inaccessible in Hong Kong. Attempts by the Guardian on Tuesday to access the site through Hong Kong networks were unsuccessful. Additional reporting by Reuters news agencyI was researching ideas for a documentary when a friend told me about a village in a rural region of the Czech Republic. He half-joked that when people in this place visited their family, the grandma wouldn’t bake fresh cakes to serve with coffee, as is the custom, but fresh meth. Most people in the village were on meth, he said, even those with children. I grew up in 1980s Czechoslovakia when it was still part of the Soviet bloc. As a teenager I read Memento by Radek John and Zoo Station by Christiane F, both about meth and heroin addicts. When I was 20, I discovered that one of my childhood friends had become a heroin user. He was the only one from among his group who lived. My recollection of those years is that drug use was heavily stigmatised and associated with certain subcultures, including parts of the Czech underground. Anyone caught in possession and prosecuted faced harsh moral censure and the real threat of a prison sentence. Many others were sent to psychiatric institutions, although not much was understood or tolerated about addiction as an illness. People in these institutions were misunderstood, misplaced and many of them got lost in time. But the Velvet Revolution didn’t sweep away the problem, even if drug policy evolved. Due partly to a past as the eastern bloc’s centre for pharmaceutical production, the Czech Republic now has the biggest methamphetamine problem of any European country and is Europe’s biggest supplier of meth (also known as crystal meth). It accounts for one in every two Czech admissions to specialised drug treatment, and nearly 90% of the illicit meth labs dismantled by law enforcement in the EU annually are Czech. A former meth addict called Josef now runs a centre for outpatient treatment in the north of the country. It was to Josef I turned to find out more about this phenomenon. This was May 2020, and much of Europe, including the UK, was in Covid lockdown, so I decided to drive from London across the continent back home. Josef let me visit the centre and told me that methamphetamine, known locally as “pervitin”, is mostly made by small home producers in kitchens or back-yard sheds. In the district Josef oversees, approximately half of meth “cooks” are female. They find their “ingredients” in cheap over-the-counter medicines bought from pharmacies in Poland, a short drive away. The person I really wanted to meet was a meth cook called Lenka. Her name was known in the meth community. There were a lot of stories about Lenka. When I finally tracked her down, I realised that the stereotype in my head of a long-term addict, constructed partly from American films, was plainly wrong. Lenka was a vibrant, hardworking person who played with words like a poet and made me laugh. Lenka was looking after her ageing parents, helping them with the house and their personal care needs. Their health was deteriorating and she was trying to stay away from cooking meth as much as possible. She worried that if anything happened to her, they would have no support and no care. But she could sleep only a few hours a night, between helping her mother with bathroom visits and her father with the land, the animals and household tasks. Lenka was also holding down a full-time job at a local recycling centre and in the evenings she worked more, supplementing a basic income by selling scrap metal from her shed. I warmed to Lenka: she was smart and had a big heart. But it was clear to me that she wasn’t just choosing to stay on meth because it was a comfort in a lonely and isolated life, but because it was central to it. She carried a lot of responsibility and relied on meth to get by on barely any sleep. “I hope you don’t mind,” she said, before pushing a big syringe into her arm, as we sat in the shed and she talked late into the evening. While the Czech government has liberalised drug policy – personal drug use and possession of small amounts are not criminalised – the stigma around addiction remains high. A network of addiction outpatient clinics similar to the centre managed by Josef has expanded, but they are still greatly under-resourced, relying on NGO or private funding. There’s an unmet human need, too, that may be sustaining the meth business. Lenka’s parents’ dependency on her was one of the most striking things about her story. This is not unique, it connects to a bigger story of rural Czech society, where families often stay close together, with children caring for elderly or dying parents. The level of personal sacrifice that is accepted and expected by the older generation is tied closely to the value placed on the family as a whole. But it carries a heavy price. Lenka and I were born in the same year and the same country, and grew up in very similar surroundings. I came away from making the film wanting her to stop using meth. But I also wanted to understand her. And I could see how she was trapped in a cycle of needing it in order to keep working and supporting her family. Meth is sometimes referred to as the “worker’s drug” in central Europe, because migrants putting in 18-hour shifts on building sites or cleaning houses rely on it for the energy to keep going. People like Lenka are harmed by drug use, but they also fall through the cracks in a system that even when it speaks the language of “harm reduction” still fails to see the complexity of their circumstances and their lives, much of it a result of chronic poverty and limited options. Meth addicts don’t need our pity, but they do need more of our empathy. Barbora Benesova is the director of Lenka, a Guardian Documentaries filmHalf rising from the plastic white chair, he jabs a finger toward a girl and her school friends sitting across the circle from him. “She will have a future,” says Patrick Ikware, almost shouting. “This cult is diminishing, but to eliminate it, we need to substitute education, send our daughters to school and block our ears to the elders.” The handful of others sitting on mismatched chairs on the grass outside the school in Masaba nod. A parents’ meeting held for those opposed to female genital mutilation (FGM), a practice almost universal among women in the Kuria districts of Migori county, western Kenya, is sparsely attended. But his daughter, grinning shyly at her father’s defiant words, like all their daughters, is still at risk. Relatives here, even neighbours, will entice a girl to the cutting ceremonies if her parents are not vigilant. “The problem we have is people who cannot look beyond their own roof! The elders, our parents and relatives, even our friends, say you have to cut,” says Ikware. “They cannot tell me what to do with my daughters and if my daughter graduates from here, I don’t have to expect her to marry around this community. There are other places.” The campaign to stop the mutilation of the genitalia of hundreds of girls at the end of next month, when schools close for Easter, is in full swing here. School holidays are when the cuttings happen, on girls from six upwards. The longer the holiday, the more girls who will be cut, and from March schools are closed for seven weeks. The Christmas holidays took everyone involved in the anti-FGM movement here by surprise – cutting ceremonies began at scale in town centres all over Kuria, on the Kenyan border with Tanzania, enabled by a lack of law enforcement thanks to the Covid lockdown. Despite the passion of the volunteers advocating against FGM, the activists talking on every local radio station about the terrible mental and physical toll, the committees, the legislation, and even the Kenyan president decrying the illegal practice, the pull and power of tradition is strong, and it is hard to be shunned by neighbours and family in a small place where life is tough. The pressure to conform is huge. Uncut girls are bullied, called nasty names. Fathers and brothers are teased or ridiculed. In rare cases where a girl gets married without being cut, mortified in-laws have been known to bribe a nurse to cut her labia off in the aftermath of childbirth. It is women, less educated and with less ability to leave the confines of the community, who feel the expectations to have their daughters cut most keenly, perpetuating the tradition even as they know the damage wreaked on their own bodies. Girls with nothing see a day when they are given praise, a present, maybe even a few banknotes pinned to their clothes. And they can be part of the processions that mark Kuria’s unique FGM celebrations, when the blood that leaks from newly cut bodies is camouflaged by paint daubed on the victims or scuffed into the dust by dancing feet when it hits the ground. Kuria, just west of the safari camps of the Maasai Mara national reserve, has so far escaped the droughts of other parts of east Africa and the fawn hides of the cows are shiny and little goats plump-bellied. But there are still harrowing levels of poverty and people who cannot afford school uniforms, shoes, fees and books. Covid entrenched the economic situation, while many boys and girls haven’t returned to education after the pandemic’s school closures. But girls still fetch a few cows in dowry, making the 1,000 to 2,000 Kenyan shillings (£6.50 to £13) it costs to pay a cutter an investment. And money is at the root of the challenge of stamping out this brutal practice in Kuria. Zacharia Gati Marwa, cultural coordinator of Kuria’s council of elders, sits on a bench in his low-roofed mud-brick home. He could also be accused of sitting on the fence. He has been engaging with activists who want an end to FGM and says his own daughters are not cut, but he has sympathy for those elders who resist using their authority to end the cutting. The four clans of the region are represented by 160 elders, who direct around 40 cutters, taking the profits they make for themselves. “The elders are not rich men,” says Marwa. “Many are very poor and without this money, they have even less income. The money collected is important. There’s an income impact here. “But the last two years we have seen at least sections of the members start to change their mindset. About a third still resist. “When they are planning how the cutting should take place, they consult the spirits and then gather the cutters, and prepare charms to help,” he says. “There are 40 cutters at any one time, chosen by the spirits. They cannot refuse the task if they are chosen, it is a calling and they are taught how to cut by the spirits. Any woman cannot just wake up and start cutting girls. “To end FGM, we should buy these men a house so they can be secure, and pay to educate their daughters, then those girls can say ‘look I’m not cut and I’m the child of an elder’. I think this is the only way. “At the moment, the biggest cultural threat to the elders’ way of life is … the changes to do with FGM.” Merida Omahe and her husband, Martin, run a tiny hotel, the Black Bull, in Migori, but most of her work now is looking after the neighbourhood’s girls. As we talk, two mothers, Esther Mbusiro and Mary Marko, turn up at their gate. They want to know if their daughters can come and hide out with Merida during the cutting season to keep them safe. “Yes, I remember what happened to me. There was quite a party,” Merida says, with heavy irony. “When I was a girl, everyone was supporting it. Sometimes I feel traumatised. I was hit, and I bled a lot. I had hidden and managed to escape it for a few years but when I was 21, I was taken by force. Then it was a rite of passage into adulthood and marriage, but I was much older than what is happening now.” “Now I can stand up for these young girls. One person in two will listen to you. Often they will hide such things from their husbands.” Her husband of 45 years supports her, even when 185 children ended up hiding out from the cutters at their family compound in December. “Now it’s five,” he smiles. “The ones we have at home, the rescues we have done, these children who run to her, who don’t want to be cut, I feel what she is doing. It touches me. She has a soft heart. At first, she was doing it alone, but now there are like-minded people,” he says. He believes local people will bring change, not the big NGOs or UN agencies. “The people who come from outside are intruders, and we don’t want them to punch holes in our culture. It’s for our people to decide what is best for them. That’s why activists from here are so important. We have to talk to our young men. These are the boys who will marry these girls, and if they shun FGM, it will stop. “The women work very hard in our community. They do all our donkey work. I salute them.” A woman who is married but not cut is called irikunena and the unmarried girls are called mosagane – rude and demeaning terms, says Janet Ghati, 15, an orphan who is one of the five still living with the Omahes. She gets a lot of verbal abuse for not being cut, but says teachers will intervene to stop the bullying if they hear it. “I don’t want to be cut, but sometimes when I am abused at school, I feel torn over my decision. It happens a lot, but I have never been driven to drop out of school. I would like to be a doctor.” Perched on a plastic chair next to her is her friend Rahena, also 15, a survivor of FGM. She now has a phobia of blood. “They did a bad thing,” she says, “I never wanted it to happen. I felt horrible, helpless. I had no phone to call Mamma. I couldn’t believe it had happened to me. It took one month for the pain to go.” Meride, along with Vincent Mwita, coordinator of the umbrella anti-FGM activist group Tunaweza, managed to get to Rahena before she was married off. “It is an unfortunate story,” she says, “we were protecting her when we heard she was at risk of child marriage, but her brother grabbed her at night. She was a very unhappy girl when we found her.” For such “rescues” they hire a motorbike taxi to pick the girls up. It’s costly, and Mwita hopes Tunaweza can one day buy their own motorbike, but it’s an expensive purchase. Police rarely agree to attend, citing a lack of staff or fuel for their vehicles, he says, but many people in the community will report cuttings and activists’ phone numbers are widely distributed for emergency call outs. “Rahena’s brother had to go into hiding in Tanzania after he was reported to the authorities for this,” he says. In December, police arrested 57 parents. Most are waiting for their court cases to be heard. The jail sentences for being involved in FGM are up to 3 years and, as the child has to give evidence, are controversial. “It’s splitting up families,” says county children’s officer Janet Robi. “Currently, we have 94 children lined up to testify against their parents, but until then we have to find places to look after them.” Without enough children’s homes places, some are waiting in police cells or adult remand centres, she says. “In the past, FGM cases crumble because the children have to stay with relatives and they are coached on what to say in court. Or they are spirited off to Tanzania. Yesterday, I had four children in my office. Both parents had been arrested so we are doing a petition to the court to release one caregiver. This is our challenge. Even if you arrest a cutter – [and it is] difficult to catch them in the act – you then make room for a less experienced one to take her place. These women are not trained.” Head of county education Rev Samson Maginga, Robi, and district child protection head Catherine Tingo are discussing their anti-FGM work. “In Kenya, we have 43 tribes, only five are not practising FGM,” says Maginga. “Kuria is only 300,000 people, but it stands out because we have both the backflow from Tanzania and the music and dancing as people go out on to the roads to celebrate. It is very colourful. Kuria is famous for two things: FGM and cattle rustling. And cattle rustling is becoming less of a problem as it’s taken seriously,” he says. “I was at a funeral this morning. There was an old man there, 90 years, with the long pierced ear lobes that men used to have, he was asking about the FGM work and he said to me: ‘Look at my ears, our people don’t follow this tradition any more, so why do they hang on to cutting up our girls?’ “But we glorify it, the pain or enduring the pain is glorified for these kids, some of whom will never have before been congratulated for anything in their lives. This is a two-faced devil,” he says. “Some say they will do one thing and do another. An example? One of the senior officials who went out to make arrests in December? Her 10-year-old daughter was cut at the same time.” This is a national election year for Kenya, a sometimes volatile time when division is whipped up into violence by the unscrupulous. Tingo says politicians are so keen for votes that they will not speak out against FGM. “This is something that’s already outlawed. The only people we have to conquer in this campaign are the political classes. The day we have a politician stand on a podium and talk about FGM, and say ‘this has had its day’, we are done and dusted.” Sign up for Her Stage to hear directly from incredible women in the developing world on the issues that matter to them, delivered to your inbox monthly:Russia could extend Alexei Navalny’s imprisonment for up to a further 15 years in a fresh criminal trial that his supporters warn has been overshadowed by the crisis in Ukraine. The Russian opposition leader is accused of embezzling donations to his FBK anti-corruption organisation, which has accused Vladimir Putin of owning a £1bn mansion and other top officials enriching themselves through corrupt schemes. Navalny has denied the charges and calls them politically motivated. The new trial for embezzlement began on Tuesday inside the IK-2 penal colony in Vladimir, an unusual setting three or four hours’ drive east of Moscow, that severely limits the ability of supporters and observers to attend the hearings. Navalny is serving a three-and-a-half-year sentence at the prison for a separate embezzlement charge. He survived a poisoning attempt on his life in 2020 and was arrested after returning to Russia last year. His family and supporters say the Kremlin is seeking an easy conviction by holding the trial inside a prison colony far away from his support base in Moscow. “[The authorities] want to hide him from all people, from his supporters, from journalists,” wrote his wife, Yulia Navalnaya, in an Instagram post on the eve of the trial. “It is so pathetic that they are afraid to hold the trial in Moscow.” As the hearings began on Tuesday, Navalnaya hugged her husband, who was dressed in a blue prison jumpsuit. Navalny was not held in a cage, as is customary during Russian criminal proceedings, because the courtroom was inside a prison. Maria Pevchikh, another top Navalny ally, has said the danger to Navalny has increased as public attention has increasingly been diverted away from human rights concerns to the potential for a Russian attack on Ukraine. “The danger to Navalny’s life, ie the probability of him being killed in prison, will increase exponentially depending on what happens in Ukraine,” she wrote. “The odds are pretty bad already, but a full-on Russian invasion barely leaves him any chance to survive.” Reporters said those wishing to enter the courtroom were barred from bringing in laptops, phones or recording devices. Navalny is accused of embezzling donations to his anti-corruption fund, which has spearheaded investigations into government officials and sparked large anti-Putin protests for years. He is also accused of contempt of court for allegedly insulting a judge during a previous trial, where he had been accused of slandering a military veteran. The government has also sought to disband Navalny’s national political network, opening criminal cases against his top aides and regional coordinators and by declaring his political network as extremist. Many of his closest allies have been forced into exile. A documentary film about Navalny, who narrowly survived an apparent poisoning attempt with novichok, premiered at the Sundance film festival earlier this year. The 90-minute film, simply titled Navalny, featured fly-on-the-wall footage of the Russian opposition leader, filmed during the several months he spent in Germany in late 2020 as he recovered from the poisoning. There are interviews with Navalny, his wife, and his closest team.Belgians will have the right to work a four-day week without a loss of salary under a government overhaul of the country’s labour laws prompted by the Covid pandemic. The option for employees to work longer days in order to earn a three-day weekend was among a package of economic reforms agreed within the governing coalition on Tuesday. Companies can turn down a request by an employee for a condensed working week – under which they will work the same total hours – but employers will need to justify their response in writing. Belgium’s prime minister, Alexander De Croo, said the aim of the labour market reforms, including new rules on night-working, was to create a more dynamic and productive economy. “If you compare our country with others, you’ll often see we’re far less dynamic,” he said. “After two difficult years, the labour market has evolved. With this agreement, we are setting the benchmarks for a good economy.” Four-day working weeks were trialled in Iceland between 2015 and 2019, and it has since become the choice of 85% of the country’s working population. A six-month trial of a four-day week is due to start in 2023 in Scotland with a £10m fund made available to participating companies by the government. On Monday, the future generations commissioner in Wales, Sophie Howe, called for the Welsh government to offer the option in the public sector as a first step. De Croo said his administration needed to encourage more people into work, with only 71.4% of people aged 20 to 64 in a job – 10percentage points lower than in the Netherlands and Germany. Belgium’s seven-party federal coalition has set a target of increasing the proportion in work to 80% by 2030. Greater “freedom for the employee” was said by De Croo to be key to raising the employment rate. But rigid rules that have long been opposed by business groups have also been targeted in the reforms. Companies with 20 or more employees will be expected to offer their staff the option to “disconnect” after working hours, meaning they need not answer calls or respond to emails between 11pm to 5am. Staff will also be able to request, and expect a reasoned response from employers, should they wish to change their working hours from week to week. Staff on variable hours will also be expected to know their working hours seven days ahead. However, under the new labour laws, a night-work rate of pay will come into force only after midnight rather than the current 8pm cut-off. “The Covid period forced us to work in a more flexible way. The labour market had to adapt to this,” De Croo said. Deliveroo couriers or Uber drivers will also be granted employee rights more quickly under a new approach to self-employment based in part on European Commission guidance on so-called platform or gig work.Up to a fifth of UK households have struggled to afford broadband, TV and phone bills in the last year, research by Ofcom shows, with some cancelling services and others reducing their spending on items such as food and clothing to make ends meet. Ofcom’s annual affordability report underlines the financial pressure many are under, while above-inflation rises in mobile, telephone and broadband bills are expected later this year as the cost of living crisis continues. We want to hear from people who have cut spending on items in order to continue paying for communications services. Which areas did you have to reduce spending in? Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.“Fame is a sweet poison you drink of first in eager gulps. Then you come to loathe it.” Richard Burton’s aphorism, and the context of his turbulent stardom, is still a near perfect summary of the nature of fame; but as our polarised society and media-industrial complex continue to engorge and mutate, new strains of this toxin hit the market almost daily. Two years on, the collective guilt felt by many of us over the death of Caroline Flack, which has never truly subsided, was again brought to the fore by her mother’s forceful accusation yesterday that the police treated Caroline differently – more harshly – simply because she was famous. Whether or not this was the case, it is my view that fame has never been so dangerous, never been more toxic. The commodification of fame has existed for a century. Fame is a value that allows you to sell a product, and for decades stars have been treated merely as the human embodiment of this value. And like any commodity, once their fame, their value, begins to wane they cease to become useful. There’s an old Hollywood legend about a Danish actor called Gwili Andre, who found success as a model in the silent era but whose voice didn’t work for the age of sound. This caused her to fade into obscurity during the advent of the “talkie”. She died in a mysterious fire in 1959 and ever since, stories have circulated that the cause of the fire was a kind of funeral pyre Andre had built out of her old press cuttings. What makes Andre’s story, pyre or not, even more tragic is that her fame was in part manufactured by lavish publicity campaigns. Organic fame is hard enough to manage, but prefabricated fame is cheap, flimsy and rarely lasts long, to the detriment of those who experience it. These truths are as old as the concept of fame itself, but in the 2020s the dangers are potent and multifaceted. First, there’s the way fame comes to be. The reality TV production line in the 2000s might have ground to a halt but it created a world in which people are famous for fame’s sake rather than as a result of any particular talent. Experiencing fame without talent is to exist on the constant precipice of anonymity. In desperation to claw themselves away from this cliff edge and into the deceitful comfort of the limelight, celebrities will willingly sacrifice their principles and even their dignity. Some effectively donate their personal lives to the tabloid and celebrity media, some stoop to humiliating depths by agreeing to be part of whatever tawdry novelty sideshow will continue their exposure, and somehow others will spout whatever hateful opinion or item of fake news a loyal sect of the internet will laud them for. Legacy media and online evangelists will always praise the glittering riches of celebrity, but the fame superhighway is littered with victims: Jade Goody, Charlie Sheen, Corey Feldman, Mackenzie Phillips, Katie Price, Lindsay Lohan, Britney Spears, Macaulay Culkin, Anna Nicole Smith – all have suffered greatly on the boulevard of broken dreams. Social media has compounded this issue by giving wannabe celebrities the power to create fame without the need of a broker. It’s far from democratic but nor is social-media fame any more meritocratic. Sure, there’s a skill to painstakingly stage-managing every detail of your appearance and curating every public moment of your life, but people’s desperation to do so in pursuit of fame has created a lower caste of celebrities in the form of the influencer market. Since influencers’ value to brands depends directly on their popularity (and, increasingly, vice versa) this only increases the fervour of their pursuit of fame, and the likelihood that they will be dropped at a moment’s notice, the moment the likes and shares dip below market value. Which brings me to another reason why fame is more toxic than ever; the speed and brutality with which it can turn negative, or even come to an end. Scandal and the downfall of celebrity have always carried with them tremendous news value and been sought jealously by certain segments of the media and society. The infamous MGM publicity machine-cum-protection racket run by Howard Strickling, the notorious head of publicity from the 1920s to the 1960s, ensured, at great cost to the talent, that Hollywood’s finest were protected from such scandals. But even the dastardly Strickling would have his work cut out in an era where access to means of recording and communicating celebrity scandals is practically universal, and motivation to do so has scarcely been higher – politicised and tribalised by the culture wars, and industrialised by the spate of celebrity downfalls referred to as “cancel culture”. Every celebrity now exists under a microscope with a target on their back and a bounty on their head. And every member of the public is armed with ways to bring them in – hot or cold – and collect the bounty. This situation is still particularly bad for women, constantly held to higher standards and vilified for things that men brush off even in today’s cynical shark tank of public opinion. What makes the experience of toxic fame more shocking for its victims is that they are, for a short time, often insulated from its danger by a bubble of managers, agents, brand partners and, yes, publicists, razor-teeth hiding behind sycophantic smiles and cooing platitudes designed to foster whatever infantile god complex will get the next deal across the line. If, as Burton seemed to suggest, fame is a noxious but highly addictive drug, then we live in a society where it’s cheap to get high, but the quality of the drug is variable, the supply is controlled by a cartel of enablers who can cut your supply at a moment’s notice, and there’s no such thing as rehab. Fame has never been more dangerous. In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org Mark Borkowski is a crisis PR consultant and author • This article was amended on 16 February 2022. An earlier version suggested Gwili Andre found success as an actor in the era of silent films. Her success in that period was as a model.A Conservative MP who said eagles are not welcome in his constituency had his election campaign funded by a shooting estate, the Guardian can reveal. The West Dorset MP, Chris Loder, caused outrage when he seemed to imply police should not be prioritising the investigation of the recent death of an endangered white-tailed eagle, found dead on an estate in his constituency. After police confirmed there was a multi-agency investigation into the death of the eagle, including a toxicology report, Loder said: “Dorset is not the place for eagles to be reintroduced. I’m not challenging government for more money for Dorset so it goes on this.” He added that officers should be focusing on crimes such as those involving county lines gangs instead. The eagle was one reintroduced on the Isle of Wight, where a successful programme has been taking place since summer 2019. The eagle went extinct in the UK in the early 20th century after they were continually poisoned and shot by gamekeepers. Loder’s 2019 election campaign benefited from a £14,000 donation from the Ilchester Estates, which runs shoots in his constituency. Those who run shoots are often opposed to birds of prey being in the area, as when they fly over a shoot, the birds scatter, disappointing those who paid to kill them. They also occasionally predate on game birds. The estates are run by Charlotte Townshend, an aristocrat worth almost £500m who has both farming and shooting interests. She also says she is the only person other than the Queen who is allowed to own swans. Neither Townshend nor a spokesperson for the Ilchester Estates could be reached for comment, and there is no suggestion the eagle died on their land, nor because of anyone associated with the estate. The police have not as of yet revealed where the eagle was found. Loder told the Guardian he did not feel he was influenced by the money from the estate, and his distaste for eagles in his constituency was because he had fears for their impact on farming. He said he had spent much time campaigning for animal welfare since being elected. Loder added: “My views on sea eagles come from me being a farmers’ son and my continued best efforts to represent the needs of West Dorset’s farming community. I am not convinced that sea eagles being here are in their best interests. No briefing or consultation has taken place with me or others that I know of by Natural England, campaigners, nor the RSPB to explain how these risks are managed, nor to inform the farming community that indeed these birds are in Dorset. “My policy views are formed in the best interests of the rural community I represent, which is also my home and where I was brought up. Any suggestion that I have been unduly influenced in this view is completely wrong.” The Guardian understands that the government is considering action to stop raptor persecution on shooting estates by tightening licences in problem areas. There were 137 cases of confirmed raptor persecution in 2020, according to the RSPB. Rebecca Pow, an environment minister, said: “There is always more we can do to tackle wildlife crime and we will carefully consider all of the UN’s recommendations – including those relating to raptor persecution – to help us build on the positive progress we have already made. Defra [the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs] sits on the police-led Raptor Persecution Priority Delivery Group, which takes forward activities to raise awareness and facilitate intelligence and incident reporting, leading to increased prevention and enforcement activity.” Luke Steele, the executive director of Wild Moors and a campaigner against raptor persecution, urged that this crackdown be implemented “without delay”, adding: “Birds of prey including eagles, hen harriers and red kites have a rightful place and an important ecological role in the British countryside. To persecute them to preserve game birds for sports shooting flies in the face of the 68% of the public who support reintroduction of birds of prey.”Manchester City have made on offer for the 17-year-old Brazilian winger Sávio as they push to beat Arsenal and the Red Bull group to the signing of the highly rated Atlético Mineiro player. City have bid €6.5m (£5.5m) plus add-ons and would include a sell-on clause in any transfer. Negotiations are continuing and if a deal is struck for Sávio to join City in the summer, he could be loaned to PSV Eindhoven next season. Arsenal and the Red Bull group, whose stable of clubs includes RB Leipzig and RB Salzburg, made contact regarding a possible transfer in December but City are leading the race for Sávio, who was given his Atlético debut in September 2020. City effectively want to replicate the deal they struck to buy another teenage Brazilian forward, Kayky, from Fluminense last April. He joined last summer and has made brief appearances in the FA Cup and Premier League, playing the final minutes of City’s win at Norwich last Saturday.The former UK health secretary Matt Hancock did not comply with a public sector equality duty when he appointed the Conservative peer Dido Harding as head of a new public health quango, the high court has ruled. The race and equality thinktank the Runnymede Trust successfully won its claim against the government over the appointment in August 2020 of Harding as interim executive chair of the National Institute for Health Protection, as well as the appointment in September 2020 of Mike Coupe as director of testing at NHS test and trace. Two judges granted a declaration to the Runnymede Trust on Tuesday after considering arguments at a high court hearing in December. The campaign group the Good Law Project had joined the trust in making complaints – arguing the government had not adopted an “open” process when making appointments to posts “critical to the pandemic response”. However, judges dismissed the claim by the Good Law Project. A spokesperson for Hancock said the former health secretary, who stepped down after apologising for kissing his closest aide, Gina Coladangelo in his ministerial office, in breach of his own Covid-19 rules, said in response to the judgment that the UK government was “dealing with an unprecedented global pandemic, where time was of the essence in order to protect and save lives”. Lord Justice Singh and Mr Justice Swift concluded that Hancock had not complied with “the public sector equality duty” in relation to the appointments. Lawyers representing the Runnymede Trust and Good Law Project suggested that people “outside the tight circle” in which senior Conservative politicians and their friends moved were not being given opportunities. They said an unfair policy was being challenged. Ministers disputed the claims made against them. Jason Coppel QC, who led the two organisations’ legal teams, told the court the challenge was based on equality legislation and public law. He said the government had a “policy or practice” of “making appointments to posts critical to the pandemic response” without adopting any, or any sufficient, “fair or open competitive processes”. Coppel said people “less likely to be known or connected to decision-makers” were put at a disadvantage. He also said the government was failing to offer “remuneration for high-level full-time roles” and “excluding all candidates who were not already wealthy” or held other posts for which they would continue to be paid. In a written ruling, Singh and Swift said: “It is the process leading up to the two decisions which has been found by this court to be in breach of the public sector equality duty. “For those reasons we will grant a declaration to the Runnymede Trust that the secretary of state for health and social care did not comply with the public sector equality duty in relation to the decisions how to appoint Baroness Harding as interim executive chair of the NIHP in August 2020 and Mr Coupe as director of testing for NHSTT in September 2020.” In a joint statement, Dr Halima Begum, the chief executive of the Runnymede Trust, and Sir Clive Jones, the chair of Runnymede’s board of trustees, said: “Neither Baroness Harding nor Mr Coupe is medically trained. Neither has a lifetime of public administration under their belt. It should not be acceptable to drop our standards during complex health emergencies when countless lives are at stake, in particular the lives of some of our country’s most vulnerable citizens.” It added: “This judgment sends a strong message to the government that it needs to take its obligations to reduce inequality far more seriously. It also serves as an unequivocal reminder that all future public appointments must give due consideration to equalities legislation.” A spokesperson for Hancock said: “We’re delighted the department has won yet another court case against the discredited Good Law Project. Claims of ‘apparent bias’ and ‘indirect discrimination’ have been quashed and thrown out by the high court. “What the judgment does make clear is that ‘the claim brought by Good Law Project fails in its entirety’, therefore highlighting the fact this group continues to waste the court’s time. “The court judgment also states that ‘the evidence provides no support … at all’ for the allegation that Dido Harding secured senior positions on the basis of ‘personal or political connections’ in the government.”Welcome to Pushing Buttons, the Guardian’s gaming newsletter. If you’d like to receive it in your inbox every week, just pop your email in below – and check your inbox (and spam) for the confirmation email. Welcome back to Pushing Buttons! In the spirit of carrying my perennial real-world lateness over into this newsletter, let’s talk about love, even though it is now 15 February and everyone will instantly forget about romance again until this time next year. As 500 different articles will already have reminded you this week, so much of the art that we humans make is about wanting someone you can’t have, having someone you don’t want, missing someone you once had, or sometimes even how much we like person/people we’re actually with. Not so with video games, though. Games are different. Very few of them are preoccupied with love. This would traditionally be the place for a cruel joke pointing out that that’s probably because nobody who makes or plays video games ever gets laid, but come on, it is 2022 and we have surely left these dumb stereotypes in the 90s. I do wonder why so few games really engage with this fundamental aspect of the human experience, though. I’ve played video games A lot in states of heartbreak or infatuation, but usually to get myself away from the overwhelming feelings I was experiencing at the time, not to examine them. The problem with video game love stories is that they often revolve around player choice. In a game, whether it’s a dating sim or Dragon Age or Harvest Moon, you generally choose whom you’re going to romance, and then it just … happens. In Mass Effect you might have to do a couple of missions to help your alien crush out first before they’ll jump into bed with you, and in Harvest Moon you have to give a potential spouse about 400 gifts before they’ll give you the time of day – but you can’t really fail at video game relationships. The fun is in picking your target. Even in The Sims, if you’ve got two little computer people with totally opposite personalities who can barely speak to each other, a really determined player can usually still marry them off, like some megalomaniacal matchmaker. Naturally, this is not how human relationships work. They are rarely so transactional. So much art has been made about love precisely because it is extremely unpredictable, and people so rarely get what they want out of it. In relationships according to video games, generally you get whatever you want. You’re hot bisexual Spartan Kassandra, wandering ancient Greece in Assassin’s Creed Odyssey and picking your conquests like low-hanging fruit. You’re Commander Shepard, having (on closer examination) wildly inappropriate relationships with several of your crew. When love stories actually work in games, it is because you have less influence over them. I’m thinking of Geralt and Yennefer in the Witcher series: they are independent people whose lives keep intersecting, and though plenty of Geralt’s potential romances in those games are embarrassingly pornographic, the ongoing story of his on-off relationship with Yenn feels much more real, partly because she keeps leaving him. Florence is a game about a love story that turns into a game about a breakup, where your futile attempts to fix things result in the puzzles becoming unsolvable. Games like Gone Home and Unpacking (I keep mentioning that game, don’t I?) tell love stories that you gradually uncover, leaving room for inference. I think one of the best love stories in games is actually Uncharted 4, a game about a big pirate treasure hunt that nonetheless makes room for not just the relationship between star Nathan Drake and his wife, Elena, but also the love between Nate and his brother, and also the love of adventure. It’s basically an extended action movie, but I nonetheless think it’s a story about how love can change us, and there still aren’t that many of those stories in games. I also couldn’t write about this topic without mentioning To The Moon, the only game that properly broke my heart. I won’t spoil that one, but if you’ve not played it … do. And I have to point you in the direction the only game that’s ever made me cry in public, anna anthropy’s Queers in Love at the End of the World. It’s an interactive fiction game that’s over in ten seconds, designed to be played over and over, inspired by its creator’s experience of the transformative power of queer love. It’s sad and blunt and sexy, and it still gives me shivers. If you’ve played a game about love that really hit you, hit reply on this and let me know. I’ll share them, along with some other reader recommendations, in a future issue. What to play I have spent two weeks playing Horizon Forbidden West. This totally eccentric, massive, open-world sci-fi game about a flame-haired warrior and a bunch of robot dinosaurs, and despite the fact that it has weird controls, a meandering plot and so many different ideas going on that it’s impossible to keep track, I love it. I was suffering pretty badly from open-world fatigue for the past few years, but this was something I could really sink into – largely because it’s so gorgeous, with its sprawling continent of mountains and deserts and overgrown ruins and underwater caves, all teeming with interesting mechanised monsters to fight. I cannot believe games now look as good as this. My ten-year-old self would never believe it. Crucially, it also gives you new and interesting things to do beyond the first ten hours, so I never felt like I was just checking icons off the map. It says a lot that I’ve been cramming this game in order to review it, but still want more. If you’ve got space in your life right now for a massive game, this is an excellent choice – though with Elden Ring out later this month, it’ll soon have competition. Available on: PlayStation 4, PlayStation 5 Approximate playtime: 40 hours (with much more if you want it) What to read Keeping with the theme, a new Sims story pack featuring a love story between two women will not be released in Russia, to avoid falling foul of the country’s homophobic laws on homosexual “propaganda”. Developers at EA Maxis stated that they didn’t want to censor it. But clearly, actually boycotting Russia in a show of solidarity with the series’ millions of queer fans is a step too far for the company. Nintendo is adding classic tracks to Mario Kart on Switch, and is also reimagining the beloved and bestselling Wii Sports, as Nintendo Switch Sports. News that warms my heart. Just in case any video game executives are reading this and still think jumping on the NFT bandwagon is a good idea, Worms publisher Team17 angered its staff so much with an ill-considered surprise announcement of Worms digital artwork that a load of them ran to Eurogamer reporter Tom Phillips with all kinds of stories about the company. Yeowch. What to click Sony trains AI to leave world’s best Gran Turismo drivers in the dust Pokémon Legends: Arceus review – makes even old-school fans feel childlike again Uncharted review – Tom Holland game adaptation is action-movie by committee Question Block No Question Block this week, as I’m writing this advance so that I can spend half-term running around after my small children. Just reply to this newsletter or email us on pushingbuttons@theguardian.com to send in a question for future issues.They were separated by more than 200 years and catered to entirely different audiences. But French decorative artists of the 18th century and Walt Disney animators in America shared a unique ambition – to breathe life, character and charm into the inanimate. This spring an exhibition at the Wallace Collection – in collaboration with New York’s Metropolitan Museum of Art – will explore Walt Disney’s personal fascination with France and French culture, and the way in which artists behind some of the most celebrated animation films of our time looked to French artworks for their source material. Inspiring Walt Disney: The Animation of French Decorative Arts will display the hand-drawn animations alongside a selection of the finest 18th-century French furniture and porcelain to reveal the connections between the two artistic movements. The exhibition chronicles Disney’s visits to France and his personal discovery of French fairy tales, as well as his early attempts to bring inanimate objects to life. Early films from the Silly Symphony series (1929-1939) demonstrate his fascination with anthropomorphic objects such as porcelain vases and clocks. In total, more than 120 examples of production artwork and works on paper from the Walt Disney Animation Research Library and the Walt Disney Archives will be on display, alongside approximately 30 artworks from the French Rococo movement. These include Jean-Honoré Fragonard’s painting The Swing (circa 1767), which provided inspiration for several Disney films including Beauty and the Beast (1991), Tangled (2010) and Frozen (2013), and which will be showcased for the first time after its recent conservation. Particular attention is given to the imaginative architecture of Cinderella (1950) and Beauty and the Beast, which feature castles that took inspiration from Versailles and the Loire Valley in early development, and are decorated with gilded mirrors and motifs of the Rococo style. In Beauty and the Beast, the objects are imbued with a movement and emotion originally envisaged by French artists. Dr Helen Jacobsen, a co-curator of the exhibition, said: “This exhibition presents us with a remarkable opportunity both to appreciate the extraordinary talents behind Disney animated films and to understand the continuing relevance of French 18th-century artworks. “Juxtaposing one of the 20th century’s most iconic art forms with these exquisite objects not only provides an unprecedented look at the impact of French artworks on Disney Studios’ productions from the 1930s until the present, it also allows us to understand something of the wit and humour of the innovators of the Rococo, who turned everyday objects into works of genius.” Dr Xavier Bray, the director of the Wallace Collection, said the museum was “fortunate to have one of the finest collections of 18th-century artworks in the world and we are thrilled to be bringing it to life for new audiences, in a manner that the original geniuses of the French 18th century – Boulle, Meissonnier, Duplessis and Caffieri – envisaged 300 years ago.” Inspiring Walt Disney will run at the Wallace Museum from 6 April to 16 October 2022, after transferring from the Metropolitan Museum of Art.For LGBTQ+ people, and especially for gay men, the summer of 1967 offered much promise. The Sexual Offences Act had just been passed, meaning that homosexuality – at least, homosexual acts in private between two consenting adult males aged over 21 – was no longer a criminal offence, and the atmosphere was filled with a palpable sense of change. People were protesting for equal rights and an end to war. Love was in the air: the Beatles told a global television audience that it was all we needed, and we believed them. As the summer of love turned into autumn and winter, a strange little record issued by a tiny, London-based independent label appeared: the innuendo-laden Kay, Why? by the Brothers Butch, its title a riff on the leading brand of water-based lubricant. Very few copies were sold, but it has gone on to become one of the most sought-after and highly cherished examples of British camp humour. Backed with I’m Not Going Camping This Winter and penned by one Eileen Dover – a wonderfully silly pseudonym that would befit a drag queen – Kay, Why? was not the first queer pop record, but it was one of the earliest, and most blatant, to be issued in the UK. Performed in high camp style by two outré queens, the song laments how the eponymous Kay has “made a mess” after being given “a little squeeze … why did you slip through my fingers? Ooooh!” Despite turning up on various collections over the years, including the Jon Savage-compiled Queer Noises 1961-1978: From the Closet to the Charts, no one has been able to uncover any of the people involved; since it was issued at a time when an admission of homosexuality would badly damage a career, it’s hardly surprising that they chose to remain anonymous – until now. Kay, Why? was the only release from Thrust Records of 494 Harrow Road, London. Now a flat above a fast food takeaway, at that time it was also the address of Eyemark Records, a small indie label that had previously issued the likes of a Sonny and Cher parody from actors Sheila Hancock and Malcolm Taylor, an album by legendary drag ball organiser Mr Jean Fredericks, and a series of field recordings of train sounds. Another of the musicians on the books was Eric Francis, singer, guitarist and occasional fire-eater with a four-piece psychedelic rock group from Fulham, the Barrier (their records have become some of the most sought-after from the British psychedelic era, with a copy of single Georgie Brown in its ultra-rare picture sleeve selling for more than $1,500 in 2020). The band performed the instrumental track for Kay, Why?, and after finishing the session left for a European tour. “There was no fee involved,” says Francis. “We just did it as we were all mates.” So who wrote the songs and performed the vocals? This was Jewish musical duo Roy Cowen and Iain Kerr, who performed as Goldberg and Solomon, a comedy version of Gilbert and Sullivan. Born in Edinburgh, Iain Kerr was brought up in New Zealand, where he gave his debut performance, billed as the Wonder Boy Pianist, at the age of four. In 1961 he returned to the UK with his cabaret partner Daphne Barker, and after becoming a hit on the London circuit they released an album of risque songs, Banned!, in 1962, which was indeed banned by the BBC. Born in Hampstead to Russian parents, Cowen discovered his knack for writing parodies of hit songs while serving in the army. The budding song satirist impressed Kerr with an on-the-spot spoof of Moon River entitled Chopped Liver, and an immediate, and lasting, partnership was formed. The pair wrote material for Kerr’s nightclub act as well as for other artists; Cowen wrote lyrics for Charles Aznavour, and to accompany the easy listening tune A Walk in the Black Forest, which had been a No 3 hit for Horst Jankowski in 1965. Perhaps the most bizarre commission came from tractor manufacturer Massey Ferguson, who had them compose a full opera, staged on a beach in Greece, in front of company delegates from around the world. As well as working with Cowen, Kerr continued to perform in clubs and hotels in London, becoming friendly with visiting US stars including Bob Hope and Sammy Davis Jr, and was regularly featured on the popular BBC radio programme Music While You Work. Now 88, and still a lively, engaging raconteur a decade into a fight with Parkinson’s, Kerr has never spoken about his involvement in Kay, Why? before. He met Eyemark’s Mark Edwards and Malcolm Taylor at a recording session, who asked if they had any other songs, and then paired them up with the Purple Barrier. “Mark and Malcolm were anxious to exploit their new venture in the record industry,” says Kerr. He and Cowen, meanwhile, “were passionate about the English language and delighted in the art of double entendre. We had fun playing with words. Roy’s natural wit could take two words like Kay Why, build a sad little story about the break-up of a relationship, and turn it into a hysterically funny song that had audiences in stitches. In all of our parodies and original songs we gave the audience the choice of which way to take it.” Despite the passing of the Sexual Offences Act, life was hard for LGBT people, and no mainstream pop act would come out publicly until the 1970s. Arrests for importuning, or “cottaging” in public toilets increased, and plain-clothes police officers took to hanging around gay-friendly pubs, procuring arrests through entrapment. But such an obviously gay song as Kay, Why? was not a political statement. “I don’t think we ever had time to consider whether we were brave or subversive, we were too busy entertaining,” says Kerr. “Our audiences were by no means only gay; wherever we went, we played to people of all backgrounds. Many a time we had nuns out front – we could see their wimples quivering at all the naughty bits!” As Goldberg and Solomon, the pair recorded their first album for Eyemark in 1967, the same year as the Brothers Butch tracks were laid down: The Tailors of Poznance, featuring Rag Trade actor Miriam Karlin and subtitled the Best of Goldberg and Solomon, No Two. “There never was a volume one,” Kerr laughs. In December that year they sailed to South Africa to perform their show An Evening With Goldberg and Solomon. Kerr remembers: “Halfway through the journey were invited to drinks at the Pig and Whistle, the crew’s bar, and as we went in we were delighted to find that two members of the crew had chosen to honour us by miming as the Brothers Butch. They had gone to a lot of trouble to rehearse and learn the lines. We were both thrilled.” Kerr was also involved as co-writer and pianist in another Eyemark release, QPR – The Greatest, by Queens Park Rangers footballer Mark Lazarus: “I did it because I was asked!” The flip side features what is probably the most peculiar, psychedelic football anthem ever recorded, Supporters – Support Us, credited to the QPR Supporters. Rumour had it that the Barrier, who backed Kay, Why?, created this. “I have heard it suggested many times,” says the Barrier’s Eric Francis, “but we’re not guilty.” Francis managed to score a No 1 hit in Japan with the band Capricorn, but apart from the occasional session that would be his last shot at stardom. “By 1971 I had a small baby, and I decided to get out,” he says. “I had been a professional musician for about 10 years, but I would have been better off financially stacking shelves in Morrisons. I did some driving for a car hire company. One of my customers was Greg Lake, the bass player with Emerson, Lake and Palmer, which was a bit embarrassing because he was a mate.” Then, five years after Kay, Why? was released, an advert appeared in the recently launched fortnightly newspaper Gay News. “Have a Thrust for Christmas” it announced, before promoting the more seasonal I’m Not Going Camping This Winter as the main track. By that time the Gay Liberation Front had been established for two years, Britain’s first Pride march had taken place, and pop stars including David Bowie had helped make androgyny big business. Perhaps the world was finally ready for Kay, Why?, but in the end very few copies were sold, and the record again drifted into obscurity. Over the ensuing years it began to pick up notoriety among collectors, helped along by a digital reissue in 2007, with copies changing hands for hundreds of times more than the “60p for one copy or £1 for two” advertised in Gay News. There had once been plans for a second Brothers Butch single, but this did not materialise. “Roy and I were extraordinarily busy at the time”, says Kerr. Indeed they were. During the decade following the recording of Kay, Why?, Goldberg and Solomon released three further albums and toured the world, playing several return seasons in Australia and South Africa. The curtain fell on their highly successful act when Cowen died of a heart attack, aged 54, in Sydney in June 1978. Kerr continued to work: for 25 years he was the resident pianist at the May Fair Hotel in London’s West End, and in 1997, at a celebratory dinner hosted by Sir Peter Ustinov, he played in front of the Queen. Kay, Why? has also endured, since its appearance at a time when LGBTQ+ people in Britain were beginning to find their voice. “We were aware,” says Kerr, “that we were sticking our oars out and making a few ripples.” Those ripples would soon become waves: Kay, Why? may not have changed the world, but despite its commercial failure, it remains an important footnote in the history of British psychedelia, and in the story of LGBTQ+ pop.Before the pandemic, I was an artist, activist, teacher, director and producer – living fully, despite having had blood cancer for 10 years. Today, I am classified as “A3” (a person with comorbidities) in the Philippines. In the UK, I am classified as extremely clinically vulnerable. I don’t believe in labels, yet all of a sudden, I am one. Although I am fully vaccinated and boosted, there are no guarantees that the vaccines work in a body that has a suppressed immune system, like mine. So I continue to isolate and shield in place. Largely alone. Before, community was my life. Now, loved ones are cautious about seeing me without isolating and testing beforehand, as they don’t want to put me at risk. In the Philippines, where we have no free tests, this is a big consideration. Freedom comes with the ability to pay. When two friends committed to quarantining and testing before spending time with me by the sea, I fell into their arms weeping when they arrived. I had almost forgotten what it was like to be held. Remembering hurts, and keeping that memory from fading is exhausting. What happens to the body after two years of no touch, no physical community, while managing a blood condition? It is in constant pain. I have always had cancer side-effects, but they eased in the arms of loved ones – in shared laughter, activism, movement building, dancing and adventures. The loss of a life that was free, that this body used to know, is heartbreaking. A life with touch, hugs, intimacy, pleasure, love, exploration, fun, joy, wildness. A body in isolation is sorrow. It is a deep longing, searching, endless waiting, and loneliness. People talk of herd or natural immunity, of fewer quarantine days, of more relaxed protocols. But I can’t visualise what that looks like for someone like me, and for the millions of people around the world with autoimmune diseases. “Mild” Covid is not something we can count on. As waves come and go, “freedom” still feels like a possible death sentence for us. Then you begin to live with another kind of pain: the pain of being left behind, while the world is moving on. But inside the sorrow of this body’s isolation remains the possibility of life. I manage the pain and loneliness with kundalini yoga, meditation, Tantra and divine feminine practice; by playing with my dog and learning to be a child again, creating art, beauty and sacred spaces in my home. My work as an activist and artist with One Billion Rising keeps me going. Every day, I get up, contribute, connect, reclaim and rise, to make this body a vessel of hope. These are my radical acts. One day soon, we will all be dancing together again. Monique Wilson is an actor and women’s rights activist, as well as the global director of One Billion RisingDeliverance meets The Hangover in this wacky-but-slapdash horror-comedy from Kazakhstan. It’s juvenile, crass and gross-out, with funny bits depressingly few and far between. Daniar Alshinov is Dastan, a man who is under the cosh of his pregnant wife Zhanna (Asel Kaliyeva); her only personality trait is that she’s a nagging ballbreaker. Though to be fair, most of the characters here feel like one-dimensional stereotypes. As a last hurrah before the birth of the baby, Dastan has arranged to go fishing with two old buddies. One of them, Arman (Azamat Marklenov) owns an online sex toy business, so arrives with a camper van full of cheapo factory seconds blow-up dolls. Things get steadily more unhilarious from there. An excruciating set piece on the road involves one of the trio pissing in bottle and throwing it out the window; only the window is shut. More comedy mishap ensues on the dinghy, when a fishing hook catches Arman in the ear, ripping clean through the ear lobe (weirdly, with very little blood). Things get worse, sub-Fargo style, when the three men witness a group of clownish mobsters accidentally shooting a man in the face. The mean guys give chase. But wouldn’t you know, an even meaner guy, a one-eyed serial killer, arrives on the scene. He’s the strong, silent survivalist type, who can rip a man’s jaw apart with his bare hands. Admittedly, I’m not the target audience for this brand of infantile humour. But I’m not sure even a film aimed at six-year-olds could get away with a gag involving a man hiding behind a door from a murderer and almost giving himself away by nervously farting. In the absence of actual jokes, the actors seem to have been directed to yell lines at each other, as if that will make them funny. Take Paracetamol, not popcorn. • Sweetie, You Won’t Believe It is released on 21 February on digital platforms.The impact of the first year of Brexit on Ireland has been revealed after official data showed cross-border trade between Ireland and Northern Ireland jumped by €2.8bn (£2.3bn) in 2021. Full-year figures from Ireland’s Central Statistics Office show that imports to Ireland from Northern Ireland were up 65% to €3.9bn, a rise of €1.5bn compared with 2020. Exports from Ireland to Northern Ireland also rocketed, up 54% to €3.7bn, an increase of €1.3bn compared with 2020 – a total trade rise of €2.8bn. The breakdown of figures show the biggest increase in trade in both directions was in food and live animals, with exports to NI up from €919bn to €1.35bn year on year, while imports to Ireland were up from €714m to €1.02bn. The past year also saw a tripling in the value of imports of chemicals and related products to Ireland from NI, up from €280m in 2020 to €850m in 2021, with big rises also in imports of fuel. As no contemporary trade figures are published by the UK government or the Northern Ireland Statistics and Research Agency for goods crossing the Irish Sea from Great Britain into Northern Ireland, it is impossible to tell how much of the increase in trade is a result of the new trade barriers created by the Northern Ireland Brexit protocol. Nonetheless, they will be seized on by protocol critics, including unionist parties, as confirmation that Brexit has boosted Ireland’s trade with Northern Ireland. The CSO figures, published on Tuesday, also show the impact of trade barriers erected between Ireland and Great Britain as a result of the UK’s departure from the EU, with a fall in exports from Great Britain to Ireland. Exports from Ireland to Great Britain were up 17% across the year to almost €14.4bn, but imports plummeted by 13% to €15.4bn. There was a drop of just over €2.3bn in exports from Great Britain to Ireland. The UK was Ireland’s single biggest trading partner before Brexit. The UK is now neck and neck with the US as the largest single non-EU source of goods imported to Ireland, accounting for 20% of trade at around €2bn apiece. However, the CSO figures suggest traders are becoming accustomed to the Brexit barriers. They show a massive drop in imports from GB between December 2020 and January 2021, when the new rules came into force, but then a slow rise over the year. Data for December shows that the decline in imports from GB slowed by the end of the year, down 4% compared with December 2020. The main decreases were seen in imports of food and live animals, machinery and transport equipment. Levels of exports to GB were less volatile across the year, with no comparable sharp fall in January last year. This may be down to better Brexit preparedness in Ireland compared with Britain. Exports for December 2021 compared with December 2020 were down 5%, with greatest decreases in exports of food and live animals. The steady export trade also suggests Brexit has not caused a diversion of trade to GB by the use of new Brexit-busting ferries that go direct to France and Belgium, allowing exporters to bypass the so-called “land bridge” to the EU. Preliminary figures for 2021 show that Ireland enjoyed a bumper year with exports at highest on record, exceeding €165bn. The largest increases were in medical and pharmaceutical products, a reflection of the strong presence of large companies such as Pfizer, one the of manufacturers of Covid vaccines, in Ireland.As a child growing up in Ukraine, every time I blew out the candles on my birthday cake I made a wish that there would be no war in the world. Now the war is at my door. For almost eight years we have been hearing about the dead at the war front in Donbas, seeing the tears of people who lost their families and homes, and who had to start again from scratch. In January, I was visiting friends in the UK, and reading the latest news stories about Russian troops building up on the border. I always try to be sceptical about these stories, because I believe this is Vladimir Putin’s way of destabilising the situation in our country, rather than any real attempt to start a war. But this time, my mother told me that Ukrainians were getting scared, and she asked me not to come back for a while. It felt like a turning point. As a freelancer I can live wherever I want and usually I spend a lot of time abroad. But due to the growing tension, I returned to Kyiv so I could be with my family. Even in the month since, the tension has increased significantly. Two weeks ago I had a meeting with foreign colleagues and I told them that I was 90% sure that Russia would not attack. Would I say that today? No – now for me it’s 50/50. However, there isn’t panic on the streets and you won’t see empty supermarket shelves. Even now, we have full shelves with all the essential products. A week ago, I jokingly sent photos of camembert to friends in Britain, which we couldn’t find when I visited them in January. Restaurants and malls are full of people living their lives seemingly as normal. But anxiety haunts us all the time. My small family decided that if there was an emergency we would meet at my house without calling. I think a lot of people have similar plans in place. Like many others, I have bought about a month’s supply of food – cans, cereals, pasta, water and other nonperishables. At the beginning of the month, I bought a woodburning stove in case of power or gas cuts, so we could stay warm and continue to eat hot meals, and 20 litres of fuel for my generator so that we would be able to charge our phones. For my pets, I ordered food two months in advance, as well as extra in case neighbours start leaving and abandoning their animals. To distract me from bad thoughts, I bought a few jigsaw puzzles too. I do believe that foreign leaders beyond President Putin deserve some of the blame for what is happening. President Biden started a game of ping-pong with Putin – they are like two barking dogs trying to show each other who is better, and we are stuck in the middle. The support of foreign partners is very important to Ukraine, but at the moment it is also important to choose your words carefully. Every Ukrainian is affected by statements by foreign politicians about an “inevitable” Russian attack. No matter how much we tell ourselves that everything is fine, you can’t remain calm when 10 times a day you see statements about an imminent attack or intelligence about potential invasion dates that change daily. People joke that it’s time to publish a schedule of attacks for the whole of 2022 so that we can plan our lives around them. It’s great that instructors from the UK, Canada and the US have come to train our military. In this I see our salvation. We must develop our own independent, strong army in order to reclaim our territory, and leave talk of joining Nato to one side from now. Of course, what worries us most is Putin himself and his behaviour at meetings with leaders of other countries. It seems to me that he is enjoying all the headlines, and the pleas for him to stop. If I was to dedicate a song from the Ukrainian people to Putin, it would be Lily Allen’s Fuck You: “We’re so uninspired / So sick and tired / Of all the hatred you harbour.” We are used to disruption and a certain level of tension. When in 2018 one of my work events was moved from Kharkiv to Kyiv due to the introduction of martial law, we were barely concerned. After the military shot at protesters during the Maidan revolution in 2014, there was an endless feeling of pain for every person who died there and their families. But there was no fear. But now when I wake up at night, I check the news to see if we have been attacked. I shrink from the thought that in the 21st century a full-scale attack, the bombing of Kyiv, is possible. We would like Russia to leave us alone. We want the choice of whether to be in Nato or not, and we want foreign politicians to stop making unnecessary statements that only provoke an escalation of the conflict. We are a large, independent European nation. Over the past five years, our country has changed hugely. We have almost no Russian goods left in the shops; most people speak Ukrainian; and the question of whether we will join the EU is no longer a question, but our course for the future. I travel a lot for work, and we have far more in common with other countries – Moldova, Kazakhstan, Poland, Belarus – than we do with Russia. However, we are now hostages of a situation that was created over decades by the government of the USSR and then Russia. Have I thought about leaving the country? No. Has this situation affected my life? Definitely. Even as I try to be sceptical and keep a level head, the stress and fear persists. Every Ukrainian is facing a lot right now. But we are more united than ever. Alexandra Matzota is an event planner based in UkraineThe progressive New York congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez believes the Republican-led pressure on political systems is so great that there is “a very real risk” democracy will cease to exist in the US within a decade. The leftist Democratic politician derided efforts by Republican legislatures around the country to restrict voting rights as the “opening salvos” in a war on democracy, which she said could result in a return to the Jim Crow-era disenfranchisement of racial minorities. In the interview with the New Yorker, she warned that the clock was ticking for Joe Biden and other Democratic leaders to do anything about it, with huge chunks of the president’s agenda, including legislation to protect voting rights, stalled in Congress by more conservative or moderate members of her own party. “Honestly, it is a shitshow,” Ocasio-Cortez said of working in the same Democratic-controlled Congress in which centrist senators Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema have blocked both electoral reforms and Biden’s ambitious Build Back Better social spending initiative. “We don’t have much time,” she said. “The president has not been using his executive power to the extent that some would say is necessary.” The issue of voting rights was a dominant theme of the interview with New Yorker editor David Remnick, who asked her about her previous use of the phrase “if we have a democracy 10 years from now”. “There’s a very real risk that we will not,” she said. “What we risk is having a government that perhaps postures as a democracy, and may try to pretend that it is, but isn’t. “We’ve already seen the opening salvos of this, where you have a very targeted, specific attack on the right to vote across the United States, particularly in areas where Republican power is threatened by changing electorates and demographics. “You have white nationalist, reactionary politics starting to grow into a critical mass … the continued sophisticated takeover of our democratic systems in order to turn them into undemocratic systems, all in order to overturn results that a party in power may not like.” Although she believes the situation “is not beyond hope”, Ocasio-Cortez fears inaction will lead to a “return to Jim Crow”, a reference to repressive laws in the US south to the mid-20th century designed to enforce racial segregation and disenfranchise Blacks. “You have it already happening in Texas, where Jim Crow-style disenfranchisement laws have already been proposed,” she said. “You have the complete erasure and attack on our own understanding of history, to replace teaching history with institutionalized propaganda from white nationalist perspectives in our schools. This is what the scaffolding of Jim Crow was. “The question we’re really facing is, was the last 50 to 60 years after the Civil Rights Act just a mere flirtation that the United States had with a multiracial democracy that we will then decide was inconvenient for those in power? And we will revert to what we had before?”Nine endangered wolves were shot in one day in Norway after a court ruled that a controversial hunt could go ahead. Fifty-one wolves were originally due to be slaughtered – a significant proportion of the 80 animals thought to live in Norway. But last month, activists secured a stay of execution when they got an injunction halting the hunt until an appeal over its validity could go ahead. They claimed that allowing hunters to kill wolves in a conservation zone would be against EU nature protection laws. Twenty-five animals, within four packs, are in the “wolf zone”, an area of nature set aside to protect the predators, and these wolves were protected by the appeal. But last Friday, the Norwegian court of appeal reversed the district court’s interim injunction to halt the hunting of the wolf families within the “wolf zone” where the animals are allowed to breed, which makes up 5% of the country’s land. Over the weekend, hunts went out to find these animals, and nine were shot in a single day. The resulting images show bloodied wolves lying on the snowy ground. Karoline Andaur, the CEO of the WWF in Norway, said: “This is a loss not only for the wolves, but also for biodiversity and rule of law in nature conservation. The wolf is critically endangered in Norway, and we have a national responsibility to take care of it. “Now they are being shot just because they are living in Norwegian nature, even though they live in the wolf zone – an area where the authorities have decided that the wolf should have particularly strong protection.” The Guardian reported in January that conservation groups across Europe were appealing to the EU to take action against wolf population culls in Norway, Sweden and Finland, arguing that the Nordic nations were creating the most hostile environment for wolves in western Europe and flouting laws that protect the species. Last month, Finland suspended licences to kill three packs of wolves, citing EU legislation. Yet Norway’s government welcomed the court of appeal’s decision to lift the cull injunction. A spokesperson said: “I note with satisfaction that the court of appeal upholds us in that the state’s decision of 22 December 2021 to kill wolves belonging to four wolf packs within the wolf zone, is legal.” The Norwegian environment department added that measures to ensure the full quota of wolves is taken may be put in place. Siri Martinsen, who runs the nature group Noah, said: “We are shocked by the ruling. The court does not evaluate the consequences of letting the state cull critically endangered wolves with the main aim of keeping them critically endangered.” Other European countries have introduced anti-wolf policies. Hunters in Sweden have already shot dead most of their annual target of 27 wolves. In Germany, where wolves have appeared in recent years having entered from neighbouring countries, there has been a debate over the predators’ impact on agriculture. In the UK, there are fierce arguments over whether wolves should ever be reintroduced.Melinda Simmons, the British ambassador to Ukraine, has been winning plaudits for her decision to stay in post in Kyiv, working with a much-reduced staff to help UK citizens out of the country and to manage the steady flow of British dignitaries still flying to the country to show their solidarity. Given the clarity, frequency and urgency of the British intelligence warnings of an imminent Russian invasion, including the possibility of airstrikes, it is surprising that she has until now insisted she remain in situ alongside a core team. Her decision to stay put, along with most EU embassies, will be popular with Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy. He is deeply unhappy that some western embassies – including the US, Canada and Australia – decided to move from Kyiv to Lviv or other cities in the west of the country. At a joint briefing on Monday Zelinskiy said he was determined to prevent an exodus of his political and business class, and questioned their logic. “There is no western Ukraine,” he said. “There is Ukraine; it is integral. Because if, God forbid, something happens, it will be everywhere.” Simmons’s decision to stay may also be an implicit admission that the Foreign Office did not cover itself in glory in its handling of the fall of Kabul. It might be thought that the Conservative press would treat her decision to stay put as a sign of the sangfroid on which the British diplomatic class like to pride themselves. But Douglas Murray, associate editor of the Spectator, took umbrage at her admissions that she sometimes needed to take walks to relieve herself of stress. “When exactly did Simmons-like behaviour become our national character? When did me-time and self-esteem replace stoicism? People used to talk of drawing on reserves in a crisis, not least because it gave confidence to our friends and allies as well as to ourselves. Clearly that isn’t the case now.” Those who know her say she is regarded as a highly focussed humanitarian, and part of a new generation of British female ambassadors. Born in the East End of London to Jewish parents, her family is from Poland on her father’s side, but her mother’s side is both Lithuanian and Ukrainian. Fluent in German and French, she came into the diplomatic network in 2003 via the Department for International Development (DfID) relatively late – 10 years after university, and after spending time in advertising and marketing, which she quit in disillusionment, taking a 50% pay cut to work for a peace-building NGO. Her husband was a journalist specialising in Africa. Her DfID career had a heavy Africa focus and she specialised in conflict resolution and prevention. Her move to the Foreign Office in 2013, and to the National Security Secretariat, meant a drift from soft to harder power. In 2018 she started language training in preparation for taking up her post in Kyiv in 2019. For the de-stressing reviled by the Spectator she tries baking and boxing. Inside the Foreign Office she has tried to be a trailblazer, but admits it can be hard, once saying: “I think it’s really difficult to build the courage to speak up for yourself. Often for women, that’s just a step too far out of your comfort zone, plus there’s a real ‘why bother’ button that switches on in your head. Giving yourself permission to be heard is hugely empowering.” She awards herself one specialist skill – the ability to pick up the phone to anyone, no matter how senior, to get her point across. Apart from shepherding British citizens on to commercial flights or over the border into Poland, her key task is to manage the sometimes fractious relations between the Ukrainian government and Britain. There is for instance great resentment in Ukraine about the west’s dire warnings of a Russian invasion, warnings that the UK has been at the forefront of. She has also not been afraid to sound the alarm bells over any backsliding in Ukraine’s fight against corruption. She recently told one Ukrainian interviewer: “When Brits think about Ukraine, by large they think about corruption and they think about war.” She said pretty pictures of the Carpathian mountains or Odessa will not shift that narrative. By contrast, “positive stories about progress in tackling corruption and positive stories about Ukraine growing in strength as a confident democracy, these are the things that will alter the perceptions of Brits”.Florian Zeller’s brand of psychological theatre in which fractured inner states are expressed through form is undeniably slick. Like his Oscar-winning film, The Father (adapted from his play), this story of infidelity scrambles chronology and blends memory with fantasy to prove the slippery nature of reality. Part of its charm is in the unscrambling, though it remains a moot point whether style wins out over substance here. The story is a moral one – of unfaithfulness and its consequences – presented in the mould of a crime thriller. It revolves around Pierre, a distinguished surgeon whose affair leaves him unbalanced, possibly murderous. He is a split self on stage, bifurcated through guilt and subterfuge, and his dominant half, Man 1, is superlatively performed by Toby Stephens, alongside Man 2 (Paul McGann). “Scenes play over and over again in my head,” he says, and they do on stage, too, with small variations each time, so that no one truth can be pinned down. Stephens has a casual entitlement but also shades of Dostoevsky’s Raskolnikov in his secret desire to be caught, to confess and be punished. Translated by Zeller’s long-term collaborator, Christopher Hampton, The Forest is masterfully executed and captivating to watch, but without the same emotional depth and power of The Father. A jigsaw with a piece missing, the story allows us to project our own meaning in its gaps, but even then it feels slightly flat at times, and too bound up in Zeller’s signature style, which plays out like a similarly repeating game. It bears the intrigue of a thriller but resorts to cliches of the genre, too: the anonymous phone calls, the loose cannon of a lover, the quietly suspicious wife. Every woman on stage is not only betrayed but appears flat, particularly the lover (Angel Coulby), whose obsessive impulses veer into the “bunny boiler” stereotype. The wife (exquisitely played by Gina McKee) appears deliberately like a cipher, too. This may well be a reflection of the reduced way in which Man 1 sees them but they lack credibility as a result. Whatever its shortcomings, we cannot help but be seduced by this production. McKee sends shivers down the spine in the play’s final moments, and the rest of the cast is universally strong, especially a surreal, whey-faced interrogator played with controlled menace by Finbar Lynch. Elegantly directed by Jonathan Kent, every element of the stagecraft shines and delights. Rooms light up out of darkness with thrilling surprise: the lover’s bedsit above the family drawing room, an office space in which dreams are revealed and grubby bargains made. A single, mono-note of dread in Isobel Waller-Bridge’s sound design buzzes across the drama. Hugh Vanstone’s lighting is striking, and Anna Fleischle’s naturalistic set design is a good foil to the play’s skewed reality. The three rooms gradually begin connecting and at their most effective they capture the simultaneity of the moment for which Zeller seems so often to be striving. The end does not yield the catharsis of a crime thriller but appears, eerily, on pause – as if it will carry on repeating its churn of inner turmoil after we have left the auditorium. If this is all an elaborate exploration of guilt, it is guaranteed to spark fevered discussion after the lights go up, even if it has melted away by the morning after. • At Hampstead theatre, London, until 12 March.‘If in doubt, get the breasts out.” That is not an official advertising slogan, but it might as well be. Cleavage has always been the uninspired ad man’s best friend. Flogging fast food? Show a bunch of busty models eating burgers in bikinis. Hawking ice-cream? Film a slow-motion shot of it dripping down a woman’s chest. Selling cars? Boobs. Selling home insurance? More boobs. You get the idea; you would have to be a boob not to. While breasts are not exactly unusual in adverts, Adidas’s new marketing campaign for its expanded range of sports bras takes things to the extreme. Instead of just showing a bit of cleavage, the advert features 25 pairs of bare breasts. Some are scarred; some are small; some are saggy; all of them are unapologetically uncovered. Accompanying the nudity are layers of predictable PR guff about how Adidas wants to celebrate inclusivity and showcase the many varieties of modern mammaries etc etc. Frankly, I would have respected the company a lot more if it just said: it is not that deep – we know this is guaranteed to get people talking, which means our brand name will worm its way into your unconscious and hopefully translate into a sales boost for our bras. I don’t know how the bra sales are going, but the “get people talking” strategy is working. Some people have been celebrating Adidas’s advert for desexualising breasts; others have called it exploitative. “They are now trying to sell us objectification as if it’s liberation,” an associate professor of sociology at the University of California at Irvine told the Washington Post. It is a fair point, but, after much consideration (I have been thinking about breasts all weekend), the former marketing professional in me has decided the ad is quite good, actually. Unlike male chests, women’s breasts are still ridiculously sexualised – so much so that female nipples are censored on Instagram. Adidas’s ad might be a shameless attention grab, but anything that helps normalise nipples is OK with me. Arwa Mahdawi is a Guardian columnistHuman rights must take precedence over personal beliefs and political whims. That is why there are strong international mechanics in place to ensure national human rights bodies can operate independently of their governments. However, here in the UK, these mechanics are wheezing under the weight of a string of appointments to the Equality and Human Rights Commission (EHRC) that run counter to human rights for all. As a result, Stonewall wrote to the UN last week to seek a special review into the EHRC. It was a move we did not take lightly – but the body’s recent actions have left us with no choice. Concerns about the EHRC’s independence and integrity are long-running and spread across various human rights movements. But for those in the LGBTQ+ sector, things came to a head in January when the EHRC made two public policy interventions that appear designed to hold back human rights protections for trans people. The first was an attempt to intervene in the Scottish government’s reform of the Gender Recognition Act. After years of publicly supporting reform, the EHRC suddenly changed position. In a letter from the chair, they asked for the plans to be put on pause, despite recognising “that many trans people have criticised the current process to obtain a GRC as being intrusive, medically based, bureaucratic, expensive and lengthy”. The law hasn’t changed. The day to day lives of trans people haven’t changed, and the complete inadequacy of our current process for amending trans people’s birth certificates hasn’t changed. The only thing that changed was the composition of the EHRC commissioners. The second intervention was the EHRC response to the UK government’s consultation on banning “conversion therapy”. “Conversion therapy” is a term used to describe practices that have the goal of changing or suppressing someone’s sexual orientation or gender identity. These practices don’t work, of course, and they cause serious and sometimes lifelong harm. “Conversion therapy” is abuse, plain and simple, and it is rightly condemned by the UN human rights community, of which the EHRC is a part. Yet two years after a UN expert called for a global ban on all forms of conversion therapy, and as countries around the world (including most recently New Zealand, Canada and France) bring in bans, the EHRC is arguing against reform. Instead, it advocates more delay, and argues the government should consider moving forward with a ban that covers sexual orientation while leaving trans people unprotected. The position of the international human rights community hasn’t changed. The harm being caused by this abuse hasn’t changed. Again, there was just one variable that could account for the EHRC’s sudden change in heart: the people making the decisions. The result is the complete collapse in trust between the EHRC and the LGBTQ+ human rights movement. The EHRC’s recent stances have created a situation where the absurd now seems possible. Just last week, we saw leaked reports that suggested the EHRC was considering publishing guidance that would restrict access to single-sex spaces like changing rooms and toilets to the small minority of trans people who have gone through the arduous and humiliating process required to get a gender recognition certificate. Imagine, for a second, a world where you are asked to show identity documents for the most mundane of activities: using the toilets at the train station, or to get into the gym changing rooms. It feels bizarre, unthinkable even. Yet it’s happened in the US, where a series of “bathroom bills” have been passed and then revoked because of the damage they cause – not just to trans people, but to all of us who don’t fit into narrow, neat little boxes. The EHRC has denied it considered taking this step, which is very welcome. Nonetheless EHRC has confirmed that guidance on single sex spaces is coming soon, and given the body’s recent record, the trans community is awaiting it with trepidation. We believe the EHRC no longer meets the minimum international requirements of a top-tier national Human Rights institution. That’s why 18 trans-led and LGBT charities in the UK have supported our submission to the UN asking for a special review of the EHRC’s “A” rating. The public agrees: in just 48 hours, more than 10,000 people signed our petition to support that call. Our argument is simple. The UN has for years criticised the EHRC for its lack of independence. The government is involved in appointing EHRC commissioners, ministers hold annual reviews with the chair, the government controls EHRC funding, and it has no independent relationship with parliament. The risk this creates – that the EHRC will not act to promote and protect the rights of all its citizens, but instead will be swayed by personal whims and the politics of the day – has now become a reality. This does not appear to be an isolated occurrence. Our sister movements have in the past few years called out the EHRC for failing on key issues on race, on Islamophobia, and on disability rights. We all deserve better. We deserve a truly independent national human rights institution that puts people above politics and stands up for the rights of all. Human rights simply have to rise above the politics of the day. Trans rights may be in the firing line now, but failings in our national human rights body are a threat to us all. Nancy Kelley is the chief executive of StonewallName: The cursing ghost. Age: Dates back to 1789. Appearance: Wraith-like, white, abusive. Where do these appearances take place? In the Quantock Hills of Somerset, near a beauty spot called Dead Woman’s Ditch. Who’s in charge of naming the beauty spots of Somerset? Because it might be time for some fresh thinking. This one is said to be named after a murder that took place in the late 18th century. The victim, some believe, still haunts the place. What happens, exactly? A ghostly vision of a woman in white accosts visiting walkers. And puts curses on them? Well, actually it just tells them to “fuck off”. How terrifying and offensive. It first happened in 2020. According to contemporary reports in the Bristol Post, the “potty-mouthed spook” had been identified by an outfit called Ghost Hunters South West. Now, after a two-year hiatus, the ghost is back. And just as angry? Still very rude, apparently. Are ghosts getting more unpleasant generally? Perhaps – this week CCTV footage emerged allegedly showing a poltergeist pushing a full pint off a table at the oft-haunted Swan Inn in Dunstable, Bedfordshire. And there has also been some ghostly hair-pulling at the Shrubbery hotel in Ilminster, Somerset. Out of order. But is the woman in white Britain’s only swearing ghost? Apparently not: last month there were reports of a foul-mouthed spectre at the Adelphi in Liverpool, supposedly the UK’s most haunted hotel. This follows another spate of paranormal cussing on the same site last year. So it’s an actual thing, swearing ghosts? No, of course it isn’t. What do the local people around Dead Woman’s Ditch think about the sightings? For the most part they are less than impressed. “It all sounds a bit Scooby-Doo to me,” said one. Good point – has anyone checked the movements of the caretaker at the disused amusement park? I believe some meddling kids are on the case. What is it with all these ghost sightings: have we become more credulous of late? It seems we have. Reports of paranormal activity have rocketed in the last two years, as part of a general increase in “magical thinking”: conspiracies, superstition, etc. People are so stupid. I blame social media, and those microchips they put in the vaccine. It’s most likely caused by anxiety over Covid, and the stress associated with lockdowns and prolonged isolation. Well, I suppose I can tolerate a little superstitious nonsense as a symptom of a global pandemic. But I draw the line at bad language. Understood. Do say: “I ain’t afraid of no ghosts.” Don’t say: “That’s some spooky shit!”That’s me for today. Thanks for reading along. See you tomorrow. Bye! Curling: The Canadians negotiate between themselves until the last possible moment. It’s the draw, dropped carefully on the blue outer ring. Glukhov for the win, then. Right to left - they sweep hard, it looks good.... it is right on the button! The ROC claim the win over Canada in the extra end, by a margin of 7 to 6. That keeps the ROC in touch of a semi-final with a record of 4-4 with Canada dropping back to 5-3. Curling: I’ll stick with this extra end before setting off. ROC have the hammer but Canada have the shot; three stones to go. The Russian skip, Sergey Glukhov, drives with his penultimate stone to remove the guard - Canada take their time out. Will they set another guard? Or will they draw it in at the button? “The stats say draw,” says one voice from the team as they try and work through making life as difficult as possible for their opposing number with the final stone of the night. And before I wrap this up and say goodbye, don’t miss the best of today’s pictures from the brilliant photographers at these Beijing Winter Games. With all the medals decided for today, here’s the updated table. Norway, after another productive day on their cross-country skis, have now jumped to a big lead with 12 gold medals. Germany, after their clean sweep of the two-man bobsleigh, have nine of the best with the USA, after a slow start, now into third with seven. Curling: Canada with the final stone in regulation needing to turn one shot into two to take the ROC to an extra end! Brad Gushue is the skip and, after consulting with the coach, elects to go straight, threading past his own markers at the top of the house... brilliant! Two shots for Canada - they’re off to an extra end. Curling: Canada have the hammer for the final end. They need to pick up two points on the ROC here to take it to an extra end with stones all over the house. We’ll go back there as soon as Team GB wrap this up against Sweden, as they should any moment now with Bruce Mouat’s drive clearing the house of all red stones. Nice. Sweden have played their last shot wide, so Team GB gave the entire house to aim for to take the victory. Instead, he takes out the Swedish shot. Job done. That’s a big result for Bruce Mouat’s team, knocking off their undefeated opposition 7-6. Both teams now sit at 6-1 with two matches to play in the round robin stage and have formally qualified for the semi-finals and then the medal round. Nicely done. Curling: Eight stones left, the phony car continues with plenty of room in the house for both Sweden’s Niklas Edin and GB’s Bruce Mouat. Meanwhile on the other lane, China have seen off Norway 8-6 to win their third match of the competition. Ice Hockey: Canada’s men lead China 5-2 nearing the end of the second period, almost certain to advance into the final quarterfinal position in that tournament. Curling: Striaght over to the water cube for the final end of the top-of-the-table clash in the men’s curling, Team GB perfectly placed to knock off the undefeated Swedes if they can hold their nerve with the hammer here, already with a 7-5 lead. Around the grounds to the other matches, while we wait for that last end to begin: (9) Italy 10 v (5) USA 4 - final score (7) Norway 6 v (8) China 7 (6) ROC 6 v (3) Canada 4 Bobsleigh: Francesco Friedrich is a triple gold medallist! Never in doubt, they win the competition by half a second. It’s a clean sweep for Germany! The first time that has been achieved in this event - what a performance from the magnificent pilot. GOLD - Francesco Friedrich and Thornsten Margis (GER) 3:56:89 SILVER - Johannes Lochner and Florian Bauer (GER) 3:57:38 BRONZE - Christoph Hafer and Matthias Sommer (GER) 3:58:58 Bobsleigh: Clinical! Johannes Lochner and Florian Bauer do it easily with a 59.53, They confirm their silver but have given Francesco Friedrich and Thornsten Margis plenty of room to work with, only needing to break 60 seconds for gold. Go, go, go! Bobsleigh: Hafer ensures they will win a bronze at worst with a 59.70! Johannes Lochner and Florian Bauer, in the silver medal position, start half a second behind provisional gold - can they turn the pressure up with something special? They’ll need to break the track record again with 58.something. And here they go! Bobsleigh: 59.77 from Switzerland’s Michael Vogt - they take the lead but will it be enough to force any of the German teams off the podium? First up is Hafer, who moved from fourth to third with their penultimate run. No nation has ever taken gold, silver and bronze on this event, the TV caller tells me. Well, if any team is taking a clean sweep at the sliding centre it is these outstanding Germans. Bobsleigh: ROC and Austria both do enough to take the lead but neither blow the lights out, the latter completing the course in over a minute. Monaco’s turn with Rudy Rinaldi in a position to put some real pressure on the three German teams to come. And he does it very well indeed, a 59:59 – they now take the lead with just four teams to come. The grandstand finish?! The Swiss are next. Figure skating: Sakamoto (JAP) also opts for the double axel into the triple lutz - clean and clean. As are the triple flip/triple toe. Not a lot wrong with that to the naked eye. “A huge performance and it will be a huge score,” declares the commentator. “A beautiful routine to the gladiator theme.” 79.84 - that’s third place, just 0.4 away from second and a couple of marks away from the leader Valieva. And that’s the end of the short programme. After the bobsleigh, I’ll return to the top ten standings before the free skate on Thursday. Bobsleigh: Seven pairs to go! The Russians, who dropped from third to seventh in their penultimate run, are next to go. We’ll be straight back over there as soon as Kaori Sakamoto has completed her short routine - the final skater in the women’s figure skating. Figure skating: Time for the world champion and the third Russian of this final group, Anna Shcherbakova. Just a double axel for her instead of the troublesome triple to begin - easy, nice. Triple flip, perfect again. Combination jumps, triple lutz into triple toe - bang, bang! “Her make or break combination,” says the TV caller. “Immaculate!” From there, to the finish line with elegant spins and and a precise step sequence. “That’s the program of the night!” We might have new leader here; over to the judges. “The timing, the precision, the joy. For heaven’s sake, fabulous!” But she doesn’t go to the top: 80.20 moves her into second, two marks behind Valieva. Figure skating: Three to go, the second Russian loaded with expectation, Alexandra Trusova. And she’s on her back with the triple axel straight away! It’s the undoing of all of them at this stage of proceedings. The triple flip is better; the combination spin is exquisite. Triple lutz/triple toe - sticks them both. Spins and steps to finish, not a foot out of place. Enough for second, even after the fall? Maybe not – she’s been docked for an under-rotation as well. 74.60, into second it is, some seven marks behind the leader Valieva. Curling: progress scores before we wait for the next round of judges’ scores in the figure skating - seven ends down, three to go: (1) Sweden 3 v (2) Great Britain 5 (9) Italy 6 v (5) USA 4 (7) Norway 4 v (8) China 7 (6) ROC 4 v (3) Canada 3 Figure skating: Young You is on fire to begin, making the triple axel Valieva missed look easy. From there, the lutz/toe are a piece of cake. Now for the triple flip - tidy, landing just inside the walls. Nothing will compare to the Russians steps and spins but the Korean has completed her task here in style. Uh oh, reflection, the TV commentators believe the triple axel might be just short of the required rotation - yep, it’s a downgrade. The judges judge her harshly, 70.34 putting her into third position but 12 behind Valieva before the free skate component a couple of nights from now. Figure skating: The TV commentator wants to stress that he believes Kamila Valieva isn’t to blame for what is happening to her but that’s a discussion we can pause for now while the 15-year-old magician takes the ice. Triple axel to begin... and she doesn’t nail it - a slide upon landing - nobody saw that coming. She recovers quickly with the triple flip and her brilliant combinations. Clean with the triple lutz/triple before the spins to finish, which are quite glorious. She’ll be going into the lead, we’re assured, but by how far? 82.16 - she’s put a gap of nine points between her and the previous leader. Figure skating: Karen Chen (USA) is the first to go, the Californian 22-year-old. A lovely combination to begin - triple lutz into triple toe. There’s the double axel, into the spins - nice. Oooh! The triple loop is a bridge too far - she’s on the ice, that hurts. A great start but the deductions are coming. “What a shame!” says the TV caller. “She’ll be out of medal contention, she’ll be way, way back.” 64.11 is the score, enough for eighth. Now, find a telly, it’s time for Kamila. Figure skating: Here come the fifth and final group of six to warm up for their short program routines. Kamila Valieva, the 15-year-old in hot water, receives a very supportive ovation from the crowd who are in when her name is read out - she’ll take the ice second. Anna Shcherbaokova (ROC) is second last to go, the world champion. Bobsleigh: Three runs down, 20 teams left! Teams from Italy, China, The Netherlands, Korea, Not Russia, Austria, USA, Trinidad and Tobago, Brazil and Jamaica say goodbye at this stage. We aren’t far away from the business end, which will be in reverse order. So, we’ll have to wait to very end for the three German pairs, sitting in the three medal positions with this fourth and final run to come. Ice Hockey: In the first period, Canada are already 2-0 up against the winless Chinese team. This should and will be an easy victory to put the Canadians into the quarter-finals of the men’s competition. Curling: Sweden have are in position to gain one point with two stones to go in the fifth - can Bruce Mouat, Scotland’s favourite son, knock it out of position to make life difficult for his opposing number? He opts for a wide draw, left to right, and is happy to close off the hole to - in theory - block Sweden’s route to a second shot with the final shot of the end. It works: GB are 4-2 up after five. The Daily Briefing is in! A must-read every day of these Winter Games, subscribe here to have it delivered to your inbox. Bobsleigh: Some more detail on Team GB’s crash. If you’re just jumping in, both Brad Hall and Nick Gleeson are fine. There are four teams to go in the third heat and then its to the fourth and final run - medal time. As it happens, the British pair are still in 13th spot (the crash was right at the end) so they get another dart later on as a member of the top 20, so long as their sled is up to it. Curling: Every time I hear Bruce Mouat calling the play behind one of his stones, I want The Just Joans to come on and provide the soundtrack. Sweden have the hammer again, early in the fifth end. Curling: Team GB are 3-1 up, deep into the fourth end, with the hammer - which means Bruce Mouat has the final stone. The Swedes opt to post a guard at the top of the house before moving into shot with their final stone. Over to Bruce, who has the yellow stones with the Swedish on the reds - dare I say it, that’s going to cause a little bit of confusion. He plays a draw, they sweep it hard - the line looks good... it’s to the button. Tidy curling. Team GB lead 4-1 after four. In case you missed it, a dramatic wrong turn in the nordic combined. He’ll never live it down, poor thing. Norway still won a gold medal in the event, of course. Norway’s Jarl Magnus Riiber has had a Winter Olympics in Beijing to forget. Having tested positive for Covid he has spent two weeks in isolation, unable to train, and was only released on Monday. Cleared to compete today in the Nordic combined large hill/10km he put himself well in contention for a medal. Having recorded the longest and highest-scoring ski jump earlier in the day, he set off first for the cross-country element with a 44-second time advantage over the rest of the field. And then he took a wrong turn. Unfamiliar with the course, he went the wrong way. He had to turn around, but the time taken virtually wiped out his entire lead, and he eventually faded to finish in eighth place. Bobsleigh: No surprises after the poor start for Not Russia, back from third to seventh with one run to go, Germany currently occupying all three spots on the provisonal podium. 17 teams down, 13 to go. From there, the top 20 will get a final run to decide the medals. Curling: Four matches tonight in the men’s tenth round-robin session. Here are the progress scores, with the team’s position coming into this in brackets. A superb start for GB after two ends. (1) Sweden 0 v (2) Great Britain 3 (9) Italy 3 v (5) USA 2 (7) Norway 1 v (8) China 3 (6) ROC 1 v (3) Canada 1 Bobsleigh: Team GB crash! Brad Hall and Nick Gleeson are both fine, and they’ve crossed the line, albeit with the sled on its side. “Tough times and a tough watch,” says the BBC commentator. “They need to re-group here for the four-man competition later in the week.” Figure skating: Three groups down, 12 skaters to go at Capital Stadium. From here we’ll see all three superstar Russians, including Kamila Valierva, two Americans and two Japanese athletes. Aerial skiing: Before we move on from Genting Park, the six jumpers who made it through from the second men’s qualifying group: Oleksandr Okipniuk (UKR) 125.00 Pirmin Werner (SUI) 123.45 Ilia Burov (ROC) 120.36 Stanislav Nitkin (ROC) 119.47 Justin Schoenfeld (USA) 105.88 Stanislau Hladchenka (BLR) 115.49 They join the following six from the first group in tomorrow’s final: Qi Guanpu (CHN) 127.88 Jia Zongyang (CHN) 125.67 Noe Roth (SUI) 123.08 Eric Loughran (USA) 121.24 Oleksandr Abramenko (UKR) 120.36 Christopher Lillis (USA) 119.91 Bobsleigh: The ROC’s Rostislav Gaitiukevich and Aleksei Laptev have a chance to jump to second if they nail this but they don’t - 59.8. In turn, the third German duo, steered by Christoph Hafer, can slot into the bronze medal position. And they do! A 59.51 is enough for them to leapfrog Not Russia, ahead by 0.24. And the Austrian sled, with pilot Benjamin Maier, has snuck past the ROC too - by his 59.64 getting them into fourth by 0.01 of a second. Wow. And now the Swiss too - Michael Vogt now into fourth. And now Monaco! So, the top seven - the only real medal hopes - win one run to go: 1. Francesco Friedrich and Thornsten Margis (GER) 2:57:37 2. Johannes Lochner and Florian Bauer (GER) 2:57:85 3. Christoph Hafer and Matthias Sommer (GER) 2:58:88 4. Michael Vogt and Sandro Michael (SUI) 2:59:06 5. Benjamin Maier and Michael Vogt (AUT) 2:59:11 6. Rudy Rinaldi and Vain Morris (MON) 2:59:09 7. Rostislav Gaitiukevich and Aleksei Laptev (ROC) 2:59:12 Bobsleigh: What a start Francesco Friedrich and Thorsten Margis, our German leaders the first team under 59 to break the track record and extend their lead! It’s a different story for Johannes Lochner, piloting the second German team, clocking a sluggish 59.32. They’re now 0.48 behind with one run to go - that’s a considerable margin. Freestyle aerials: Two men to go in the second qualifying heat. Wang Xindi (CHN) first, he needs 115.5 to get into sixth. And he’s well short, a 98. To Ilia Burov, who is already in sixth, to complete the night at Genting Snow Park and he hits it nicely; 120.36 earns him third place. I’ll have top six for you shortly. Back to bobsleigh! Curling: We’re also away in the night’s curling - session ten of the men’s round-robin. A huge opportunity for Team GB, who can pull level with Sweden at the top of the table if they knock them off here. Bobsleigh: To the sliding centre too for the final two runs of the men’s two-man event. In the third heat, they go in the order that they finished at the end of the second run, which means the three German pairs - first, second and fourth - are coming up shortly. Figure skating: I’ll be back to check in on the third group of the women’s short program in a moment, but, en route to that, check out Sean Ingle’s analysis piece on the Kamila Valieva farrago. Aerial skiing: Team GB’s Lloyd Wallace won’t make the top 12 for the final tomorrow with a best jump of 108.41. Miha Fontaine, who was crucial to the Canadian team that won bronze in the team event, is clinging on to that sixth qualifying spot for now but there are still six men to jump a second time - he could miss out. Gosh, but I’m burying the lede here: Maxim Burov (ROC) is in ninth and won’t make the cut despite winning four World Cup events in 2021-22. Aerial skiiing: We have our six qualifiers from the first men’s group. Qi Guanpu (CHN) 127.88 Jia Zongyang (CHN) 125.67 Noe Roth (SUI) 123.08 Eric Loughran (USA) 121.24 Oleksandr Abramenko (UKR) 120.36 Christopher Lillis 119.91 (USA) A very close call for Lillis, falling in by half a point. He was the man who won gold for Team USA on the team event on Friday. This six, plus the next from the second group, make the finals tomorrow. Figure skating: While we wait for group three, their warm ups are underway now, let’s check in with the latest on the Kamila Valieva story. She’s set to skate second in the final group tonight. Kamila Valieva’s legal team has claimed that her positive drugs test may have come from a contaminated glass of water that contained traces of her grandfather’s heart medication. Figure skating: The news for Team GB and Australian fans isn’t any better, still in 9th and 10th from the 11 skaters to take the ice so far. The five skaters guaranteed to progress to the top 24 are: Anastasia Gubanova (GEO) Mariah Bell (USA) Mana Kawabe (JPN) Olga Mikutina (AUT) Madeline Schizas (CAN) China’s Zhu Yi to complete the group and makes an early error with her triple flip bit keeps her feet. She’s racked up the technical points from that point forward - this will be close. The TV commentary notes that she copped an awful time on social media after the team event. 53.44 - enough for ninth but she won’t get through. Aerial skiing: Popping my head into the men’s aerials and it’s the Chinese pair, Qi Guangpu and Jia Zongyang - both part of China’s silver medal team in the mixed teams event - who have landed the best jumps so far and will advance to the finals tomorrow. Figure skating: Over to Natasha McKay from Team GB and it’s disappointment here too - she needed to be flawless with a more rudamentary routine but hit the ice with her first jump. She got through the rest unscathed but it’s likely she’ll be in a similar position to Craine after the judges have had their say. Yep - 52.54. So she overtakes the Australian in sixth place but only three from the bottom. A nervous wait to see if she can sneak into the top 24. Figure skating: A dreadful start for Kailani Craine (AUS), going for a double instead of the required triple - that won’t score, the commentator tells us. She backs it up with a pair of triple loops; that’s better. Skating to a haunting version of Heart of Glass by Blondie, she clears her doule axel without fuss. “But I’m afraid the damage has been done,” the TV caller notes of that initial jump. “You can only put it down to nerves that happened at the start,” he adds as Craine is clearly nearly in tears leaving the ice knowing that she’s coughed up six points at the very start of her routine. Only 24 of the 30 athletes in this competition will progress to the free skate on Thursday - will the judges look after her for the clean jumps that followed? “Thank you to everyone at home for staying up late and watching,” she says as we wait for the scores. It’s not good, 49.93 puts her in second last place - it’s difficult to see her making the cut. Figure skating: The second of five groups of six are preparing to take the ice, chasing the score of Japan’s Mana Kawabe who posted a 62.69. Team GB’s Natasha McKay is the second to skate - the Scotish five-footer has been national champion in five of the last six years. But it’s Kailani Craine who is the first to go, the 23-year-old Australian, from Newcastle in New South Wales, competing at her second Olympics having won the national title on six occasions. Cheers, Luke. Brilliant stuff, what a finish there - Norway do it again! Forward into the 11th night session of these Beijing Winter Olympics and a couple of the busiest hours of the Games so far. Initially, our focus will be at Capital Stadium where Kamila Valieva will capture all the attention as the short program continues in the women’s figure skating short program. From the 30 in the running, the top three are all Russian - Anna Shcherbakova was the 2021 World Cup champion and Alexandra Trusova is just as likely to end up on the podium when the competition concludes on Thursday. The other medal event on the agenda tonight is the final two runs of the two-man bobsleigh, the penultimate of which begins in just over an over. As has been the case at the sliding centre over the last week, Germans are all over the medal positions – three pair in the top four. Leading the way are Francesco Friedrich and Thorsten Margis, who set track record to get the party started yesterday. But they were shaded in the second run by their countrymen Johannes Lochner and Florian Bauer, the duo who were second in the world last year. It might be a race in two with Rostislav Gaitiukevich and Aleksei Laptev from the ROC currently in third trying to spoil that. The 25 competitors in the men’s freestyle aerials are just now beginning their first qualifying round – that group will be reduced to an even dozen for the medal rounds tomorrow night. Ukranian Oleksandr Abramenko returns having won gold in 2018, likewise Jia Zongyang (CHN) who took silver in that event. However, it has been Russians dominating the World Cup events since the start of the pandemic, with Maxim Burov successful four times in those outings and looking the man to beat at Genting Snow Park. For Team GB, a fantastic opportunity at the Water Cube for the tenth session of the men’s curling – a top of the table clash against the undefeated Sweden. If Bruce Mouat can skipper a victory tonight, they will pull level with the Swedes at 6-1 and will almost certainly progress alongside them to the medal matches later in the week. And in a couple of hours from now at the National Indoor Stadium, in the men’s Ice Hockey, Canada and China are playing off for one quarter final spot. When considering the hosts went winless in the group stage, the Canadians really should get the job done there. Alright, let’s get busy. Hit me up throughout the session with an email or a tweet. It’s been a manic few hours of action, and it’s time for me to hand over to Adam Collins. Bye! Wow! That was some race. Joergen Graabak finds his way back from over two minutes down to overtake the previous leaders and grab another gold for Norway, this time in the Nordic combined – men’s Gundersen Large Hill/10km. And it’s a one-two on the podium for Norway with Jens Lurås Ofterbro wing silver and Akito Watabe of Japan eventually beaten into bronze. Riiber (who has been in Covid isolation) started the skiiing with a 44sec lead, following the ski jump, but he went the wrong way at the start of the first lap and eventually finishes eighth! What drama. Nordic combined – men’s Gundersen Large Hill/10km: Riiber looks spent. He’s dropped down to fifth. Lamparter leads! Watabe second! Nordic combined – men’s Gundersen Large Hill/10km: Confusion reigns. The live standings on the Olympics site went haywire for a while and had Geiger in the lead. Watabe is in fact fourth behind Lamparter (Austria), Riiber (Norway) and Faisst (Germany). The confusion and excitement was only added to by Riiber going the wrong way at the start of the first lap. Nordic combined – men’s Gundersen Large Hill/10km: Akito Watabe of Japan leads the way. Riiber (Norway) second, Faisst (Germany) in third ... Denis Oswald, the International Olympic Committee’s permanent chair of the disciplinary commission, has defended their decision to allow the Russian skater to compete in the individual competition in Beijing. Watch the video: Women’s figure skating – short program: Mana Kawabe (Japan) has registered the score to beat, 62.69. Men’s ice hockey: Into the third period and Switzerland still hold a 3-1 lead against Czech Republic in their playoff encounter. The cross-country skiing in the Nordic combined – men’s Gundersen Large Hill/10km is about to begin. But why is it called ‘Gundersen’? Wiki has the answer: “The Gundersen method is a method in the Nordic combined developed by Gunder Gundersen, a Nordic combined athlete from Norway, that was first used in the 1980s. This technique turned the cross-country skiing part of the Nordic combined from a points-based system, where all athletes ski in an interval start manner and whoever earned the most points with the ski jumping part of the Nordic combined won the event, to a pursuit race for the cross country skiing part where whoever crossed the finish line first in the cross country skiing part of the Nordic combined event won the competition.” Exciting format! Good work, Gunder. The organisers of the Paris 2024 Olympics said on Tuesday they want to make sure the doping case of Russian teenage figure skater Kamila Valieva, which has rocked the Beijing Olympics, does not cast a shadow on their own Summer Games. “Paris 2024 is 100% committed to the fight against doping and is working in close coordination with all stakeholders to ensure the fairness of the competitions in 2024 and the protection of athletes,” they said in a statement. “We must use this situation [the Valieva case] to make sure that it does not happen again. Our top priority will be the development and execution of an effective anti-doping program that protects the rights of athletes and the integrity of competitions.” Valieva, 15, has been cleared to further compete at the Beijing Olympics after the Court of Arbitration for Sport (Cas) ruled in favour of the Russian Anti-Doping Agency (Rusada)’s decision to lift her provisional ban after a positive drug test that was revealed at the Games, prompting outrage from athletes and officials around the world. (Reuters) The women’s short program figure skating has begun. Anastasiia Shabotova, of Ukraine, has got things up and running and registered a score of 48.68, and is clearly far from pleased with her performance. There are 30 athletes – the top 24 qualify – and all eyes will be on Kamila Valieva, of the ROC team, who yesterday was cleared by the Court of Arbitration for Sport to continue at these Games, despite failing a doping test at Christmas. Valieva is 26th on the list of 30 skaters, so won’t be up for a while yet. Speaking of big air, the BBC are currently revisiting the snowboarding contest, when the 20-year-old Reira Iwabuchi of Japan came close to landing the first-ever triple cork in a women’s competition. It was an astonishing attempt. Anna Gasser (Austria) won gold, retaining her title, Zoi Sadowski-Synnott (New Zealand) took silver and Kokomo Murase (Japan) won bronze. But Iwabuchi (who finished fourth) was the talk of the town, and was mobbed by her fellow competitors after nearly pulling off the historic trick. “She went for progression and not for the medal today,” Gasser said of Iwabuchi. “She could have played it safe and maybe been on the podium, but she went all out. I hope she gets the same attention from this ride that she would have got for a medal.” You can keep up with all the latest – live scores, schedule and results – right here: Can you actually imagine skiing (or boarding) down this ludicrously steep ramp, at top speed, and being launched into high into the air? I have to be honest, I don’t think I’d fancy it. GOAL! Switzerland bang in a power-play effort from Denis Malgin and it’s 3-1 in the men’s ice hockey. Just at the moment the men’s ice hockey is the solitary live event. Switzerland continue to lead Czech Republic 2-1, as they battle for a berth in the last eight. Coming up soon: women’s singles short program figure skating, the cross-country skiing in the Nordic combined, men’s Gundersen large hill/10km, freestyle skiing – men’s aerials qualifying ... men’s curling, bobsleigh, and MORE men’s ice hockey. Phew. To paraphrase Mario Balotelli, why is it always them? Was it not enough that Russia corrupted the 2014 Winter Games in Sochi with a devilish scheme that involved Federal Security Service agents passing steroid-riddled urine samples through a mouse hole before swapping them with clean urine? The act was so devious that the International Olympic Committee president, Thomas Bach, later called it “a shocking and unprecedented attack on the integrity of sports and on the Olympic Games”. Norway, Germany and the USA are first, second and third in the medal table respectively. Nil points for Great Britain but there is still time. When Sturla Holm Lægreid handed over to Tarjei Boe in Tuesday’s Olympic biathlon relay he was sure Norway’s hopes of gold were gone, but a collapse by Eduard Latypov and a stunning final leg by Vetle Sjåstad Christiansen delivered a stunning victory. While Latypov, representing the Russian Olympic Committee, missed four of his five shots on his final visit to the range, Christiansen’s five-shot salvo was perfect and he powered home to take the gold medal. “I was so pumped up when he left the shooting, I was screaming with all I had because it was such an incredible moment for me, to watch him go out there in the lead and the secure the gold,” an elated Lægreid said. There was little to suggest a Norwegian win when Lægreid handed over to the elder Boe brother in seventh place, more than 40 seconds behind the ROC team, but Tarjei and his brother Johannes battled back to get close enough for Christiansen to exploit Latypov’s wayward shooting. “We weren’t really in the gold fight in the beginning, but when the Russian started with these mistakes, there was a chance for the gold,” Lægreid said. “It was still unbelievable to watch Vetle hit every target in the last standing shoot and just go for it.” The Norwegians are enjoying a stellar Games at the National Biathlon Centre, picking up five gold, one silver and four bronze medals, and Lagreid said the team would be celebrating. “We have to suit up tonight and maybe we will have something else for dinner, other than pasta and water,” he said. Men’s ice hockey: Killian Mottet restored Switzerland’s lead against Czech Republic. The Swiss lead 2-1 in the second period of their playoff. Switzerland’s Mathilde Gremaud soared to gold in the Olympic women’s freeski slopestyle final after holding off another last-gasp charge by Eileen Gu, the American-born emerging superstar representing China, who settled for silver by the narrowest of margins but stayed on course for a historic treble at the Beijing Games. Italy’s Sofia Goggia won a remarkable silver medal in the women’s downhill just three weeks after partially tearing a knee ligament in a crash in Cortina. The reigning Olympic champion revealed she battled through the pain barrier to take second place, 0.16sec behind Corinne Suter of Switzerland, with Goggia’s compatriot Nadia Delgado taking bronze. “The path to come here after the crash in Cortina was tough, but I had no room for doubts,” said Goggia. “I really did believe that I could make it, and this is why I did it.” Goggia established an early lead and was only eclipsed by Suter, despite revealing she was far from fully fit after damaging her anterior cruciate ligament. The American Mikaela Shiffrin’s difficult Beijing Olympics continued as she finished 18th. “This has been really tough on me mentally,” said Goggia. “I took painkillers before the race. It was really painful at the top of the course, but it was for less than a second. I would have loved to have had 80 per cent of my strength. Of course it is getting better every day, but I cannot bend the knee and I can barely do a squad. But skiing in the last days was pretty much OK.” (PA) Kamila Valieva’s legal team has claimed that her positive drugs test may have come from a contaminated glass of water that contained traces of her grandfather’s heart medication. Speaking after the daily media briefing in Beijing, International Olympic Committee member Denis Oswald confirmed the 15-year-old Russian’s explanation for her positive test for the banned angina drug trimetazidine was “contamination which happened with a product her grandfather was taking”. Canada won gold in the women’s speed skating team pursuit after a mishap by the Japanese team cost them the top prize. The defending champions Japan started strong as they raced at the National Speed Skating Oval, keeping a steady half-second lead ahead of their Canadian rivals. But a slip by Japan’s Nana Tagaki, who was third in the train as they coasted towards a gold medal with the finish line in sight, cost them their title. She lost her balance as the team sped around the last corner and banged into the trackside wall. Her teammates slowed as they realised she had fallen, raising their hands in despair before crossing the finish line 11 seconds behind the Canadians, who finished the race in an Olympic record time of 2min 53.44sec. Tagaki could be seen putting her hands together in apology towards her teammates as tears streamed down her face. The Canadians cheered after crossing the finish line and looking up to see that they had clinched their country’s first gold medal in the event. Their win marks the first podium since Canada won silver in Turin 2006. The fancied Netherlands team, which counts gold medallists Irene Schouten and Ireen Wüst in their ranks, won the bronze medal after crashing out in the semi-finals in a race they lost to Canada. (Reuters) Women’s round robin curling: Switzerland have closed out a 9-6 win against USA. ROC beat China 11-5 and Sweden beat Denmark 9-3. As I mentioned earlier, Great Britain defeated Japan 10-4 with a convincing performance that only required eight ends. That all means that Switzerland top the round robin (P 7 W6), Sweden are second (P 7 W5). Great Britain, Japan and USA are all played seven, won four, with Great Britain sitting third in the table on their head-to-head record. Great Britain have two matches remaining, against China and ROC, and they know if they win both they will progress. Men’s ice hockey: Czech Republic lead Switzerland 1-0 in the first period of their playoff match. Lukas Klok got the goal. His teammate Jan Kovar has just got two minutes in the sin-bin for a cynical foul, slamming an opponent into the boards. “Boarding”, they call it. Nordic combined – men’s Gundersen large hill/10km: Jarl Magnus Riiber of Norway is the pacesetter, his jump of 142m garnering 139.8pts. Kristjan Ilves (Estonia) and Ryota Yamamoto (Japan) are second and third respectively before the cross-country skiing part of the event, which is coming up in a couple of hours. The Norwegians hold off the ROC team in the final: 3 min 38.07sec is their time, with the Russians 2.39sec behind. Like a well-oiled machine, Norway defend their title. That’s a first Olympic medal for the ROC team in this event, so well done them. Dave Hogg tweets to point out that Miho Tagaki of Japan has now won three silver speed skating medals at these Games. She’s finished second in the 1,500m, 500m and now the team pursuit. An outstanding performance but no doubt she’d have loved a gold medal. Men’s team pursuit speed skating: the USA take a comfortable win against the Netherlands in the bronze-medal race. Not a good day at the office for the Netherlands, 2.81sec off the pace. Norway roared back to pull off a stunning win in the men’s 4 x 7.5km biathlon relay at the following a sensational collapse on the final shoot by Eduard Latypov of the Russian Olympic Committee (ROC). The middle two legs of the race looked like a victory parade for the ROC team, but a disastrous series of misses by Latypov destroyed their chances of gold, allowing Vetle Sjaastad Christiansen to swoop in and claim the win for Norway. He crossed the line 27.4sec ahead of Quentin Fillon Maillet of France, with Latypov coming home 17.9sec further back for a disappointing bronze medal finish. Freezing temperatures of -15C prompted organisers to start the race two and a half hours earlier than planned, and the competition began in blazing afternoon sunshine with blustery winds increasing the chill in the air. In all, 21 teams of four set out, with each racer skiing three 2.5km laps and shooting twice, once from the prone position and once from standing. The field remained tight through the first leg, with the top dozen teams skiing into the second shoot with only a few seconds between them, but the Norwegians soon found themselves well down the pack after an indifferent performance by Sturla Holm Laegreid. The Russians took command over the middle two legs of the race, Alexander Loginov and Maxim Tsvetkov taking their time on the range and preserving their lead. Latypov, a bronze medallist in the pursuit race, set his sights on bringing home the gold. That dream was dashed, however, as he missed a scarcely-believable four of his five shots to leave his team’s hopes in tatters and Christiansen sailed past into the lead on the final lap, with no intention of relinquishing it. Wrapped up in hugs by his teammates after crossing the finish line, he delivered Norway’s fifth biathlon gold of the Games and by far the most thrilling. (Philip O’Connor, Reuters) That is so painful for the Japan team and they are distraught, as you would be ... years of work and it comes down to a mistake on the final corner of the gold-medal race. Ivanie Blondin, Valerie Maltais and Isabelle Weidemann of Canada, needless to say, are jubilant. They were 0.3sec down on Japan but they take gold and in Olympic record time: 2min 53.44sec. Japan were seconds away from retaining their title, speeding around the rink, and metres away from glory ... but Nana Tagaki, at the back of the group of three, crashes on the final corner and Canada win! Incredible! Tagaki lost her balance, desperately tried to hold it together, but fell and slammed into the protective barriers at the side of the ice as her teammates sped over the finish line. Speed skating – women’s team pursuit: Netherlands win the bronze-medal race against ROC in a time of 2min 56sec. Another Olympic medal in the bag for the remarkable Ireen Wüst. The gold-medal race will be contested by Canada and Japan, and is coming up any second now. GB curler Vicky Wright talks to the BBC after the 10-4 win against Japan: “We knew what we had to do, we just had to go out there and win ... we’ve still got a long way to go, two wins needed to go through.” Curling: Great Britain’s women have just wrapped up a 10-4 round robin win against Japan. Japan throw the towel in after eight ends. That result means Great Britain can qualify if they keep winning ... their next match is against China, and their final date of the round robin is again the ROC team. Thanks Emma and hello everyone. It’s all going on today: speed skating, curling, Nordic combined skiing, the lot. What is Nordic combined skiing, exactly? It’s a mix of cross-country skiing and ski jumping. Here they are again, this time in the flesh. And now I’m off and handing you over to my colleague Luke McLaughlin. Go well. Behold some (dramatic) 4x7.5km relay results: Gold: Norway Silver: France +27.4 Bronze: ROC +45.3 Biathlon really is a slog, isn’t it. All sweat and tears. And grimacing, if you’re Philipp Nawrath and trying in vain to squeeze Germany into a podium place only to finish fourth. This has been an intriguing race. The ROC led until about six minutes to go in the final leg when Eduard Latypov slipped to third place as Norway’s Vetle Sjåstad Christiansen surged from fourth into the lead and held firm all the way home with a 10 out of 10. A remarkable turnaround for the Norwegians, who keep winning shiny things in the biathlon. For their efforts they earn this exquisitely kitsch Photoshop job from the sport’s governing body: Biathlon: Did someone say Johannes Thingnes Boe? He’s still going, is the Norwegian. Going, specifically, for a third gold at these Games. He has already two golds and a bronze and is now much of the way through the men’s 4x7.5km relay. As it stands, Norway lead with France and ROC closely in tow. To the curling! Team GB hold a 7-3 lead over Japan at half-time in the women’s round-robin session. The US are neck and neck 3-3 with Switzerland. I have gone down a google rabbithole searching for historical curling photos on Scotland’s frozen lochs. There are some good ones here: https://www.scottishcurling.org/curling-history/1929-grand-match-results/ Freestyle skiing: Three Americans are into the men’s slopestyle final after Nick Goepper (third), Alex Hall (fifth) and Colby Stevenson (sixth) posted strong first runs, which means the US is still in with a shot of sweeping the podium as the country did at Sochi 2014. Goepper, who won bronze in at those Games and has since claimed a silver in Pyeongchang, will seek to complete his collection with a gold. Swiss world champion, Andri Ragettli, qualified first in front of the Netherlands’ Birk Ruud, who has already won big air gold in Beijing. New Zealander Ben Barclay will compete in his first Olympic final on debut but fellow Kiwi Finn Bilous missed the cut. Speed skating: Canada have upset the Netherlands in the semi-finals of the women’s team pursuit, reeling in and then finishing 0.98 seconds faster than their rivals to guarantee themselves the gold or silver medal. They will face Japan in Final A while the Dutch team will meet ROC in Final B, after the Russians came in 6.99 seconds slower than Japan. Both will take place from 4.22pm local time (8.22am GMT/7.22pm AEDT). The men’s semi-finals are happening right now and the Netherlands have missed out on a chance for silver or gold here too after losing to Team Norway, who will go for gold against the ROC. The Russians have absolutely smoked their semi against the US in an Olympic-record 3:36.61 (+0.44). Hockey: Slovakia have seen off Germany 4-0 in the men’s qualification play-offs to set up a quarter-final meeting with the US, while Denmark have beaten Latvia 3-2 and will meet the Russian Olympic Committee team. Still to come today is Czech Republic v Switzerland (winner to play Finland) and Canada v China (winner to play Sweden). Freestyle skiing: The men’s slopestyle qualifiers are under way. Said qualifiers do not feature Britain’s James Woods, who said he was “full of painkillers and strapped up in bed” because of a back injury. Antoine Adelisse of France is the other competitor who did not start. Switzerland’s Andri Ragettli is in plum position to qualify first thanks to a second run of 85.08 while Birk Ruud of Norway sits second with 83.96 and American Nick Goepper third with 82.51. Su is pretty happy. And why wouldn’t you be? He already had a silver in the slopestyle and now he’s added a gold in the big air. Su started snowboarding when he was three, which probably says something about his centre of gravity. Meanwhile, Parrot’s bronze means Canada has now won six snowboarding medals – one gold, one silver and four bronze. Gold: Su Yiming – 182.50 Silver: Mons Røisland – 171.75 Bronze: Max Parrot – 170.25 Hiroaki Kunitake displaces Red Gerard with an 84.00 which, despite his middling middle run of 50.25, brings his total to 166.25 and is good enough for third ... for now. It’s Su, Parrot, Kunitake. Van der Velden crashes on his final run but Røisland rises under pressure. He puts out a very similar trick to one by Gerard earlier on and the landing is perfect. He needs early 80s, and he looks nervous. It’s an 82.50! Su is hugging his coach in celebration from the gate before his final run. He knows he doesn’t need to do anything – he’s done it already. This run is basically a victory run and the 33.00 he yields makes not one bit of difference. Parrot has just completed his third run – a frontside triple 1620 and is waiting nervously for his score. It’s a 76.25, which is not going to better Su, who is almost certainly going to win gold at this point. Otsuka is out of the running, after a front foot-heavy land that is not a land and earns him a 33.75. Combined score is 128.75 and he’s back in ninth. It’s also not good news for McMorris, who went hard but fell and ended up with a 33.25. The US’s Gerard Redmond is sitting in third on 165.75 with a few to go. Yikes! Otsuka has well and truly recovered from his first-up disappointment with a 95.00. I repeat, 95.00. If numbers could be capped I would cap it but this is the highest single score thus far. Parrot has almost matched him with a 94.00. He knew it was good as soon as he hit the ground on a cab 1800, and let’s us know by shaking his fist. He and Otsuka are back in gold-medal contention. Speaking of McMorris, he went for the quad but his last rotation came up ever so slightly short and he was flat on his back before he knew it. That’ll be a 21.00. Some other cracks are starting to appear following that flawless group of first runs, including Marcus Kleveland of Norway attempts a mystery trick even the commentators are struggling to figure out and after a swivel and a swerve lands it, but comes away with a 62.25. Still good enough for fourth place. Su, meanwhile, has put down a 93.00 for a combined score of 182.50 with one run remaining. This kid. This 17-year-old who has just done five 360s in the air and landed it so easily. So neatly. How will anyone beat that total? There is Su, then daylight, then Mons Røisland. Here’s Bryan Armen Graham’s report on the women’s slopestyle final: Switzerland’s Mathilde Gremaud soared to gold in the Olympic women’s freeski slopestyle final after holding off another last-gasp charge by Eileen Gu, the American-born emerging superstar representing China who settled for silver by the narrowest of margins but stayed on course for a historic treble at the Beijing Games. In that first run, apart from those who bombed out (Otsuka, Max Parrot, Sven Thorgren) all scores were more than 80.00. That is some special kind of twisty turny craziness. Parrot, who won gold in the slopestyle under some controversy, still has plenty of time to post a big score. For those who missed it, Parrot’s compatriot and bronze medallist in that event, Mark McMorris, claimed judging errors meant Parrot was mistakenly awarded gold. Fans of silver medallist Su were also a little riled up. McMorris has since apologised. Men’s snowboard big air: Hello! While Beau was finishing up with the women’s downhill I was taking a peek at the start of the big air finals and there’s been a big early score with Team USA’s Chris Corning opening with a 92.0 – and that’s against a strong field. After the first run, local Su Yiming (89.50) and Norway’s Mons Røisland (89.25) sit second and third. Japan’s Takeru Otsuka, who completed one of the most technical runs going in qualifying, failed to land his first attempt. Pretty good day for the land of clocks, lakes and many languages. Suter had to go big to beat Sofia Goggia, and she nailed it with a strong final section. That’s a 1-2 for the reigning world champion and Olympic champion. The bronze is more of a surprise -- Italy’s Nadia Delago has never been on a World Cup podium. Mikaela Shiffrin finished 18th but showed some aptitude for doing well enough on the downhill phase to contend in the upcoming combined event. We get a view of Nick Goepper’s family watching in Utah. The dog is walking around oblivious to the excitement and tension. Goepper already has two medals in this event -- bronze in 2014, silver in 2018. He also has four X Games gold medals. He’s still just 27. And he uses the house instead of the neighboring rails. He takes another line through the jumps. This is beyond description. If this isn’t in first place, I have no idea how to judge anything. I’m not even sure I can dress myself properly. He’s ... second, with an 82.51. OK, that’s not too unreasonable. Birk Ruud holds first, and that’s fine. Team GB star James Woods did not start. Not being able to move without pain is probably a bad thing ahead of a freestyle skiing event. Woods, who competed earlier in big air and took 30th, has taken fifth and fourth in this event in the last two Olympics and won the 2019 world championship. Now I see the reason for the delay in the women’s downhill -- the medical crew is taking France’s Camille Cerutti off the course. Course workers also need to work on the netting. I haven’t seen a replay, and I think I don’t want to. Lest we forget -- this is a dangerous sport. But we’ll resume. Freeslopestyle: Norway’s Birk Ruud won the big air, and he’s well on his way to challenging for another medal. His score of 83.96, built up with a nifty move on the first rail and then a double cork 1620 on the second jump, is good for first place at the moment and is surely enough to make the top 12. The women’s downhill is on hold with nine skiers left. Four of the last seven skiers didn’t finish. The best of the lot was the USA’s Keely Cashman, who moved into 17th -- one ahead of Shiffrin. When we resume, Australia’s Greta Small will be up. Freeslopestyle (men’s qualification) is underway ... The USA’s Mac Forehand goes first and makes an early mistake, failing to ride all the way along a rail. His jumps are fine, but his score of 51.21 will leave him needing something more in his second run. Then teammate Colby Stevenson shows us how it’s done. He dazzles early on, switching direction as he hops between two rails. His jumps (1260, 1440, 1440 -- all double corks with a mixture of grabs) land cleanly. He gets a 78.01, and as harshly as the judges have been viewing things out here, that might be enough to get him into the top 12 to qualify for the final. Switzerland’s Andri Ragettli goes even better on the jumps, landing back-to-back 1620s. What do you have to do to break 80? Apparently not that. 76.98. Slovakia is the first team to net a goal in the men’s hockey playoffs. They’re up 1-0 on Germany. The 21st downhill starter is the USA’s Alix Wilkinson, a replacement for Breezy Johnson, who would’ve been a contender here. Wilkinson loses the line early and often, then finally goes too far away to have any realistic shot of making the gate. She stands up out of her tuck as the first DNF of the race. Elsewhere, the men’s hockey playoffs have started, with Germany facing Slovakia for the right to face the USA, which earned a bye to the quarterfinals. Denmark and Latvia are playing for a spot against the ROC. In five minutes, we’ll be watching the men’s freestyle skiers tackling the slopestyle course in qualifiers. Tippler falls far off the pace early. She finishes behind Shiffrin, who didn’t seem to be risking anything as she preps for the combined. Your likely downhill medalists are: Gold: Corinne Suter (SUI) Silver: Sofia Goggia (ITA) Bronze: Nadia Delago (ITA) Lara Gut-Behrami bids to displace her Swiss teammate and win the super-G/downhill double. Early on, she looks like she’s not going to do it. Later on, she looks like she’s not going to do it. A bit later, she looks like she’s not going to do it. Yeah, she barely beats Shiffrin. Austria’s Tamara Tippler is the last skier to have a decent shot at the podium, and even that is stretching it. Cornelia Huetter of Austria has a recent World Cup podium. She falls off the pace early, just not really able to get comfortable. It might be up to Gut-Behrami to make any change we’re going to see in the top places. France’s Laura Gauche is nowhere near the lead. How about Germany’s Kira Weidle? She leads by 0.01 at the first split and looks like a medal contender through the canyon. She won’t catch Suter, but she comes across in ... fourth. So close. The next three to go include Lara Gut-Behrami, a contender because of her form so far in these Games, and two Austrians who are contenders because they’re Austrian. Slovenia’s Ilka Stuhec is slower than Shiffrin, moving into 13th. Switzerland’s Corinne Suter should have a good shot at disrupting the Italian sweep. She’s the 2021 world champion, though our announcers remind us that no one has done the world-Olympic double since Lindsey Vonn. First split: First by 0.06. Second split: 0.09 ahead. Third split: 0.08 ahead. This is going to be close. She skids a bit and falls 0.18 behind. The commentators say she might be able to get onto the podium still. Oh yeah? She can do a bit better than that. She’s in first, 0.16 ahead of Goggia. The world champion has dethroned the Olympic champion. Still five skiers with solid chances to come. Here’s one of the favorites, Sofia Goggia, bidding to make it an Italian sweep. And the defending champion and World Cup downhill leader blazes her way down, building a lead of 0.70 by the fourth split time as she wildly swerves past all the gates. She somehow loses a bit of time near the end, but she’s still well into the lead, 0.41 seconds ahead. She celebrates with a roar. Still some contenders to go, but that may be our winning run. Mikaela Shiffrin has won World Cup races in every discipline, but downhill is by far her worst discipline. This is basically a practice run for the combined, where she’s the favorite as long as she can avoid missing a gate. Or is it a practice run? She’s very close to the pace through the first three splits. But she loses it past the halfway point and comes across the line 11th. She doesn’t seem terribly disappointed. We have a new downhill leader, and it’s Italy’s Nadia Delago, who conquers the middle section that had bedeviled so many skiers since her fellow Italian skier Elena Curtoni set the early pace. She fell behind ever so slightly at the next split but winds up 0.43 seconds ahead. Next up: Mikaela Shiffrin. Ma Xiuyue piles on the pressure with a draw to the button on his last shot, leaving Chinese rocks sitting first and second, but Brad Gushue hits a clutch shot to remove China’s rock from the button and leave his own nearby. Round-robin standings (top four reach playoffs) 7-0 Sweden 5-1 Team GB 5-2 Canada 4-3 USA 3-4 Norway 3-4 ROC 3-4 Switzerland 2-5 China 1-5 Italy 1-6 Denmark Canada’s Marie-Michele Gagnon, the eighth skier to start the downhill, moves into third behind Elena Curtoni (ITA) and Joana Haehlen (SUI). She yells hello to her family and pronounces this is her last Olympics. Surely Austria’s Mirjam Puchner will break into the top three, right? She was the silver medalist in super-G. She’s fifth in the World Cup downhill standings. She runs nearly even with the lead through the first three split times but then goes wide and loses some time. A lot of time. She rallies toward the end to tie Gagnon for third with the heavy hitters to come. Next up: Italy’s Nicol Delago and Nadia Delago. Not at the same time. We’ve already had enough references to Better Off Dead tonight. Big win for the defending gold medalists, thanks to back-to-back steals in the eighth and ninth ends. Switzerland concedes before all the rocks are delivered in the 10th. Round-robin standings will follow when we have a Canada-China result. Ester Ledecka of the Czech Republic is up. In 2018, she won the super-G and the parallel giant slalom in snowboarding, where she was more of a favorite. She has defended her PGS title but finished fifth in super-G. She runs ahead of pace, 0.19 ahead after the third turn, but she falls and skids. In true badass fashion, she gets up and finishes. Leader through five skiers: Elana Curtoni, the first skier down the hill. A quick peek at curling: Sweden remains unbeaten with an 8-3 win over Denmark Norway routs the ROC 12-5 Canada scored three in the eighth and held China to two in the ninth to go up 9-8 with hammer in the last end Another steal for Shuster makes it 7-4 USA heading into the last end It’s windy, it’s extremely cold, and yet 36 skiers are going to speed their way down a steep slope in China. First up is Italy’s Elena Curtoni, whose finish is interrupted by an ad for Apple TV. She skidded off the best line a couple of times early in the run. Time for the women’s downhill ... Only 36 skiers have entered, and only the first 20 have any sort of legitimate shot. Snowboard-ski multisport athlete Ester Ledecka will start fifth. Up 12th: Mikaela Shiffrin is a longshot for the podium in this, her weakest event, but this could give us a good look at her form heading into the downhill. Defending champion Sofia Goggia, also bidding for her third World Cup downhill title this year, starts 13th despite spraining her left knee in a crash in January. Super-G champion and giant slalom bronze medalist Lara Gut-Behrami is up 19th. Sticking with the USA vs. Switzerland -- Chris Plys plays a precise hit-and-roll to leave the USA lying two. Sven Michel misses a draw, but so does Plys, whose rock adds to a Great Wall of stones a few feet before the house. Michel answers by threading the needle to get a red rock on the four-foot, outcounting the two US yellows. Shuster then misses badly, wrecking on the guard as he tries to follow the path Michel just took. Benoit Schwarz draws to the other side of the four-foot and leaves it a little deep. You’ll want to see Shuster’s next shot. His rock hits one of the US rocks to the side of the house, spins to the four-foot, knocks away the rock Schwarz just threw, and spins up to take a piece of the button and outcount the Swiss stones. Schwarz tries to run one of his own rocks onto the button, but it’s slightly off. That’s a steal for Shuster. 6-4 USA. The downhill is about to start, so we’ll focus our attention there. Having gorged ourselves on X sports, it’s time to check in on curling, at least until the downhill starts. The USA has taken a 5-4 lead on Switzerland, but the Swiss have the hammer here in the eighth end. Thanks to the magic of microphones, we hear the glorious sound of John Shuster and Matt Hamilton pondering their options from 150 feet apart. They opt to guard their rock close to the button, and Switzerland’s Peter de Cruz goes into hero mode to attempt a red-onto-red-onto-yellow takeout, but he’s slightly off target, and the US rock remains on the outskirts of the four-foot circle. On another sheet, you can practically hear Canadian nerves jangling. They’re tied 6-6 with China in the eighth. Kelly Sildaru won the world championship in this event in 2019. She won the Youth Olympic Games the next year. She leads the World Cup. She started winning big events at the 2016 X Games -- when she was 13. Her tricks are astounding. She switches back and forth over the rails. Her first jump is a 900 with a silky-smooth landing. She follows with a 1080 and massive air. She follows with another 1080, and surely that’s good for ... Not quite improving on her second run. Gremaud wins. Gremaud wasn’t exactly an underdog here. She took silver in 2018 and in the 2021 world championships. Eileen Gu, who won by a hair in big air, is now on the other end. Gremaud’s winning total: 86.56. Gu’s total: 86.23. Sildaru’s top run (her second): 82.06. Then it’s a pack of skiers between 71.30 and 75.51 -- the ROC’s Anastasia Tatalina fourth, then the USA’s Maggie Voisin, Norway’s Johanne Killi, France’s Tess Ledeux and Team GB’s Kirsty Muir. Another GB skier, Katie Summerhayes, was a few points back in ninth. Freeslopestyle: OK, Killi was pretty good. Can’t imagine her knocking Sildaru off the podium, but she’s justifiably happy with that. Somehow, the score is lower than her second run. She seems confused. So it comes down to this. Kelly Sildaru is guaranteed a medal. Can she pass Eileen Gu for silver or pass Mathilde Gremaud for gold? Freeslopestyle: If you’re tired of hearing about Eileen Gu, here’s some bad news. She got green marks on all three jumps -- the 900, the 1080 and a 900 with a double grab. That’ll surely get her on the podium. And it does! Just not in first. It’s an 86.23. Yeah, her story has been told more often than high school students are forced to read The Catcher in the Rye, but she’s spectacular by any measure. Still two skiers to go. Not holding out much hope for Norway’s Johanne Killi, but the last competitor is Estonian superstar Kelly Sildaru. Freeslopestyle: Here goes Maggie Voisin! Can we get an American on the podium in the events they have traditionally dominated? The last jump is an awesome 1260. But she dragged her hand on the landing off the first jump. Or did she? Did you know there’s a challenge flag in this sport? Well, it’s a 66.03. She’s in fourth. Just as she was four years ago. Four years before that, she suffered a broken fibula in a training run. She does have a full collection of X Games medals, though. Freeslopestyle: Team GB’s Kirsty Muir made a good run at the top spots but landed with her legs apart on one of her jumps. Her 69.21 isn’t as good as the 71.30 from her second run, and she’ll miss out on the top five. But we have a new person on the tentative podium. The ROC’s Anastasia Tatalina isn’t so great on the rails, but she pulls off a stunner on the last jump -- a double cork 1440. She improves from a 74.16 to a 75.51. Doesn’t sound like much. But Maggie Voisin, who had been in third, had a 74.28. Tatalina moves up. Alpine downhill: Delayed. More to come. Zoi Sadowski Synnott’s bid for the slopestyle-big air double ends in a fall. It doesn’t look like the jump would’ve beaten Gasser anyway. The New Zealander will take silver, with Japan’s Kokomo Murase taking bronze. Australia’s Tess Coady finished ninth. The USA’s Hailey Langland didn’t land any of her three runs and finished 12th. Freeslopestyle: As in the big air, Tess Ledeux’s day ends in tears. Her father died a year ago, which has been weighing on her mind as surely as it has Mikaela Shiffrin’s. She botches the landing on her second run and won’t medal. Big board: Defending champion Anna Gasser of Austria s ready to go. And ready to roll. And flip. It looks good. What will the judges think? 95.50! She’s in first! Zoi Sadowski Synnott needs ... a lot. Big board: The 17-year-old Japanese boarder also can’t land her trick. Bronze for Kokomo Murase. Can Anna Gasser jump into the lead and defend her title? She needs an 87.00 to tie. Big board: We know our medalists but not the order. Reira Iwabuchi couldn’t land her underflippy jump, a refreshing change from the parade of 1080 double corks, so she’ll remain in fourth place. Next up: Kokomo Murase needs an 85.50 to tie for first. Freeslopestyle: You don’t want to know how Mathilde Gremaud just landed. I’d include the word “split.” Still leads, of course. Big board: During the commercial break, Tess Coady crashed. No medal for Australia here. The medalists are going to come from our last four competitors -- Reira Iwabuchi (JPN), Kokomo Murase (JPN), Anna Gasser (AUT) and Zoi Sadowski Synnott (NZL). Let’s follow them one at a time. If anything changes in freeslopestyle, I’ll mention it. Freeslopestyle: I cannot believe they’re going to commercial right as Coady’s about to jump. Seriously? OK, we’ll go back to freeslopestyle to see if Estonia’s Kelly Sildaru can reclaim her lead. Her rail work looks good. She lands a succession of 1080s and then ... she’s skiing on one ski! Better Off Dead for the win! Well, in this case, she’ll drop this score. So with the reminder that only one run per athlete will count, our current podium after the second round is: 1. Mathilde Gremaud (SUI) 86.56 2. Sildaru (EST) 82.06 3. Maggie Voisin (USA) 74.28 Big board: China’s Rong Ge has a nice jump to move up to fifth. Next up: Can Canada’s Laurie Blouin and Australia’s Tess Coady move into the top three? Blouin’s up first. She’s counting a stellar 86.25 from her second run. Her third ... no. Just not a solid landing. Here comes Coady ... Freeslopestyle: Oh no. Gu falls and falls hard, slamming the back of her head onto the snow. She takes a minute to examine her helmet before skiing down to the finish. Somewhere in the mix here between two sports and ads, I missed the run by Britain’s Kirsty Muir, who posts a perfectly solid 71.30 and stands seventh, one place ahead of Gu. Freeslopestyle: The ROC’s Anastasia Tatalina moves into third, and it’s hard to explain why she was better than Ledeux. But it’s easier to explain how the USA’s Maggie Voisin was better. She has a 630 on one of the rails. Off the jumps, a tremendous grab on a 900 with her skis in an X, another 900, and a double cork 1260. She’s in third with a 74.28. Next up? Oh, just Eileen Gu, whose academic record was just hyped on NBC’s broadcast. Like it’s hard to score in the high 1500s on the SAT, graduate a year early and get into Stanford. Big board: These Japanese snowboarders are phenomenal. Kokomo Murase says, “Forget the double cork -- I’m just going to do the most elegant 1080 you’ve ever seen.” It works. That’s a 91.50, and she moves into second behind Gasser. Last up: slopestyle gold medalist Zoi Sadowski Synnott of New Zealand. And oh yes, that’s nice. She lands as easily as most of us walk off a curb. It’s a double cork 1080, yes, but she holds her grab nicely and just looks better than most of the rest. Score is ... 83.75, and she’s in first. STANDINGS AFTER TWO RUNS (reminder: best two runs count) 1. Sadowski Synnott (NZL) 177.00 2. Anna Gasser (AUT) 176.75 3. Murase (JPN) 171.50 Tess Coady is by no means out of it. She got an 85.00 on her first effort. She’ll drop the score from her second. An 87.00 would put her on the podium -- pending other results, of course. Freeslopestyle: The unfortunate Tess Ledeux wipes out on her second run. She’s still in third but probably has a case to be in second or first. We’ll come back to this -- the second run of Big board is almost complete. Big board: When did Anna Gasser go? Not sure if the defending champion jumped while I was distracted by the freeslopestyle or they were at commercial, but the Austrian picked up an 86.75 on a ... wait for it ... double cork 1080. Best two of the three runs count, and her combined score of 176.75 will be tough to top. Canada’s Laurie Blouin also had a nice effort, scoring an 86.25. She was re-attempting her first run (or at least going in the same direction), which means she has opted to erase that first run rather than add to it. Freeslopestyle: We have a new leader, and she’s the one whose binding pulled a Better Off Dead in the first run. Switzerland’s Mathilde Gremaud gets a 9.20 and 9.00 on her first two tricks on the jumps and gets an 85.56. That’s an improvement of 85.46 from that first run. More importantly, she’s in the lead, though our commentators raise the same question I have -- was Tess Ledeux underscored? Again? Canada’s Olivia Asselin did not attempt her second run. Will try to find out why, but we have to hop to our other venue again ... Big board: Here comes Tess Coady. And ... she won’t count that one. Never really looked in control, and she skids on her side as she lands. NBC (well, USA) decides to backtrack rather than show a replay of the Australian’s run. During the commercial break, China’s Rong Ge earned an 85.75, apparently. Freeslopestyle: To say the skiers are looking a little cautious on this course would be an overly cautious statement. Norway’s Johanne Killi takes what amounts to a scouting run, adding to the gaggle of skiers with scores under 50. But the last skier here, Estonian teen Kelly Sildaru, fooled us with a tentative start on the rails followed by three gorgeous tricks on the jumps. Again, not as many rotations as Ledeux, but they couldn’t be cleaner. After one run, she has the lead at 82.06. Sildaru and Gu are slated to compete in halfpipe in addition to slopestyle and big air. Showoffs. Big board: During the eternity in which we waited for Gu to start and get her score, New Zealand’s Zoi Sadowski Synnott stamped her authority on this competition in her bid for the slopestyle-big air double. Her ... yes, another double cork 1080 ... gets a 93.25, and she’s in the lead. The second run is already underway, and the USA’s Hailey Langland has her second fall of the competition. She won’t be contention. Freeslopestyle: Can anyone else complete a solid first run? Not Team GB’s Kirsty Muir. Not the ROC’s Anastasia Tatalina, who crashes. Not the USA’s Maggie Voisin, who takes off awkwardly on one element and pulls out of her next trick. Top two are Tess Ledeux (72.91) and Team GB’s Katie Summerhayes (60.01), but it’s hard to see those scores landing on the podium. So let’s check Eileen Gu, whose story of growing up in California but representing China has been well told by now. She goes a little too far on the second rail, but that’s the only flaw in her run. Not as many rotations as Ledeux, thought -- a 900, an 1080 and a 900 double cork double grab. That’s a 69.90, second to Ledeux. Big board: Better news for Japan, with Reira Iwabuchi landing a sweet ... you guessed it ... double cork 1080. She put a hand down on the landing, which probably explains why she’s trailing Coady with an 83.75. Kokomo Murase follows with an 80.00, putting two Japanese riders in contention. Big board: Just hand Anna Gasser her second gold medal in this event. She lands a double cork 1080 to net a 90.00 on her first run. In big air, the top two runs count (though they must be rotated in different directions), so she could always stumble on her next two, but it looks unlikely. Second place so far? Hello Australia! It’s Tess Coady with her own double cork 1080. Her score: 85.00. A lot of other competitors have struggled to land their tricks. The next rider after Gasser was Miyabi Onitsuka, part of a powerhouse Japanese team, who landed hard and remained down for a couple of minutes while various personnel came out to attend to her. She did leave the finish area under her own power. Freeslopestyle: Here comes France’s Tess Ledeux, who took silver in the big air behind Chinese superstar Eileen Gu in a close -- might even say controversial -- decision. Ledeux serves notice that she’ll be a contender here as well, landing a strong run with some nifty rail work followed by a 1080, 900 and double cork 1260. The last is particularly impressive and probably should’ve gotten more than 8.95 points. Total score is 72.91. Freeslopestyle: Remember the climactic scene in Better Off Dead in which Lane’s binding breaks on one of his skis, and he has to race Stalin on one ski? That’s what happened to Switzerland’s Mathilde Gremaud, our first competitor on a bitterly cold day in which it’s several degrees below zero. Yes, Fahrenheit. Each athlete will only count her best run, so Gremaud has time to warm up and fix up her equipment. Shuster is famous for his half-grimace, half-resigned smile expression. He flashes it again after his last shot in the first end, which removed a Swiss stone and left the US lying three ahead of Schwarz’s hammer. He figured -- correctly, as it turns out -- that Schwarz could take out all three of those rocks. But Schwarz’s rock rolled out of play in the process, which means the Swiss only scored one, not two, with hammer. That’s typically considered a win for the team without hammer. So ... ready for dueling flippy-twisty sports? Let’s talk curling ... All of the teams in the men’s competition have played six of their nine scheduled games. Sweden and skip Niklas Edin, who lost the final to the USA and John Shuster in 2018, won all six and have clinched a berth in the semifinals. In second place, it’s Bruce Mouat’s British squad, which is 5-1. They’re idle in today’s first session but will play later against Sweden in a top-of-the-table clash. Canada, where curling is a Very Big Deal, is 4-2. They’re playing China at the moment. Win that one and beat the ROC, and they’ll be 6-2 and almost certainly assured of a semifinal berth ahead of their final round-robin game against Mouat and Team GB. Shuster’s US team and its opponent here, Switzerland, are 3-3, as is the ROC. That’s your bubble. Four years ago, Shuster and company won their last three games to finish the round-robin at 5-4. That time around, that was enough to qualify for the semifinals. Don’t count on 5-4 being sufficient this time. Switzerland is one of those rare teams in which the skip doesn’t throw the last rocks. Peter de Cruz is in charge, but he throws second in the lineup. Benoit Schwarz throws the all-important last rocks. (The most important rocks, of course, are the first rocks, though I may be biased because that was my position when I competed in the only tournament I’ve ever entered. We won. I’ve retired unbeaten. Besides, Shuster won a bronze medal in 2006 playing lead for Pete Fenson.) Here’s a quick rundown of how we’re going to do things in the next couple of hours ... As we’ve seen a few times now, curling starts off the day’s action, but we’ll soon thereafter have multiple sports vying for our attention. Here’s where it gets difficult. We have two medal events kicking off at the same time, 40 minutes from now -- the women’s freestyle skiing slopestyle final and the women’s snowboarding big air final. So if you’re like me, you’ll have two screens devoted to people doing flippy-twisty things in the air. And if you’re reading this, you’ll see me go back and forth between the two events with unnerving regularity. Here’s what I’ll do: All updates from the snowboarding big air final will start with “Big board,” and everything from the freestyle skiing slopestyle final will start with “Freeslopestyle.” Got it? Once that’s done, the women’s downhill will be the only event running for about an hour, and then we’ll get the men’s hockey playoffs. Then it’ll be the men’s turn to do flippy-twisty things in the freeslopestyle qualifiers and the big board final. But someone else will be taking that for you while I catch up on curling highlights. Hello again, everyone. I’m Beau Dure, and I’ll be your live blogger for the next few hours. A quick catchup on the Olympic news ... Slovakia’s Petra Vlhova, who won the Alpine skiing World Cup last year and rallied to win the slalom last week, will not race in the combined due to an ankle injury. That leaves the door that much more open for Mikaela Shiffrin, who’ll race in a couple of hours in the downhill, which she’s using as preparation for that combined. Shiffrin is the world champion in the event. The bad news for Shiffrin, aside from the fact that she isn’t one for bad sportsmanship and would rather see a healthy Vlhova here, is that her chief rival for the overall World Cup trophy will have a few extra days to rest. Also bowing out of competition due to an injury: US freestyle skier Marin Hamill, who qualified for the slopestyle final coming up in less than an hour but suffered a terrible crash on her next run. In better news for the USA -- for the 56th straight year, the USA won the Super Bowl. Coming up today Times are all in local Beijing time. For Sydney it is +3 hours, for London it is -8 hours, for New York it is -13 hours and San Francisco is -16 hours. 9.05am and 2.05pm and 8.05pm Curling – more 12-round robin contests 🥌 9.30am-10.24am and 12.30pm-1.33pm and 7pm Freestyle skiing – the rescheduled three runs of the women’s slopestyle are first, then at lunchtime it is the rescheduled men’s slopestyle qualification and then in the evening it is qualification for the men’s aerials. Although frankly this programme seems to change from hour to hour so your guess is as good as mine 🥇 9.30am-10.24am and 1pm-1.45pm Snowboard – women do the big air final in the morning, the men do the big air final in the afternoon. That’s a lot of big air 🥇 11am Alpine skiing – it is the women’s downhill 🥇 2.30pm-4.47pm Speed skating – a brilliant day ahead at the National Speed Skating Oval as the men’s and women’s pursuit competitions both reach their finals 🥇 12.10pm and 4.40pm and 9.10pm Ice hockey – it is the play-off round for the men with four matches 🏒 4pm and 7pm Nordic combined – it is the individual Gundersen large hill/10km cross-country which deserves a gold medal for longest event title surely? They jump at 4pm, and then at 7pm the best ski jumpers desperately try to hold on to the slim time advantage they gained with their extra metres 🥇 5pm Biathlon – the men do their 4x7.5km relay 🥇 6pm Figures skating – the women’s single skating short program will be the next instalment of the Kamila Valieva story ⛸ 8.15pm and 9.50pm Bobsleigh – the final two heats for the men’s two-man teams 🥇At the start, a stumble. At the end, tears. In between, another brush with perfection. And somehow, after a week of extraordinary personal tumult and torment, the 15-year-old Kamila Valieva did what she has been trained to do since she began skating at three: deliver when it matters. Despite the positive drugs test. Despite the intense media scrutiny. Despite staying up at 3am to follow her court of arbitration for sport appeal hearing before a late reprieve. She still delivered. At the halfway stage of the women’s single skating competition, Valieva leads with a score of 82.16, just under two points clear of her compatriot Anna Shcherbakova. But a question lingered at Beijing’s Capital Indoor Stadium like a pungent smell. Should she be here at all following her positive test for the banned angina drug trimetazidine? The US coach Adam Rippon, who won Olympic bronze four years ago and now coaches Valieva’s competitor Mariah Bell, was the most vocal critic. “I don’t know how the Olympics recovers from this,” he said. “It is shocking and it is disappointing. I don’t think ever in the history of the Olympics somebody with a positive test has been allowed to compete.” Like many, he expressed sympathy for Valieva – before suggesting her entourage, led by her coach Eteri Tutberidze, was to blame. “All of our hearts are breaking that this is a 15-year-old girl,” he said. “It feels like she was taken advantage of and given this drug that she had no business taking.” Then came a twirl of the knife. “What this says is that the team around her are child abusers,” Rippon said. “The only thing they care about is performance, and not the health and well being of their athletes. They are a factory that pumps out children who can compete, up to a certain point. It doesn’t feel like the coaches involved in the ladies’ program are coaches at all, but dog trainers; they’re running a circus. They shouldn’t be here at the Olympic Games. They’re clowns.” On Saturday Tutberidze had said the situation was “very controversial and difficult” but added: “I want to say that I am absolutely sure that Kamila is innocent and clean.” Rippon’s words were striking, but they did not exist in a vacuum. Long before Valieva stepped so gracefully on to the ice, the British skater Nastasha McKay was asked about the Russian being allowed to compete. McKay is usually so diplomatic she could easily find a job in the foreign office. Not this time. “I wish it was a level playing field and it’s not,” she replied. When invited to express sympathy for Valieva, she preferred to devote her words to those she felt deserved it. “I have sympathy for whoever will be on the podium who won’t be receiving their medals,” she said. “It’s the most important part of the Olympics and they won’t get that chance.” Soon after the Swedish skater Josefin Taljegard made a similar point, albeit more subtly. “I think fair play is important,” she said. “Something inside me thinks it’s sad. I try to be a good role model. I just want everyone to know that figure skating is a lovely sport. These negative things take away from that.” Neither Valieva nor Tutberidze stopped to speak to the world’s press after competing. But Shcherbakova, who is also coached by Tutberidze, did. When asked by the Guardian about her coach’s methods, she mounted a qualified defence. “I have been in her group since I was nine,” she said. “And, if I am not changing my coach, it means that I like this coach. We are very fruitful working together, we are achieving a lot as you can see. And I believe this speaks more than words.” Earlier on Tuesday it emerged that Valieva’s team had suggested that her positive drugs test may have come from a contaminated glass of water that contained traces of her grandfather’s heart medication. The International Olympic Committee member Denis Oswald confirmed the 15-year-old Russian’s explanation for her positive test was “contamination, which happened with a product her grandfather was taking”. The Russian newspaper Pravda said Valieva’s lawyer Anna Kozmenko made a similar argument at a Cas hearing on Sunday. “There can be completely different ways how it got into her body,” Kozmenko is reported to have said. “For example, grandfather drank something from a glass, saliva got in, this glass was somehow later used by an athlete. Or the drug lay down on some surface, traces remained, the drug lay down on this surface, which the athlete then drank.” That explanation certainly raised plenty of eyebrows here in Beijing. But at the same time, some of the more excitable criticism of Cas’s decision to allow Valieva to compete does not seem justified either. Neither Valieva nor Russia have received a diamanté-emblazoned get-out-of-jail-free card. She still has to face justice for her failed drugs test. Cas’s decision is a stay of execution, not a pardon. But the overriding image of this night was of Valieva, with the world’s gaze and pressure weighing down on her, once again showing the talent that many think makes her the best female skater in history. True, it wasn’t a perfect routine. No sooner had the opening bars of In Memoriam by Kirill Richter ended than Valieva wobbled and came dangerously close to falling on her first jump, the triple axel. Yet she was able to refocus and scored top marks on her remaining elements. Valieva rightly now goes into Thursday’s free skating programme as a huge favourite for gold. The tragedy for her is that the chances of an Olympic medal around her neck hang increasingly by a sequin’s thread.Some stories feel so unbelievable that every time you think of them again, you have to sit with the basic concept for a few moments just to remind yourself how truly, staggeringly outrageous the whole business is. It’s almost as if your head has to be got round it all over again, every single time you go there. I’m like that with the Post Office scandal, which as of this week is the subject of an active public inquiry. In the spirit of rearranging our heads once more, let’s do the brief summary: between 2000 and 2014, 736 subpostmasters and postmistresses were prosecuted of theft, fraud and false accounting in the branches of the Post Office they ran. Their lives – and the lives of thousands of others – were torn apart. They were financially ruined, put out of work, locally shunned, driven into poor health and addiction, saw their marriages destroyed. Some – from a 19-year-old woman to mothers of young children to all manner of others – were imprisoned for many months. At least 33 victims of the scandal are now dead; at least four reportedly took their own lives. But … they had done nothing wrong. They had done nothing wrong. The blame in fact lay with Horizon, a faulty computer system designed by Fujitsu and imposed on their branches by Post Office management. It is currently being described as the most widespread miscarriage of justice in British history. And here’s the kicker – many post office operators had been reporting problems with Horizon to the Post Office right from the outset. The Post Office not only failed to adequately investigate, but demanded the staff personally made up the financial shortfalls, and denied to the complainants that anyone else had similar issues. Up in the rarefied air of the executive suite was Paula Vennells, who took over as CEO in 2012. Under her leadership the Post Office prosecuted hundreds of subpostmasters. To this date, more than 20 years on for some cases, nobody from the Post Office or Fujitsu or the civil servants charged with oversight has been held accountable, much less faced criminal investigation themselves. Instead, victims’ heads have rolled. So that’s the short version, but of course it all feels inadequate. Even simply listing every individual injustice in the sparsest possible terms would take far more space than I have available; at even cursory depth, every single story is utterly heartbreaking and utterly extraordinary. And to add to the sheer WTF-ery, these are subpostmasters we’re talking about, often working meticulously for long hours serving small communities. It’s backbone of Britain stuff – and the prison doors clanged shut on them. Among other burning questions, then, the current inquiry will look at whether the Post Office bigwigs knew there were bugs and glitches in the computer system, but pushed ahead with the prosecuting and the life-ruining anyway. I don’t want to unleash too many spoilers here – it’s important that viewers get to experience the breakneck magic of a British public inquiry in real time – but let’s just say that a high court judge in 2019 described the Post Office’s approach as “the 21st-century equivalent of maintaining that the Earth is flat”. Other highlights of the story? You’ll enjoy the episode covering the bit where Post Office CEO Paula Vennells gets a CBE in the year 2019 (TWENTY NINETEEN), and then gets made both chair of London’s Imperial College Healthcare NHS trust and something called “a non-executive board member of the Cabinet Office”, presumably because the government thought it important to bring in our brightest brains from business. By way of an inspired satirical touch, Paula also moonlighted as an Anglican priest and as a member of the Church of England Ethical Investment Advisory Group. (She has since “stepped back” from these positions.) In 2019, after the Post Office agreed to pay nearly £58m to settle claims, Vennells issued a statement saying “I am truly sorry we were unable to find both a solution and a resolution outside of litigation and for the distress this caused.” Ah. Students of apology types may have identified this as the classic sorry-that-we-just-HAD-to-hound-you-into-court apology. It’s a real pro move, and your inability to execute it is why you, an amateur, live in fear of losing your livelihood, while hotshots like Paula &amp; Co take millions and get bumped up into first class on the gravy train, no matter how monstrous their screw-ups. For while the postmasters have gone through the sort of wringer that makes Kafka feel like a Disney musical, extraordinary compassion has been shown to the managerial class in all this, who have been showered with honours and directorships and bonuses throughout. Elsewhere, it must be said that this sorry saga has not been the finest hour of much of the news media. Most papers and TV news outlets would now admit they horribly under-reported the Post Office story over the years, with all the running made by the likes of Private Eye, Computer Weekly and the BBC journalist Nick Wallis, to say nothing of the campaigning victims themselves, such as the heroic Alan Bates. As for the wider lessons of the scandal, what a lot it says about a society crossing the threshold of the third millennium that thousands of entirely upstanding human beings were disbelieved in favour of trusting a computer. Actually believing in the confusion and anguish of that famously gangsterish demographic – British subpostmasters – was regarded as a wholly irrational act. This, I’m afraid, is a version of only following orders. And it’s also, alas, the bit where those of us who cannot believe it happened simply have to look around us. Today, technology is deferred to even in the face of human tragedy far more than it was 20 years ago. Spool onward in the timeline and you will find more and more examples of ways in which technology was deemed to know best. In 2015, it emerged that in one three-year period, 2,380 sick and disabled people had died shortly after being declared “fit for work” by a computerised test, and having their sickness benefits withdrawn. Today, bereaved parents are told that nothing can be done about the algorithms that pushed their teenage children remorselessly in the direction of content they believe ultimately contributed to them taking their own lives, even as a Facebook whistleblower recently said that firm was “unwilling to accept even little slivers of profit being sacrificed for safety”. At the time the Post Office scandal began unfolding, Facebook wasn’t even a glint in Mark Zuckerberg’s eye; now, many technology firms are more powerful than nation states. At the time, Little Britain’s Carol Beer worked as a bank teller or holiday rep; now, computer-says-no culture runs the world. Marina Hyde is a Guardian columnist An evening with Marina Hyde and John Crace: Join in person or online Join Marina Hyde and John Crace live in Kings Place, looking back at the latest events in Westminster. On Monday 7 March, 8pm GMT | 9pm CET | 12pm PST | 3pm EST. Book tickets hereMI5 had enough intelligence to regard Salman Abedi as a threat to national security and open an investigation before he bombed the Manchester Arena, killing 22 people and injuring hundreds of others, an inquiry has heard. The Security Service was “struggling to cope” with an increased workload, and the team responsible for the north-west of England had declared an “amber” period of stress and high capacity the month before the attack in 2017. The information, revealed on Tuesday, came from the testimony of four MI5 witnesses and 10 officers from north west counter-terrorism police, who gave evidence in closed sessions last year after the chair of the Manchester arena inquiry, Sir John Saunders, ruled it could compromise national security if it were heard in public. Families of those killed in the attack have said they are shocked and appalled and found the admission from one MI5 officer that he had raised concerns with superiors and worried something could “get through” because of the high volume of documents “difficult to swallow”. Summarising the evidence heard in secret over 10 days, Paul Greaney QC, counsel for the inquiry, said the MI5 officer who first assessed one piece of intelligence accepted during questioning that it could be understood, at the time, to indicate “activity of pressing national security concern”. Two pieces of intelligence received by MI5 in the months leading up to the attack were not passed to counter-terrorism police and the security services did not fully appreciate their significance. Had the significance of the intelligence been understood, two witnesses agreed further investigative steps may have been taken. Witnesses from counter-terrorism police and MI5 described IT systems for sharing information between them as “clunky” and “hit and miss” and the “system for triaging unsolicited intelligence was admitted to be a bit haphazard”. That system has now changed. A senior MI5 witness gave evidence that large electronic files would occasionally not send properly, so that PowerPoint presentations had to be sent slide by slide. Occasionally documents would be sent to police but it might not be realised for a day that they had not arrived. MI5 did not tell police that the agency had information that Abedi had travelled from Istanbul to Libya in May 2016, despite an intention to do so. One witness described the role of an MI5 investigator as being “like a spider in the centre of a web, with strands of intelligence from many sources coming together for them to assess”, while another said that the team in MI5 responsible for the north west was surprised by the pace of the change in workload after the declaration of a “caliphate” by Islamic State in 2014. The north west investigative team went into “amber” on its workload dashboard in April 2017, some of its casework was suspended that month and into May – the month of the attack. By the time Salman Abedi had murdered 22 people and injured hundreds more when he detonated a suicide vest at the end of an Ariana Grande concert on 22 May 2017, he was a closed “subject of interest” after being red-flagged by the security services twice in 2014 and 2015. He first came on their radar in 2010, just before his 16th birthday. MI5 had intelligence that Abedi supported Islamic State, but one witness said there were a large number of people during this period who expressed such support who “did not pose a threat to UK national security”. Saunders said he understood the evidence had raised “questions that may not have been raised before”, and that would inform his conclusions, but were not a finding of fact. Kim Harrison, of Slater and Gordon, solicitor for families of 12 of the victims, said they were “deeply shocked and appalled by the evidence read today that the MI5 north west investigative team were struggling to cope with a significant increase and change in workload from 2015”. “To hear that concerns had apparently been raised with superiors regarding the triaging of intelligence, including worries that something could get through due to the volumes of documents being considered is difficult to swallow,” she said.Pam &amp; Tommy, the Hulu series on the story behind the most infamous sex tape of the 1990s, is disconcertingly fun. The eight-part series created by Robert Siegel, half of which has aired, is front-loaded with 90s iconography and zany gags designed to provoke online discussion. There’s the brain-scrambling transformations of actors Lily James and Sebastian Stan into mid-90s rock it-couple Pamela Anderson and Tommy Lee, and a mulleted Seth Rogen as Rand Gauthier, the stiffed carpenter who pulls off an impressive heist of the couple’s safe, played for suspense. There’s nostalgic needle drops from Nine Inch Nails to Fatboy Slim, a conversation between a high Tommy and his animatronic penis, and plenty of sex, drugs, videotapes and characters asking, with winking naivety, what the world wide web is. It’s a confusing, often entertaining watch, one that wants to have its fun and interrogate it, too, at best a heady blend of screwball comedy, madcap romance, expensive nostalgia and serious retrospective of a public scandal in which a woman’s privacy was invaded, her intimate moments exploited and judged without her consent. But there’s one detail that, for me, turns this whole palate sour: the real Pamela Anderson did not want this story retold. While Stan has confirmed that he spoke with Lee, who has praised his portrayal, Anderson did not respond to producers’ overtures. She has not spoken publicly about the series, but sources have expressed her discontent and disappointment in multiple outlets. Anderson’s reticence looms over everything. In one standout scene from the fourth episode, time ceases to pass as Pam overhears Baywatch crew watching the tape and realizes that it’s her voice, that it’s her tape, that strangers are watching her private video. James’s performance of paralyzing dread is excellent, her slow-burn horror palpable, chilling. But, for me, it’s inseparable from the off-screen context. Are we not repeating that horror now? Pam &amp; Tommy recreates parts of the tape, has actors mimic Anderson and Lee’s sex noises, includes montages of them having cartoonishly vigorous sex, uses prosthetics to imitate their famous anatomies. It’s deliberately uncomfortable to watch, and while there’s a lot going on here, much of it interesting and admirable, not all discomfort is productive. No amount of impersonation, or sympathetic portrayals in which Pam clearly recognizes the biases against her, can get me past the fact that a show about consent exists without the consent of one of its central subjects. It’s not without trying; the show’s sympathies clearly lie with Anderson, especially in later episodes yet to air that depict how the slut-shaming fallout from the tape’s (illegal!) release was particularly hellacious for her. The showrunners and cast have been straightforward about their desire to do right by her – “We particularly wanted to let Pamela Anderson know that this portrayal was very much a positive thing and that we cared a great deal about her and wanted her to know that the show loves her,” showrunner DV DeVincentis told Entertainment Weekly of attempts to work with her. “We didn’t get a response, but considering what she’s been through and the time that we were reaching out, that was understandable.” I get that. TV is a collaborative project that shouldn’t necessarily hinge on the feelings of one person. Nor is a subject’s narrative control and participation necessarily the best recipe for clarity, honesty, even empathy – see: most pop-star documentaries, which essentially function as long-form PR, such as Taylor Swift’s Miss Americana. But Anderson’s lack of interest in revisiting a foundational public trauma, one that reportedly remains “very painful” for her, undermines the whole project. It invades every scene, particularly in the mid-season stretch in which Pam and Tommy begin to realize the extent of the tape’s dispersal. It turns otherwise potent, provocative material – on the boundaries of privacy, the unforgiving binds of sex appeal, the double standards of public exposure – a shade queasy. Hulu could tell this story with or without Anderson’s permission or cooperation because it obtained the rights to the 2014 Rolling Stone article by Amanda Chicago Lewis about the story behind the theft of the tape by Gauthier – a relatively long example of the viral article to streaming content pipeline that, by 2022, is at full gush. Contemporaneous to Pam &amp; Tommy, which adapts a mid-2010s gonzo retelling of a 90s nostalgia trap, is Inventing Anna, the Shonda Rhimes series on the viral article by Jessica Pressler about faux heiress Anna Delvey, which premiered last week on Netflix; Super Pumped, the Showtime series on Uber, based on reporting by Mike Isaac; and The Dropout, a series starring Amanda Seyfried as Silicon Valley fraudster Elizabeth Holmes. On the film side, there’s 2019’s Hustlers, also based on a Jessica Pressler article about savvy strippers in recession-era New York, and last year’s Zola, based on a viral 2014 tweet-thread-cum-story by A’Ziah “Zola” King. But Pam &amp; Tommy, as a depiction of how Anderson’s trauma was dismissed or compounded by those around her, including Lee, at the time of the tape’s theft and release, has more in common with feminist retrospectives on how the “post-feminist” media and mores of the 90s and 2000s treated public-facing women: documentaries re-examining the harsh media lacerations of Britney Spears, Janet Jackson and Lorena Bobbitt, the Showtime hit Yellowjackets, and most strikingly Impeachment: American Crime Story. Monica Lewinsky served as a producer on the FX series, advising the portrayal of her character, played by Beanie Feldstein. It’s fair to ask if this show should exist in the first place, if there are limits for a media retrospective, even revision, packaged as entertainment. To be fair, Pam &amp; Tommy is partly undercut by its release format – the first three episodes, which orbit around Gauthier as a pathetic, sympathetically put-upon figure and retell Anderson and Lee’s pairing as a romp, belie a more considerate and skewering back half of the season yet to air. A brutal deposition scene in the sixth episode, directed by A Teacher’s Hannah Fidell, in which old, white, male lawyers prod her memories for sport (“Was that exciting for you and your husband?” one asks of the tape) is particularly squirm-inducing, evocative and devastating. But this insight is ultimately shortchanged by its provenance, the knowledge that the person at hand again didn’t invite this public scrutiny. “I feel so violated,” says Pam in the fourth episode, hands over her face, tape now in the hands of the nascent internet. Pam &amp; Tommy, for all its hijinks, remains clear-eyed on just how traumatic and unfair that violation was. But without Anderson, the cycle of attention – this series, this piece, our watching it – also seems to extend it.My grandfather Brian Bennett, who has died aged 84, was an old-fashioned socialist. His socialism was built not on books and theories, but on the sacrifices and struggle of making a better life for his family. Growing up hungry was something that he carried with him for life, whether in never letting anybody in his company leave a crumb on their plate or giving anyone who needed it a lift home, a hot meal or the last tenner in his wallet. All his life Brian lived within a few miles of Atherton, where he was born into the dire poverty of a Lancashire mining village in the 1930s. Even by the standards of the time, his childhood was not an easy one. His mother, Nancy (nee Farrimond), died when he was seven, and rheumatic fever almost killed him before he reached his teens. But it was that illness that saved Brian from following his father, Tom, and his brothers, Tom and Jack, down the pit when he left the local school. Instead, he got a job with the Royal London, cycling round the small towns and villages that had grown out of the coalfields between Bolton and Leigh collecting insurance premiums. Brian met Margaret Lambert when she was working in the offices of Lancashire United Transport. They married in 1961 and moved into a two-up two-down in Atherton. It was their hard graft – with Margaret taking office jobs doing payroll – that sent their children, Dawn and Martin, off to university, later followed by their grandchildren. An infectious sense of humour and a warmth filled every room that Brian entered. He played the lottery each week but lived as though he already had the winning ticket in his pocket, walking down the street with a twinkle in his eye, whistling a tune and cracking jokes. He taught us that life is always better outside with the sun on your face and the wind in your hair; that there is no day that cannot be improved by a cup of tea and a long walk; that an afternoon whiled away at the cricket is the height of human progress. He worked to live and took early retirement at 60 to dedicate his later years to his family, becoming a father figure to me and my sisters, Alice and Clare, after our own father left. Brian’s life’s work was marked by the quiet dignity and daily declaration of love that is the building of a life for your family and then being able to share it with them and watch them enjoy it. He is survived by Margaret, Dawn and Martin, and his five grandchildren, Alice, Clare, James, Olivia and me.The footballer Emiliano Sala was put under pressure to complete his multimillion-pound transfer to the Premier League before he died in a plane crash as he headed to his new club, an inquest jury has been told. Sala’s mother, Mercedes Taffarel, said the weeks before the private plane he was in crashed into the Channel as he travelled from Nantes in France to join Cardiff City seemed “very intense”. “Cardiff put on a lot of pressure on him to complete the sale quickly, but Nantes asked for more money and Emi felt in the middle of the dispute,” she said. “Emi was in some doubt to go ahead with the move. Finally, the sale was agreed, not because of his performances as a player at Nantes, which were very good, but because Nantes needed the money.” The Argentina-born striker was joining the then Premier League club from the French Ligue 1 side Nantes in a £15m deal. Dorset coroner’s court heard that the 28-year-old died when the plane crashed close to Guernsey on 21 January 2019. The body of the pilot, David Ibbotson, has never been found. On the first day of the inquest, Sala’s mother told the court that her son’s dream since childhood in Argentina had been to become a professional footballer. When she first took him to play, the family could not afford to buy him football boots so he trained in trainers, but he loved the game and thrived. In a written statement, Taffarel said his goalscoring exploits in France led to calls for him to be called up to Argentina’s national team. “He appreciated the Nantes club and the fans very much,” she said. “An offer came in from Cardiff City in December 2018. It is true to say that Emi was very happy when he eventually accepted the idea of the move as he had the chance to play in the Premier League. “He felt it was the right time to move clubs and to another league. It seemed to him that the Nantes management was also pushing his exit from the club because they were going through some financial problems. Emi’s transfer was the most expensive in history of the club and that also helped to push forward his transfer, even though the team coach didn’t want him to leave the club.” Taffarel said she spoke to her son regularly, and when she did not hear from him on the day of the flight she assumed he had gone to bed early after arriving in Wales. The following day she learned that the plane was missing. Relatives travelled to Guernsey. “In the cold weather we walked on those islands calling his name, hoping to hear from him,” she said. Taffarel spoke of the family’s trauma when the official search was eventually called off. “It was extremely distressing. We didn’t hesitate to hire a private team to continue.” The plane was located with Sala’s body inside. She said: “No one can bring Emi back to us, but we ask for justice so that Emi can rest in peace and give us a little bit of peace of mind knowing that we did everything we could so similar deaths are prevented in the future.” The inquest, which is taking place at the town hall in Bournemouth, is due to last about five weeks.Written by Julian Fellowes, who brought us Downton Abbey and recent series The Gilded Age, and directed by Michael Engler, who worked on both the aforementioned, this based-extremely-loosely-on-fact costume drama adapted from a novel by Laura Moriarty should hit the sweet spot for fans of Fellowes’ particular variety of saucy-soapy period pieces. Like so much of Fellowes’ work, it effectively flatters the viewer by assuming he or she must be familiar with certain historical figures (in this case, early cinema star Louise Brooks) and then appears to dish the dirt on them through the eyes of a character from another class or at least different social sphere. Here, that parallax view is from the perspective of Norma – played by Lady Grantham herself, Elizabeth McGovern, taking a lead role for a change. When first met in 1922 in Wichita, Kansas, Norma seems like a nice, churchgoing lady of a certain age, respectably married to a lawyer (Campbell Scott) and mother of two practically grownup sons. When she hears that local pianist Myra Brooks (Victoria Hill) is in search of a chaperone to accompany her precocious but exceedingly talented teenage daughter Louise (Haley Lu Richardson) to New York to attend a prestigious dance school, Norma mysteriously jumps at the chance. Turns out she has a good reason: she was actually raised in an orphanage there for a short while before being adopted by kindly midwestern farmers, and now wants to find her birth parents. However, Louise is a bit of a handful, as anyone who knows a bit about the real Louise Brooks would be aware. Beyond the plot frame of the film, she went on to become a actor in such films as Pandora’s Box (1929), as well as a hot mess later in life, but at this stage she’s just a headstrong, naturally unconventional kid with incandescent talent and huge ambition. Turns out the chaperoning gig is harder than it looks; Louise is forever sneaking off to do whatever she wants. Richardson has a super-silky, immaculately-cut black bob to fill in playing a character as iconic as Brooks; otherwise she is about 80% there in terms of charisma and dancing skills, and around 70% when it comes to the sex appeal and feral intelligence – but in truth it would be a challenge for anyone. McGovern holds her own gracefully, especially when Norma discovers a side to herself she didn’t know was there when she meets a handsome German handyman (Géza Röhrig) at her old orphanage, a sensitive arthouse stud-monkey if ever there was one. All the corny romance stuff is about as intrinsic to the film’s soft appeal as the scrupulously well-made frocks, encompassing late Edwardian lace and flapper-style dropwaist numbers, and dozens of well-turned cloche hats. • The Chaperone is released on 21 February on digital platforms.The sight of a magnificent white-tailed eagle has once again become common for those lucky enough to live in the flight path of those recently introduced to the Isle of Wight. Thousands of Britons have seen and heard the giant two-metre wings beating overhead, and seen the cruel-beaked birds dramatically dive for fish. For us, living in a nature-depleted country, seeing such a large predator in the wild takes the breath away. White-tailed eagles were driven to extinction in Britain in the early 20th century, and persecution by landowners was the leading cause. Shot at and poisoned by those hoping to protect their game birds, Britain’s largest bird of prey didn’t stand a chance. Yet thanks to the work of conservationists, these raptors are now frequently spotted in the skies above the Isle of Wight and Scotland – and sometimes even further afield. It’s the result of years of breeding programmes and negotiations with the Scottish and English governments. But the tragedy that originally robbed us of perhaps our most awesome airborne predator looks as though it could repeat itself. Two of these giants have now been found dead on estates in Dorset and Sussex. While the cause of death has not been established, the multi-agency police investigation suggests that foul play could have been involved. Currently, officers are conducting toxicology reports, suggesting they believe the eagles could have been poisoned. Sadly, this is all too common. In 2020 there were 137 confirmed incidents of raptor persecution, according to RSPB figures. However, these are only instances where a body is found quickly enough to determine the cause of death. Many more tagged birds of prey simply disappear, never to be seen again. A 2019 study found that of 58 hen harriers tagged over 10 years, 72% were either “confirmed to have been illegally killed or disappeared suddenly with no evidence of a tag malfunction.” Gamekeepers have previously been found to be behind the poisoning of our raptors, as they prey on grouse and other birds stocked by estates for shooting parties. A bird of prey soaring above a shoot also makes the birds scatter, disappointing those who have paid to kill them. After a series of poisonings of rare white-tailed eagles on grouse estates in Scotland, the Scottish government took action, suspending general shooting licences in the hope it would reduce these crimes. But sources at the Home Office have told me it is very difficult to secure prosecutions for the crime of taking an endangered bird out of the sky. And for many of the Conservative MPs who represent constituencies full of shooting estates and the homes of the landed gentry, wildlife crime is not a priority. Chris Loder, MP for West Dorset, has said that eagles are not welcome in his constituency and suggested that the police shouldn’t even be investigating their deaths. He said: “Dorset is not the place for eagles to be reintroduced. I’m not challenging government for more money for Dorset so it goes on this. I don’t condone this at all, but I want Dorset police to focus on county lines rather than spend time and resources on this.” The local wildlife crime team pointed out to their representative that county lines gangs are not in their jurisdiction, that they work overtime to help Britain’s wildlife, and that wildlife crime is often linked to other serious crimes, including gun offences. What message is Loder sending to those who want to kill wildlife in west Dorset? The MP has essentially given them a free pass, and signalled that eagles are not welcome in the skies above his constituency. And, despite what Loder says, eagles were not reintroduced specifically to Dorset; rather they flew out of the constituencies of wildlife-friendly MPs into those represented by the likes of Loder. His constituents could benefit from the eagles if they were to be reintroduced – a study found that those released on the Isle of Mull in Scotland brought millions to the economy, as people travelled to see the birds and spent money in local businesses. But his attitude perhaps comes as no surprise. Of the 10 biggest landowners in Dorset, eight are country estate owners, and many of these host shoots. This is not to say they had anything directly to do with the raptor deaths, but it perhaps shows why the MP is likely to consider the traditional concerns of the landed gentry over the right of everyday British people to enjoy wildlife. The problem is, there is no way to meaningfully help these birds recover and properly repopulate in the UK if there are no real consequences for those who kill them. Unless those who own estates are properly held to account for poisoned birds found on their land – perhaps having their shooting licences suspended until they can get a handle on crimes occurring under their noses – this will likely keep happening. There are few things that make me shake with anger more than the idea of a rare and magnificent bird curling up to die, a burning stomach full of poison, never to fly again. But even those who do not feel so strongly about this matter should take issue with the fact that criminals are getting away with destroying our wildlife and the country’s natural legacy, and we are seemingly powerless to stop it. Until those who own estates are held to account for what happens on their land, I am afraid history may repeat itself and we may once again see our largest bird of prey silently slip into extinction. Helena Horton is an environment reporter for the GuardianPancake Day may have survived unscathed, but most of the world’s great pre-lenten carnivals and mardi gras were cancelled in 2020 and ’21 because of the pandemic. But next week will see the limited return of some famous events, such as (reduced) Venice and Trinidad carnivals – though Brazil’s blockbusters have again been cancelled. To celebrate their return, we’d like to hear about your favourite carnival experiences, whether it was a huge, Rio-style affair, a banging street festival or a smaller, more traditional event. If you have a relevant photo, do send it in – but it’s your words that will be judged for the competition. Keep your tip to about 100 words The best tip of the week, chosen by Tom Hall of Lonely Planet, will win a £200 voucher to stay at a Sawday’s property – the company has more than 3,000 in the UK and Europe. The best tips will appear on the Guardian Travel website, and maybe in the paper, too. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here. We’re sorry, but for legal reasons you must be a UK resident to enter this competition. The competition closes on 22 February at 9am Have a look at our past winners and other tips Read the terms and conditions here If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.First we see him leaning against a wall, arms folded, a working man with pen and paper tucked into the breast pocket of his checked shirt. Then he is kneeling, removing his cap, one hand resting on a Bible as he raises the other and swears a solemn oath. This is Wharlest Jackson, long dead and long denied justice, but preserved forever on film at the moment he takes a stand against the Ku Klux Klan. Not long after joining a Black armed resistance group in Natchez, Mississippi, the 37-year-old will be murdered with impunity. Jackson is among dozens of forgotten victims of Jim Crow violence whose cold cases are being rediscovered, reinvestigated and retold after half a century. The process does not necessarily deliver justice or end the pain of descendants. But it does contribute, as the title of a new film puts it, to an American Reckoning. “As film-makers, I think we are extracting the truth from the graves of these people,” co-director Yoruba Richen says via Zoom from New York. “One thing that we can do is put their stories out there and, as much as we can, have the full story told.” Drawing on rare vérité footage shot more than 50 years ago, the documentary offers an unusually intimate glimpse of the civil rights era in the deep south. Film of young African Americans throwing a football, playing in an abandoned car and riding bikes and horses makes for a vivid contrast with the horror of the white-robed Klan, said to have a bigger per-capita presence in Natchez than anywhere else. A white supremacist is seen giving a bellicose speech above a giant Confederate battle flag, symbol of the slave-owning south during the civil war. He tells the crowd: “This is your America! This is your land! We are not going to be run out of our own country by a bunch of cannibals and savages.” Among the film’s interviewees is Debra Taylor, daughter of Klan member Sonny Taylor, who recalls: “He beat us all for talking to any Black. We were not allowed. He thought we should send them back to Africa or kill them off.” Medgar Evers, field secretary of the NAACP (National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, the oldest civil rights organisation in the country) in Mississippi, was assassinated in 1963. Two years later George Metcalfe, president of the NAACP’s Natchez chapter, was severely injured by a car bomb. Protests ensued but there was little hope of protection from a police department that included Klan members in its ranks. American Reckoning shows how Black people formed armed self-defence groups such as the Deacons for Defense and Justice. Richen, 49, who is African American, says: “I hope that people will understand that the Black freedom struggle involved many different strategies and wasn’t just reduced to the non-violent when you’re-attacked-don’t-attack-back, but that we did defend our communities and had to because of white terrorism.” The archival footage from 1965 and 1967 – much of it never broadcast before – came from film-makers Ed Pincus and David Neuman and was made available through the Amistad Research Center. Richen and co-director Brad Lichtenstein were thrilled to discover the material including Jackson, the focal point of their narrative. Lichtenstein recalled: “Yoruba and I both virtual high-fived and celebrated when we saw Wharlest Jackson walk in to the swearing-in ceremony.” It was about 8pm on 27 February 1967 when Jackson’s pick-up truck exploded as he was driving home from the Armstrong Tire &amp; Rubber Company, where he had recently gained a promotion. The father of five, treasurer of the local NAACP chapter, suffered extensive damage to the lower-half of his torso and died at the scene. The FBI concluded that the bomb or other explosive device was placed under the driver’s seat area on the outside of the frame of the truck. But the culprit was never identified or arrested. American Reckoning begins with footage of Jackson’s funeral. One mourner comments: “They’ve been killing us here for 400 years.” Another voice is heard: “Wake up, white people, before it’s too late.” Lichtenstein, 53, who is white, explains: “We open with that because the whole point of calling this American Reckoning is to say that there isn’t anything exceptional about this era. “What is still with us, besides lots of violence that’s racially motivated, is white denial. Part of the controversy in this country about critical race theory is an extension of that denial – we’re not teaching history that makes people feel uncomfortable as much as we know it’s the truth.” Speaking by phone while driving in Mississippi, Lichtenstein continues: “I was just in a room of about 50 or 60 people, about two-thirds white, in Natchez. Just now is Natchez starting to reckon with this past, starting to put up memorials, starting to teach about it.” The film also shows the late activist and congressman John Lewis leading a federal government effort to investigate civil rights-era cold cases. The Emmett Till Unsolved Civil Rights Crime Act was signed into law in 2008. This prompted newspaper journalist Stanley Nelson to investigate allegations that a Ku Klux Klan offshoot, known as the Silver Dollar Group, was involved in Jackson’s murder. But although the late Raleigh “Red” Glover, leader of the Silver Dollar Group, is the prime suspect, the FBI closed the case without an official verdict. The film shows Jackson’s son, Wharlest Jr, and daughter, Denise, hurt and tearful as they realise they will never get definitive answers. They are not alone. Of more than 150 cases opened under the Till Act , all but 25 have been closed, and the justice department has not yet brought a single indictment. Richen, whose past credits include The Killing of Breonna Taylor, says: “This film and this story shows the limits of the justice system, especially for cases where most of the people have passed on. They’re not going to get anybody in jail for these crimes but I think it can be a way to talk about what is justice. “One of the things that we learned in making this film is that Congressman Lewis wanted a bigger bill. He wanted a truth and reconciliation-type bill, in the realm of what South Africa did after apartheid, that would bring stories to light. But it wasn’t something that was politically viable at the time.” She adds: “It opens up a conversation of what justice can be for these families, of reparations, of truth and reconciliation. Now we’re having a conversation about reparations, which a few years ago was a fringe idea. These things take time and can be very slow but I do think this can be a way to begin that conversation.” The Mississippi state flag incorporated the Confederate battle emblem for 126 years. It was finally removed in 2020. Lichtenstein reflects: “If we don’t address racist violence and white supremacist violence in this country right now, 50 years from now we’re going to be talking about the cold cases of 2022. You listen to the words that people were saying in 1965 in the footage and there really isn’t much difference between then and now. “The protest movements, the same kinds of demands: we really haven’t changed that much as a country. People tend to sensationalise the violence back then because the KKK wore hoods and burned crosses but today we have plenty of white militia groups and just everyday people in a system that continues to terrorise Black communities in this country. “The reason we called it American Reckoning is in part, to call up that relationship between the past and the present.” America Reckoning is available on PBS from 16 February with a UK date to be announcedA 300ft wind turbine has been blown over in a south Wales valley as the UK braces for more dangerous stormy weather and high winds later this week. Residents of the village of Gilfach Goch, near Bridgend, were woken at 6.50am on Monday when the £20m turbine – double the height of Nelson’s Column – snapped apart and crashed into the valley below. The crumpling of its blades was described as sounding like “thunder and lightning” by some who heard it crash down from the 10-turbine Pant y Wal windfarm. Lydia Stephens said: “A wind turbine fell over in the windfarm on my village this morning and I thought it was thunder and lighting but how the hell does a wind turbine fall over? “Apparently it was creaking and banging all night before it collapsed and one woman thought it was her neighbour’s tumble dryer.” The windfarm, which opened in 2013, generates enough power for 18,000 homes. Villagers are calling on officials to inspect the remaining nine turbines, with further high winds expected across the UK this week. The Labour councillor Aurfron Roberts said: “The whole village is surrounded by turbines, we have so many projects going on on the hills around her. I’m just glad they are up on the hillside and away from people in case something like this happens. “I hope this means owners will be extra vigilant and take care. It’s probably just a really unfortunate accident but it’s lucky no one was hurt.” A spokesperson for the wind turbine’s manufacturer, Nordex, said “all necessary safety measures have been implemented” following the collapse and that the cause remained under investigation. Motorists were warned to consider cancelling planned journeys this week as two storms approached the UK. Storm Dudley will hit the north from Wednesday night until Thursday, followed by Storm Eunice, with strong winds and even snow expected on Friday. “We’re encouraging drivers to check the latest weather and travel conditions before setting off on journeys and consider if their journey is necessary and can be delayed until conditions improve,” said the National Highways head of road safety, Jeremy Phillips. “If you do intend to travel, then plan your journey and take extra care, allowing more time.” The Met Office has issued amber weather warnings for Wednesday evening for strong winds, covering southern Scotland, northern England and part of Northern Ireland. Storm Eunice could bring heavy rain and possible snowfall on high ground from the Midlands northwards, the Met Office said. It added that high winds were likely to create blizzard conditions. Its chief meteorologist, Paul Gundersen, said: “An active jet stream is driving low-pressure systems across the country, both of which are likely to cause some disruption and national severe weather warnings have been issued.” Storm Dudley is expected to bring gales of up to 90mph to some coastal areas and hills in Scotland, while Storm Eunice will hit central areas of the UK on Friday with further strong winds expected.Jimmy Kimmel Jimmy Kimmel celebrated Super Bowl Sunday, “AKA cryptocurrency awareness day”, on Monday evening, a day after the LA Rams topped the Cincinnati Bengals 23-20. “It’s all crypto now, even the half-time show – Bloods versus the Cryptos,” he joked, referring to plethora of advertisements for cryptocurrencies. “It was crypto and Peacock [NBC’s streaming platform] all day long,” he continued. “There were more ads for Peacock than there are living peacocks on the planet Earth.” Kimmel also praised the half-time show performance, a medley of 90s and early 2000s hip-hop hits by Dr Dre, 50 Cent, Snoop Dogg, Eminem, Mary J Blige and Kendrick Lamar. “You know a musical performance is cool when every 45 seconds your mother asks, ‘Who is that?’” said Kimmel. “They’re going to be talking about this one on Fox News for many years to come.” And in other news, after days of events on manufactured snow, the Winter Olympics postponed women’s downhill, delayed giant slalom and women’s slopestyle events this weekend because of actual snowfall in Beijing. “That’s right, snow disrupted the Winter Olympics,” said Kimmel. “This is like water disrupting a swim meet – it doesn’t make sense.” Stephen Colbert “Everyone’s still talking about the amazing half-time show starring Dr Dre and Snoop Dogg,” said Stephen Colbert on Monday’s Late Show. “Two legends of hardcore gangsta rap, or as the kids call them today: Martha Stewart’s friend and the headphones guy.” “But as always, the star of the game was the commercials, and this year a ton of them were pushing crypto,” he continued. Coinbase aired a spot with a floating magenta QR code, Larry David shilled for FTX, and a crypto.com ad featured LeBron James advising his younger self to learn more about the site. “If he really wants to look out for young LeBron, tell him to avoid Space Jam 2,” Colbert joked. The Monday after the Super Bowl is traditionally one of the least productive workdays of the year, but “that queasy feeling might not be from the queso you ate last night,” Colbert said. “It could be because US officials are warning that Putin could invade Ukraine at any time. “That’s not the kind of will-he-or-won’t-he that I look forward to on Valentine’s Day,” Colbert noted. Trevor Noah And on The Daily Show, Trevor Noah scrapped plans for commentary on the Super Bowl and Ukraine in favor of an extended interview with the singer India Arie, in what he described as “truly one of my favorite conversations with a human being that I ever thought I could have”. Last week, the singer announced that she would remove her music from Spotify in protest of the platform’s financial support of podcast host Joe Rogan, because she objected to his “language around race”. She also posted a compilation of clips to her Instagram account of Rogan, who is also under fire for promoting vaccine misinformation on his popular podcast, using the N-word more than 20 times. Rogan subsequently issued an apology, calling the compilation “the most regretful and shameful thing that I’ve ever had to talk about publicly”. Noah had previously devoted a 15-minute segment to the controversy around Rogan’s apology and continued support on Spotify, in which he concluded Rogan was “using racism to be entertaining”. Arie delineated between “conscious” and “unconscious” racism, offering “forgiveness” for the latter, and also arrived at the conclusion that for Joe Rogan, “he is being consciously racist”. “I think he was saying it because it got a rise out of people,” she said. “That’s why he would say it. He knew that it was inappropriate. And I think the fact that he did it repeatedly and was conscious and knew, I think that is being racist.” Arie said she was initially inclined to give Rogan the benefit of the doubt with his apology, since “he tried”, but “when I go deeper and ask myself what I really think from my commitment to truth that I’ve made this last year, what I really think is that he was being consciously racist and it makes me wonder what he talks like behind closed doors”. “I don’t think being a racist makes you a bad person, necessarily,” she later added. “It makes you a person who was raised in our society. But when does it cross over into being a bad person, or being harmful? “You have racist thoughts that you can institute with power, and that’s racism,” she said. “And so if you’re Joe Rogan and you have this huge listening audience, by you doing that, you embolden them to do that. And now we’re in trouble as a society.” Noah expounded on this view, and wondered aloud if society could cultivate compassion for redemption. “I think we should all be able to critique, criticize, talk shit and still live in a world where you go, even thought you fucked up I still don’t want you to be ostracized into a world that will encourage that behavior only,” he said. “Maybe that’s how I see it.” “That’s how I see it, too,” Arie responded, though she doubted Rogan “fully understands what he did there”. The singer noted the barrage of racial slurs from his fans in her DMs. “Joe Rogan needs to do more than just go, ‘Oh yeah, I’m sorry,’” she said. “If you want to really lead your listeners down a new path, then lead them! To the point where they don’t feel that is the right language to come in my DMs and call me an ‘N-word’ in defense of him.”Floodwaters carrying “blackwater” lethal to aquatic life are moving south in the Barwon-Darling river towards the Menindee Lakes, raising fears the situation may cause a repeat of events in 2019 where over a million native fish were killed. Blackwater events are caused when heavy rains wash leaf litter that has collected on a floodplain into a major river such as the Barwon-Darling, turning it the colour of dark tea. Australian National University (ANU) ecologist Dr Matt Colloff said they were dangerous to aquatic life as the organic compounds plants used for protection against insect attack leached out of leaf litter and dissolved into the river. “Bacteria then break down the dissolved organic compounds and release carbon dioxide,” Colloff said. “In the process of metabolising carbon, the bacteria use up the oxygen in the water.” Colloff said once concentrations of dissolved oxygen fell below about 2-3mg/L, fish suffocated because they could not draw enough oxygen from the water through their gills to survive. As blackwater events move slowly and can stretch for kilometres, there is no way for fish and other aquatic life to swim through it. Depending on the geography of the area, they can be left with nowhere to hide as the waters approach, resulting in a mass die off. The Menindee Lakes were hit by a mass die off in 2019 that is thought to have killed more than a million native fish, devastating stocks of bony herring, Murray cod, silver perch and golden perch. A spokesperson for NSWWater said in a statement the blackwater had started arriving in the upper Menindee lakes at Lake Weatherell, where the Barwon-Darling enters the system. There had been “no scope for intervention” upstream of the artificial lake system “all the way to the Queensland border”, the statement said, but efforts were under way to “shandy” the blackwater by releasing fresh water into it. “WaterNSW is releasing some of this low-quality blackwater from Lake Wetherell into the adjoining Lake Pamamaroo, where it is being diluted by better-quality water in Pamamaroo, as well as offering native fish some refuge from the worst of the blackwater. “Exposing this water to the large surface area of Lake Pamamaroo is also intended to improve dissolved oxygen levels.” The spokesperson said the blackwater entering the system had also been aerated as it moved through the gates at Lake Weatherill and Lake Menindee, but stressed the combined efforts were not a “silver bullet”. Menindee resident Graeme McCrabb said he noticed the blackwater arrive on Friday but the action of the water passing through the weir had “broken up” the water and he did not believe a fish kill was currently a risk. “We had, basically, oxygen levels below 1mg/L for extended periods of time – for 24, 48 hours in different sections,” he said. “And anywhere in the Darling, below two is high risk of fish mortality.” The New South Wales Department of Primary Industry’s and Environment was contacted for comment but did not respond to questions about oxygen readings at different stages of the river or reports of fish deaths. Blackwater events do occur naturally when river systems restart after long dry periods, but ANU professor Jamie Pittock said these events were “a natural risk that has been accelerated by poor management”. “Every few years a flood would take the leaf litter away. It’s been 10 years since the last one,” Pittock said. “It does occur naturally but the severity and frequency of these events is increasing as the environmental flows on the floodplain decrease. “The frequency of floods is decreasing because of the excessive amount of water being taken for agriculture and because of governments failing to implement the environmental flows they promised in the 2012 environmental management plan.” Pittock said a failure to regulate floodplain harvesting had also interrupted natural flooding events. While heavy flooding in northern NSW and south-east Queensland was causing the rivers to surge again, he said it would a mistake to treat the current situation as a “return to normal”. Climate change forecasts for the river system predict more severe droughts and floods, a process which is likely to increase the build-up of leaf litter over time. “That is likely to exacerbate blackwater events unless we make more substantial efforts to reduce that risk where we can through managed environmental flows,” Pittock said. NSWWater said the volume of releases into the Lower Darling downstream area was gradually being reduced from 18,000 megalitres a day down to 500 megalitres a day by the start of April. “The reduction in releases follows a prolonged period of higher releases into the Lower Darling, and is at a rate intended to maintain downstream flow while retaining as much water in the lakes at the end of the current inflow event, as required by operational regulations.”The Morrison government is considering whether a little-known section of national environmental laws could be used to allow developments in some parts of the country to proceed without the need for federal approval. The move, revealed in documents released to Guardian Australia under freedom of information laws, could allow the commonwealth to reduce its role in environmental decision-making without needing support for a bill to transfer power to the states and territories which has been blocked by the Senate since last year. A year ago, a review of the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act, led by the former competition watchdog head Graeme Samuel, called for an overhaul of Australia’s environmental protections to address the decline of the country’s wildlife. Since then, legislation that would clear the way for states and territories to take responsibility for environmental decisions under the act has failed to gain enough support in the Senate, in part because the Morrison government has not adopted a set of national environmental standards recommended by Samuel (instead drafting a weaker version of its own). Legal workaround Internal documents from the federal environment department show the government could instead rely on another section of the act, which allows for regional planning of conservation, to shrink the commonwealth’s approval role. Under national laws, the environment minister may create what is known as a regional plan. These plans are only vaguely described in the act as covering a broad range of biodiversity, social and economic factors and have previously only been used in marine areas to guide conservation and industrial activities. Another section of the act, known as section 37A, allows the federal environment minister to declare certain development activities are exempt from the requirement to gain federal environmental approval where those projects are covered by a regional plan. In last year’s budget, the government announced it would spend $2.7m on a pilot regional plan in an area of Australia that is yet to be announced. Since late last year, it has been consulting several stakeholders about the design of a framework for regional plans, among them state governments, environment and industry groups. An internal departmental briefing document, released under FOI laws, states that two of the pilot’s objectives are to “streamline development decisions by moving away from project-by-project assessments” and “establish that actions taken in accordance with a regional plan declared under s37A of the EPBC Act would not require” a separate federal environmental approval. It states the other objectives are to allow for planning at different geographic scales and to support “targeted investments in protection, conservation and restoration”. Habitat protection hopes The documents have raised concern among environmental groups involved in the consultation, several of whom are supportive of regional approaches to conservation if they are used to improve the environment of a whole area, such as by identifying and protecting critical habitat. “If it goes ahead, this pilot must be about real action to protect our wildlife and natural heritage, not an effort to lock in wholesale exemptions for destructive industries from community and environmental checks and balances, like we’ve seen with the disastrous Regional Forest Agreements,” Suzanne Milthorpe of the Wilderness Society said. A greater role for regional conservation planning – tied to national standards – was a key recommendation of the Samuel review, which suggested the government focus initially on places that were threatened species hotspots. Samuel suggested the government develop regional recovery plans to support this. Members of the threatened species scientific committee have also previously raised regional planning as a tool that could be used to address threats and environmental decline at a landscape level. “Regional plans hold great promise if done to maximise environmental outcomes,” said Alexia Wellbelove, a campaign manager at Humane Society International. “But we would be extremely concerned if they are only going to be used as an alternate pathway to exempt destructive developments from environment approvals without any standards, safeguards or investment for conservation.” The Minerals Council of Australia, which is participating in the consultation, said it was supportive of the government’s regional planning initiative, which, where practical, would “provide a pathway to balance multiple land-use options”. The council’s chief executive, Tania Constable, said: “This will avoid the need for project-by-project approvals, while supporting long-term management of regional environmental and other values.” Warwick Ragg, the National Farmers’ Federation’s general manager of natural resource management, said the organisation hoped some of its long-held concerns about the act could be addressed through a regional focus. This could include making it simpler for land-use sectors, particularly farmers, to seek advice on and understand their obligations under the law. Landscape-scale planning could include incentives for farmers who manage the environment, Ragg said. He said the NFF did not support the standards proposed by Samuel. According to a timeline in the department’s documents, the development of a regional plan in partnership with a willing jurisdiction would take about 18 months. The location would be selected shortly, potentially in time for a pre-election announcement. However, a Senate estimates hearing heard on Monday that conversations with a state or territory had not yet advanced. “Extensive consultation continues with stakeholders to finalise the pilot and location,” a spokesperson for the environment minister, Sussan Ley, said.At 17, with a few dollars in his pocket after a stint of picking shiraz grapes in Mildura in north-west Victoria, future singer-songwriter Archie Roach walked out on to a highway. He smoked three cigarettes and, to decide where he would go next, he tossed a 20 cent coin. Heads would mean following the road sign that read Adelaide, where he had never been. Tails meant returning to Melbourne, to catch up with his siblings. They had been reunited years after state authorities had stolen Roach, aged three, and his brothers and sisters from Framlingham Aboriginal mission in the state’s western district, splitting them into separate foster homes. The coin landed on heads. Roach found lodgings with the Salvation Army in an ornate, late 19th century building in Pirie Street, Adelaide, known as the People’s Palace. There he met Ruby Hunter. The tiny, extroverted Ngarrindjeri teenager was also searching for her identity after being stolen at the age of eight from her grandparents’ home in south-eastern South Australia’s Coorong region. It would become a relationship that allowed them to save each other. Across Australia, frontier violence had given way to a brutal “protection” era in which the states assumed welfare control of Indigenous people, forcing many on to missions and reserves while often removing children. When he was 14 and in foster care, Roach, a Gunditjmara/Bundjalung man, learned in a letter from his sister that both their parents had died. He would later write Took the Children Away, released in 1990, which would become an anthemic ode to these stolen generations. Just as Roach wrote of authorities who “gave us gifts to ease the pain”, Hunter and her siblings were promised they were going to the circus but were sent to children’s homes and split up between foster carers. Roach would later recall in his song Old So &amp; So how when he met Hunter that day, “she could not stop talking”. Roach, now 66, who talks to Guardian Australia from his home on his mother’s country, near Framlingham, where he is Maar nation elder, was always the “shy” one. “I could talk to people in those days if I had a bit of Dutch courage,” he says. “At the time, she was the opposite of who I was.” Their love story is the subject of writer-director Philippa Bateman’s new documentary Wash My Soul in the River’s Flow, to be released in cinemas in March. In it, Roach and Hunter’s relationship is recounted in the songs they performed together in the 2004 premiere of their Kura Tungar – Songs from the River concerts with composer-pianist Paul Grabowksy and the Australian Art Orchestra, as well as backstage and rehearsal footage and interviews, interspersed with footage of the Coorong. “Archie is my silent hero and I’m his rowdy troublemaker,” Hunter says in the film. “She just had this cheeky way about her,” Roach recalls. “Not so much making trouble but had this glint in her eye.” The couple had many children of their own, including sons Amos and Eban and foster children Kriss, Arthur and Terrence. Unofficially they looked after a further 15 to 20 children over the years, Roach estimates, admitting that he’s never stopped to tally the number. I tell Roach I vividly recall interviewing the couple at their Melbourne kitchen table in 1998, various children dashing past, and how lovely it was when Hunter kept calling me “bub”. “She’d welcome people wherever she was,” says Roach, “whether at home or when we went around the country.” Sign up for the fun stuff with our rundown of must-reads, pop culture and tips for the weekend, every Saturday morning When they began singing Took the Children Away or one of the early songs Hunter penned, Down City Streets, which dealt with their homeless years fighting battles with alcohol, were they conscious of opening audience hearts to recognise shared history and truth? “People made us aware by coming up and talking to us,” he says. “They said: ‘We weren’t taught anything about this at school, stolen generations and being removed from families.’ There was nothing being taught about contemporary Aboriginal people and their lives in the cities.” In the concert featured in the new documentary, Hunter wears a headdress made from pelican feathers from her traditional home as well as rock cockatoo feathers amid raffia, sequins and mirrors. The pelican “is really Ruby’s spirit”, says Roach. “In the dreamtime she was a pelican, before she came to Earth and was born as a baby girl. When she passed away, of course, she became a pelican again.” As Roach would sing at the end of Took the Children Away, the children “came back”. When as adults Hunter and Roach returned to the Coorong, “everything just came back to her from when she was a child and they were taken. She just wailed and hit the ground. I felt guilty about taking her back there, you know? I said, ‘Oh, sorry I brought you back here, bub. We’ll go.’ She just looked at me and said, ‘Grab my shoes, I’ll walk around here barefoot.’” Hunter would die of a heart attack, aged 54, in 2010. Roach’s own health has deteriorated. He has lived with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease for years and wears a nasal cannula to access oxygen. In late 2020, an ambulance waited on standby outside a theatre, where he was inducted into the Aria hall of fame via live telecast, to ferry him back to hospital, mostly for observation. “I use oxygen most of the day,” he says now. “It’s something that helps me get through and do things.” Roach wrote philosophically in 2012: “My recent bouts of illness, I’m sure, are a result of the Pain of being removed from my family at a young age and more recently the loss of someone I loved so dearly. But Pain can also bring about change in one’s life for the better, we can choose to ignore the Pain until it becomes unbearable or we can do something.” The excellent news is that Roach is feeling well enough to perform in a free concert with Grabowsky and the Melbourne Symphony Orchestra at the Myer Music Bowl in February, and in April will undertake his last road tour of New South Wales, with Queensland dates added. He plans to make more albums and play more concerts. “This is the last tour as far as getting on the road, but I’ll still be doing shows wherever I can.” He has also been making Kitchen Table Yarn vodcasts, giving a platform to young up-and-coming music-makers. Writing still alleviates pain, he says. “There’s a healing power in music and I realise that more today, I’m relying more on that healing. It’s a place you can go to when you’re down and not well, but it’s also a place you can go to when you’re on top of the world.” One Song: The Music of Archie Roach is at the Sidney Myer Music Bowl on 19 February. Wash My Soul in the River’s Flow will be released in cinemas across Australia from 10 March. Roach’s NSW and Queensland tour runs from 31 March to 23 April, with Adelaide and Perth concerts to followDave Hughes has been one of Australia’s best-loved comedians for more than two decades. In that time, Hughesy thinks he must have toured “up to 20” different shows. “People always say to me, are you worried about running out of material? And I say no, because life will always be ridiculous,” he wheezes. “And it appears to be getting more ridiculous by the day. So there’s always things to laugh about.” His latest show, which is coming to both the Adelaide Fringe festival and Melbourne comedy festival this year, is called Trending. It’s about getting blasted on Twitter for various pandemic-related opinions – like suggesting everyone should get vaccinated. The inspiration is “being slandered left, right and centre and how to deal with it,” he says. “You’ve either gotta laugh or cry, and I’ve learned to laugh at people saying nasty things about me.” But Hughesy wasn’t always a conversation-starter. He still has diaries from the days when he was unemployed, living in Perth and only just toying with the idea of getting into comedy. Here, he tells us why he’d save that stack of old exercise books in a fire, as well as the story of two other important personal belongings. What I’d save from my house in a fire I would save the diaries that I kept when I was 22 years old. I was living in Perth, I had just given up alcohol, and I was thinking about trying to become a comedian. People who read them say I should turn them into a book, which I’ve never done. But it’s all sitting there: the ambitions of a young bloke who had quit uni, was on the dole, without a girlfriend or any money. Just dreams. I used to write positively about what I wanted to do and the philosophies on life that I had back then, which I think put me in really good stead. It’s quite cool to look back and see how it worked out for me. They document the start of a journey which is still continuing today. My most useful object My Kindle. I love reading, and the ability to have any book in the world at the tip of your fingers is something I’m making the most of. It also stops my house being cluttered up with books. And, more importantly, reading in bed without a light on stops my wife from hating me, because I can read the Kindle on dark mode. The item I most regret losing I went to the Australian Open final a few years ago and saw Rafael Nadal play Roger Federer. It was the first time they’d played in the final for ages, and Roger Federer won his first grand slam victory in five years. I had front row seats, which I’d paid quite a bit of money for. As part of getting the seats, I got to keep some of the balls that Roger and Rafael used during the match. But sometime later my dogs got hold of them, chewed them up and they’re gone. I lost a part of history. I love the smell of new tennis balls, so I used to smell Roger and Rafael’s balls and think about the good times we’d had. It’s pretty disappointing to not have Roger and Rafael’s balls any more.Government funding for private schools in Australia has increased at nearly five times the rate of public school funding over the past 10 years according to new analysis, with predictions of a $74bn shortfall in money for public schools this decade despite the shift to a needs-based scheme. The analysis compared combined commonwealth and state government funding for schools in 2009-10 to 2019-20, based on the Productivity Commission’s report on government services, released earlier this month. It was conducted by the public school advocacy group Save our Schools. In that decade, funding for private schools – including Catholic and independent institutions – increased by $3,338 per student, adjusted for inflation, compared with $703 per student for public schools. Trevor Cobbold, an economist and national convenor for Save Our Schools, disputed claims by state and commonwealth governments that all schools had enjoyed increased funding. “In nominal terms, that is true, but when you take account of inflation, the funding hasn’t kept up with costs, so that means they’ve been cutting the real resources in public schools – and this has been happening for a decade right across the states,” he said. While commonwealth funding of state school students increased by $1,181 over the decade, state spending dropped in that time by $478 per student, the analysis found. “At a state level it’s also been disastrous for public schools, because state governments are the primary funders of public schools and on average, across Australia, they have cut funding,” Cobbold said. In 2017 the Turnbull government passed needs-based education funding legislation based on the Schooling Resource Standard (SRS). The benchmark is an estimate of how much total public funding a school requires to meet its students’ educational needs, and is based on recommendations from the 2011 Gonski review. Under the reform, overfunded independent schools would have their funding brought down to the SRS benchmark by 2029 while underfunded public schools would have their funding increased. However, Cobbold said there was an average shortfall in public school funding of $6.7bn per year between now and 2029, a total of $74bn since the 2019-2020 financial year. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Meanwhile, he said, successive Coalition federal governments had increased funding to private schools such as through the $1.2bn “choice and affordability fund” – designed to soften the financial impact for nongovernment schools during the transition to a new funding model. “The projections are that until the end of the decade, private schools will be overfunded – [that is,] funded over 100% of their Schooling Resource Standard – and public schools won’t even be funded to 91%,” he said. The Australian Education Union’s pre-budget submission has called for an “urgent” and “bold” investment in public school funding, including calling for the commonwealth to fund schools to a minimum of 100% of the SRS. Margery Evans, chief executive of Independent Schools Australia, stressed that the “vast majority” of enrolment growth in the independent school sector in the past five years was in low to medium fee schools. “These are the schools that receive higher levels of government funding overall due to their communities’ lower capacity to contribute,” she said. Under the current school funding agreement struck in 2019, the commonwealth contributes 80% of the SRS for private schools, while state governments are responsible for the remaining 20%. The split is reversed for public schools. But Cobbold said the states’ “formal target” for public schools was only 75%, contributing to the under-funding. Additionally, he said the current funding agreement also allowed states to include in its SRS contributions spending on items not originally deemed part of the Gonski benchmark such as depreciation, transport and payroll tax. New South Wales’ education minister, Sarah Mitchell, said because the figures in the Save Our Schools analysis were not taken directly from the Productivity Commission Report they were “unable to be validated by the Department of Education”. Mitchell said growth in the state’s expenditure for each student from 2010-11 to 2019-20 had exceeded all other states and territories and was more than double the national average. Victoria’s education minister, James Merlino, said since 2014-15 the state had increased its recurrent spending for government school students by more than 30%. “I have repeatedly asked the commonwealth to do its fair share and fund the final 5% of the schooling resource standard for government schools – and it has consistently refused to do so,” he said. Overall, in 2019-20 the commonwealth spent $3,246 on public school students and the states spent $11,935, for a total of $15,181. Meanwhile, the commonwealth spent $10,211 for each private school student and the states spent $2,978, a total of $13,189. The figures exclude user cost of capital, depreciation, payroll tax and school transport as these items are not included in the funding figures for private schools. Cobbold said the upcoming federal election provided an opportunity to recast education funding as a key policy area, or else inequalities in funding would worsen over the rest of the decade. A spokesperson for the acting education minister, Stuart Robert, said the government services report showed the commonwealth’s investment had grown faster for both government and nongovernment schools compared with states and territories. “The Morrison government is proud of providing record school funding to all schools to meet the educational needs of Australian students now and into the future, with $315.2bn to be provided to schools between 2018 and 2029 under the government’s Quality Schools package.” The federal opposition’s education spokesperson, Tanya Plibersek, said a Labor government would work with states and territories to ensure every public school was “on a path to its full and fair level of funding”.As a teenager, Dean Nicolle dreamed of planting one of every eucalypt species in Australia. He took his parents to nurseries and requested that they buy “any eucalypt with a different name on it”. Nicolle, a self-described “gum nut” who is now a botanist and ecologist, has been fascinated by plants since he was eight. On a plot of land at Currency Creek, an hour’s drive south of Adelaide, he set about creating his own arboretum. “The first plantings went in in 1992,” he recalls. Today, Nicolle’s arboretum is comprehensive: it has more than 10,000 plants of more than 900 different species and subspecies of eucalypt. Eucalypts are golden, literally: trees in South Australia and Western Australia have been found to draw up water containing gold and deposit the metal on their leaves and branches. They are blue, too: forests of the plants release compounds called terpenoids into the air, scattering light to give the Blue Mountains its characteristic haze. And eucalypt flowers can be almost every colour conceivable: there’s the purple of the Port Lincoln mallee, the pale pink of the caesia (also known as the silver princess) and the fluorescent yellow of the book-leaf mallee. “Eucalypts have fed obsessions, trailed questions, and leaned against each other in a pyre of ideas and images,” writes Ashley Hay in Gum: The Story of Eucalypts &amp; their Champions, a new edition of which was published in November. “They have been grown, pulped, painted, written – and ignored.” Each year, 25 species are chosen by Eucalypt Australia, a charitable trust, for a public Eucalypt of the Year poll. “It’s primarily an awareness and education tool,” says Linda Baird, chief executive of the organisation. Nicolle, who consulted on the poll, says narrowing down the list for voting was a tough ask. “That’s really difficult when you’re talking over 900 different species of eucalypts.” Voting in the 2022 competition opened this week. So which eucalypts have made the shortlist? Not just the giants Though the terms eucalypt, Eucalyptus and gum tree are often used interchangeably, they aren’t synonymous. Eucalyptus is a genus – a scientific category – of eucalypt. In Australia, plants belonging to the Eucalyptus, Angophora and Corymbia genera are known as gum trees – so called for the sticky substance, called kino, that many of the plants produce. Whether in John Williamson’s twangy cover of Home Among the Gum Trees, or the ghost gums that feature prominently in the landscapes of Albert Namatjira, images of giant eucalypts loom large in the Australian consciousness. As well as the ghost gum – which is also called ilwempe by the Arrernte people – other towering species in contention for Eucalypt of the Year include the mountain ash, which grows up to 100 metres high and is one of the tallest flowering plants in the world. There’s also the much-loved Sydney red gum, the lemon-scented gum and the messmate stringybark, a resilient species that gave rise to the term Eucalyptus. But many eucalypts aren’t trees at all. More than 300 species are shrubs, and some are even pot-plant sized. “Eucalypts grow everywhere from your ankles to 100 metres high,” Baird says. Of the smaller species featured in the voting list is the Mongarlowe mallee, the rarest eucalypt in Australia. There are only six individuals of the critically endangered species left – and they could be as old as 10,000 years. Also known as the ice age gum, the Mongarlowe mallee is thought to be a relic of when conditions in Australia were wetter and cooler, Nicolle says. Previous winners – river red gum, snow gum, red-capped gum/illyarrie and gimlet gum – are ineligible to win this year. Existential threat “Climate change would be by far the biggest threat to eucalypt species in general,” Nicolle says. “Even though they occur over most of Australia and a lot of different climatic conditions – from the mountains down to the sea – most eucalypt species are quite restricted in distribution. “They’re only adapted to a very narrow climatic range, whether it be rainfall, soil type, temperature, or a combination of all those things.” One example featured on the voting list is the endangered Morrisby’s gum. There are only a few thousand individuals found on two small hills near Hobart. “Because the climate’s been drying there, particularly the winter rainfall over the last decade, the trees have been put under a lot more water stress,” Nicolle says. “Then you get other problems … they’re more susceptible to insect attack and also predation from possums.” As a result, mature trees start to die, without regeneration of new trees. “[Eucalyptus] morrisbyi is just one example of that,” Nicolle says. “But that’s happening all over Australia, and particularly southern Australia, where winter rainfall is dropping off.” The increasing frequency of bushfires is also an existential threat. Drive through some regions that have burnt in recent years, and you might see charred trees fluffy with new green growth. This occurs because some eucalypt species have epicormic buds that lie dormant beneath the bark. “There’s a regulatory hormone in the crown [the top part of the tree], which stops the epicormic buds shooting normally,” Baird says. Damage such as by fire results in extensive sprouting and revegetation. “Then other places you go to, the trees are dead,” Baird says. “They just don’t have this ability.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Nicolle says: “There’s about 80 species that are killed by fire, so they only regenerate by seed.” This includes the mountain ash and the coral gum. For some species, regeneration to maturity takes decades. “If you’re getting fires more often than the trees can seed, grow up again and flower and seed again, then they become locally extinct in an area,” he says. Biodiversity benefits Though eucalypts are evocative of the Australian bush, many species thrive in urban environments. “People forget that there are a lot of smaller-growing species that are quite suitable for home gardens and for planning in parks,” Nicolle says. He would like to see smaller eucalypts such as the octopus mallee, the coral gum and the Moon Lagoon mallee planted more in cities, over popular exotic trees such as Manchurian pears, plane trees and flowering cherries. “While all of those [trees] are good trees, none of them have the biodiversity benefits that some of these eucalypts have in attracting native wildlife.” Eucalypt of the Year voting is open until 20 MarchThe Coalition used its $187m safer communities grants program to fund at least 10 projects that had been deemed “unsuitable” by the department after the project applicants were visited in person by Peter Dutton’s assistant minister, Jason Wood. An auditor general’s report into the program released on Monday also revealed that decisions to award grants against the recommendations of the department had been influenced by the lobbying of MPs and senators. It raised concerns about applicants having direct access to decision-makers. The audit, which found the program favoured Coalition-held seats in the lead-up to the last election, is critical of how grants were awarded with more than half delivered without a “clear basis for the decision”. Over five rounds of the program – which fell under the responsibility of Dutton as then home affairs minister – 225 applications were awarded funding worth $47.9m against the recommendations of the department. Of these, 23 projects worth a combined $7m were “assessed as either ineligible or unsuitable”. According to the audit, nine “unsuitable” applications were approved for a combined $3m of grant funding in round four of the program, which was opened just before the 2019 election, with five of these decisions being “informed by a visit by the minister during the assessment process”. “However, the records did not explain how the information obtained during the visit had impacted upon how well each application was considered to have performed against the published merit criteria,” the audit stated. The ministerial visits by Wood, the assistant home affairs minister, happened after applications for the round had already closed ahead of the 2019 election. Another five of these “unsuitable” projects were awarded funding after representations were made from MPs and senators, despite the records not explaining “how the representation had impacted upon how well each application was considered to have performed against the published merit criteria”. All of the projects funded after Wood’s visits were assessed as unsuitable against the published merit criteria, scoring between 33 and 53 out of 100, and “each failing the published threshold of scoring at least 50 per cent against one or more of the individual criteria”. In another round, seven projects were successful on the basis of a ministerial visit, with five previously assessed as “unsuitable” and another deemed ineligible. The unsuitable ranking meant that the merit scores received by the projects “were not high enough for it to either be recommended for funding or included on the list of candidates for the reserve list”. One of those projects was approved on the basis of both a ministerial visit and a letter from the local MP in support of it. Commenting on the manner in which grants were awarded, the audit highlights the “importance of transparent and equitable access to grant funding opportunities”. It compares the process used in the program to the problem that would arise if tenderers were able to “engage directly with the decision-maker” for government procurement. “Applicants for grant funding invest time, effort, and resources in preparing and submitting their applications,” the audit states. “The CGRGs (Commonwealth Grants Rules and Guidelines) do not specifically address the transparency and equity issues that arise when applicants seek to engage with decision-makers prior to decisions being taken on which candidates will receive grant funding. “As the risks that arise in these circumstances are similar to those that would arise in a procurement if some tenderers were able to engage directly with the decision-maker, there would be benefits in the CGRGs explicitly addressing whether applicants should be able to interact with decision-makers prior to grant funding decisions being taken. “And if so, how risks to the principles of equity, transparency and probity are to be managed.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The projects funded on the back of ministerial visits by Wood were in addition to two projects awarded grants by Dutton during the Braddon byelection in 2016, which were announced prior to an application being made and against the recommendations of the department. The audit raises concern about the impact of ministerial visits on the decision-making process, saying that how they influenced grant decisions was not made clear. “The records of decisions did not set out how information collected during ministerial visits to certain applicants and representations from parliamentarians was being relied upon to inform an assessment against the grant opportunity guidelines.” The auditor general points to the obligations under the Public Governance, Performance and Accountability Act regarding the approval of expenditure by ministers, saying that they are required to “undertake reasonable inquiries to satisfy themselves that the proposed expenditure would be an efficient, effective, economical and ethical use of public resources”. Ministers are required “to record the terms of the approval” under the act, and are also obliged under the commonwealth grants rules to “record in writing the basis for the approval relative to the grant opportunity guidelines and the key principle of achieving value with relevant money”. In parliament on Tuesday, Labor asked the now home affairs minister, Karen Andrews, to explain why the Holland Park Mosque, which had applied for a grant “after being subject to a number of Islamophobic attacks” had missed out on funding. The mosque was vandalised with swastikas and references to the Christchurch shooter as a “saint”. In response, Andrews said that the government “had always acted in the best interests of our communities” but acknowledged there had been some ministerial “intervention”. “There were a range of programs that were assessed by the department and, yes, there was some intervention from ministers responsible to support key programs in a number of seats. “So those opposite can get all precious and work themselves up about how grant funding was in fact allocated, but there were instances where ministers did take specific responsibility to make sure that programs could be supported in various communities.” Wood was contacted for comment.The Future Fund has been forced to divest about $5m in taxpayers’ money from a Chinese state-controlled weapons manufacturer that sold arms to the genocidal Myanmar military. Last year, the Guardian revealed that Australia’s sovereign wealth fund had invested $4.9m in five subsidiaries of the Chinese arms conglomerate Aviation Industry Corporation of China (AVIC). AVIC had sold the Myanmar military K-8 light combat aircraft, 16 JF-17M combat aircraft, 40 short-range PL-5E missiles and 24 longer-range PL-12 missiles. The Future Fund divested from AVIC in November, a month after the investment was revealed in freedom of information documents. The government is trying to shield the Future Fund from future FOI requests about its investments. At Senate estimates on Tuesday, Greens senator Nick McKim asked Future Fund chief executive, Dr Raphael Arndt, whether the divestment was only made due to the embarrassment of the FOI. Arndt said the divestment was made due to US sanctions against AVIC. “In August 2021, the US treasury announced that there would be investment sanctions against one AVIC subsidiary, being Avic Shenyang Aviation Company Ltd, which is one of the companies we had an investment in,” Arndt said. “[We] proceeded to divest that position. Under the sanction that was issued, they had until June of this year to do that and I believe the response to the FOI request was October 2021. In November of 2021, that position was fully divested.” UN investigators say Myanmar’s military, known as the Tatmadaw, executed 2017 “clearance operations” with “genocidal intent” against the ethnic minority Rohingya in Rakhine state. Evidence suggests the military was involved in mass killings, including of children, as well as gang rapes, arson and torture. The UN also found in 2019 that China was breaching international humanitarian law by transferring military supplies through AVIC to the Tatmadaw. Arndt said the $4.9m investment in AVIC was made through an index fund, and that the Future Fund doesn’t look at individual companies it invests in through index positions. That is left to third-party investment managers, he said. But McKim said it was clear the divestment would not have happened without the FOI request. “The Future Fund had been caught out investing Australians’ money in companies facilitating the coup in Myanmar, massacres of civilians and the brutal repression of democracy,” he said. “Coupled with the Future Fund’s previous investments in the Adani Group, this clearly highlights why we shouldn’t allow the secrecy of making their investments exempt from freedom of information laws, as the government is proposing.” In anticipation of the Future Fund’s appearance at estimates, an alliance of aid, human rights groups and unions wrote to the chair of the fund, Peter Costello, to express their alarm at the revelations. The groups included Amnesty International, Justice for Myanmar, the Australian Council for International Development, the Australian Centre for International Justice, and the Australian Council of Trade Unions. “Any Future Fund investments in companies supplying arms to, or in partnership with, the Myanmar military are fuelling the very human rights abuses that are causing the dire humanitarian situation in Myanmar necessitating the provision of humanitarian and development aid to mitigate the impacts of those abuses,” the group said. “It undermines the Australian government’s support for a return to peace and democracy in Myanmar, its own humanitarian and development support and its support for Asean’s five-point consensus and an end to the violence unleashed by the military.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The government is seeking to shield the Future Fund from future FOIs about its investments. The changes, if passed, would grant wide-ranging exemptions to the Future Fund from FoI law. That prompted criticism that it was a “calculated response” to an FOI that revealed the fund’s $3.2m investment in an Adani company criticised by the United Nations for an arrangement that gave financial support to the Myanmar military.That’s all from me, Léonie Chao-Fong, on the global coronavirus blog for today as I cross over to our Ukraine coverage. Please feel free to join me there. In the meantime, here’s a recap of all the international Covid developments: Long Covid is less likely to affect vaccinated people than unvaccinated people, a review by the UK Health Security Agency released has concluded. “These studies add to the potential benefits of receiving a full course of the Covid-19 vaccination,” said Dr Mary Ramsay, head of immunisation at UKHSA. The lifting of remaining Covid restrictions in England will “disproportionately impact” vulnerable sections of the population, the UK government’s scientific advisers have warned. Members of SPI-B say the removal of free Covid testing will make it more difficult for people experiencing Covid symptoms to take action, including self-isolation, potentially increasing anxiety among people who are clinically vulnerable. Japan reported 236 Covid-19 deaths on Tuesday, the highest daily deaths since the pandemic began. The country has started to see a decline in daily new Covid cases but experts have warned that deaths may continue to increase due to a recent series of infection clusters at facilities for elderly people. South Korea also reported its highest number of Covid deaths in a month today as daily cases surpassed 80,000 for the first time. US health authorities advised Americans to avoid travelling to the country grappling with a fast-developing Omicron surge. One of the last remaining countries without Covid – the small Pacific nation of Cook Islands – has reported its first case of the virus. Papua New Guinea will reopen to vaccinated travellers from Wednesday after two years of strict border rules. Some domestic restrictions will remain, including compulsory mask-wearing in markets, shops, on public transport and places of worship. Vietnam’s tourism ministry has proposed a full reopening of the country to foreign visitors and lifting nearly all travel restrictions from 15 March. The proposal, which will be submitted to the prime minister for approval, follows similar reopening steps taken by other south-east Asian countries, such as Thailand and the Philippines. Hong Kong’s chief executive, Carrie Lam, said she had “no plans whatsoever” to impose a mainland China-style “complete, wholesale” lockdown amid surging coronavirus cases that have left the city’s emergency resources overwhelmed. A new wave of infections from the Omicron variant of coronavirus is moving towards the east of Europe, the World Health Organization said on Tuesday, urging authorities to improve vaccination and other measures. The Queen has carried out her first official engagements since it was announced that Prince Charles had tested positive for Covid-19 on Thursday. Our US west coast reporter, Dani Anguiano, looks at how a Californian police department is encouraging unvaccinated offers to join them. A sheriff’s department in southern California is encouraging law enforcement officers who oppose vaccine mandates to “take back [their] freedom” and apply for jobs with the department. The Kern county sheriff’s office released a video last week inviting applications from deputies within Los Angeles county, where officials passed an order that could lead to the termination of thousands of county workers who haven’t received the Covid-19 vaccine or provided a religious or medical exemption. “Drive north, we have a place for you … Kern county is a community that backs the blue,” the minute-long ad says, as country singer George Strait sings The Weight of the Badge, a song paying tribute to police. Covid-19 vaccination rates inside the LA sheriff’s department have lagged far below that of the public, with just 54% of workers fully vaccinated, despite a vaccination mandate for county employees. Last week the county board of supervisors moved to shift vaccine mandate enforcement power away from the LA county Sheriff, Alex Villanueva. Villanueva, who has criticised mask orders and said he will not fire workers who refuse the vaccine, said such an act could lead to more than 4,000 unvaccinated deputies losing their jobs. The sheriff’s office in Kern county, a deeply conservative expanse located immediately to the north of Los Angeles, responded with its video the next day. “So take back your freedom, and APPLY today to work at the Kern county sheriff’s office. You deserve a job that welcomes you and your values, with open arms.” Hello everyone. It’s Léonie Chao-Fong here again, bringing you all the latest global developments on the coronavirus pandemic. Feel free to drop me a message if you have anything to flag. You can reach me on Twitter or via email. The lifting of remaining Covid restrictions in England will “disproportionately impact” vulnerable sections of the population, the UK government’s scientific advisers have warned. Members of the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage) behavioural science subgroup, SPI-B, say the removal of free Covid testing will make it more difficult for people experiencing Covid symptoms to take actions (including self-isolation) to reduce transmission to others, potentially increasing anxiety among people who are clinically vulnerable. The report says: In the event of remaining restrictions being lifted, policy makers and communicators should seek to mitigate potential economic and social harms to those identifying as clinically vulnerable and those from deprived socioeconomic and minority groups. If the legal requirement to self-isolate upon testing positive is lifted and becomes an item of public health guidance, it is likely to lead to further ambiguity among the public about the need for strict adherence. This will disproportionately impact vulnerable sections of the population, for example those who face greater pressure to work outside the home when ill because of financial hardship, precarious employment, or caring responsibilities. And some reaction to SPI-B’s latest report from the UK’s scientific community. From Prof Susan Michie, director of the centre for behaviour change at University College London: From Stephen Reicher, a member of the Sage subcommittee advising on behavioural science: And from Dr Zubaida Haque, a member of the Independent Sage committee: NHS medical director Professor Stephen Powis said: With more than 10,000 people in hospital with Covid, this study is a timely and important reminder that vaccines remain our best protection against the virus, reducing the chances of becoming seriously unwell as well as the effects of long Covid. The NHS vaccination programme has helped prevent over 100,000 hospitalisations since mid-December alone, and so the NHS is clear, when eligible book in for your vaccine without delay. Long Covid is less likely to affect vaccinated people than unvaccinated people, a review of 15 studies by the UK Health Security Agency released on Tuesday has concluded. “These studies add to the potential benefits of receiving a full course of the Covid-19 vaccination,” said Dr Mary Ramsay, head of immunisation at UKHSA. “Vaccination is the best way to protect yourself from serious symptoms when you get infected and may also help to reduce the longer-term impact.” Last week Boris Johnson announced that all Covid regulations in England, including the requirement to isolate after testing positive, were due to be abolished on 24 February. Whille the Omicron variant has caused fewer hospitalisations and deaths than many predicted, some scientists say the changes may be going too far, too soon. In this week’s episode of the Science Weekly podcast, Madeleine Finlay gets the Guardian science correspondent Hannah Devlin’s view on whether there’s scientific evidence backing up this decision and what the changes could look like. You can listen to the episode here: What will ‘living with Covid’ actually mean? Vietnam’s tourism ministry has proposed a full reopening of the country to foreign visitors and a lifting of nearly all travel restrictions from 15 March, three months earlier than planned, Reuters reports. The proposal, which will be submitted to the prime minister for approval, follows similar reopening steps taken by other Southeast Asian countries such as Thailand and the Philippines, where the Omicron variant has caused a recent surge in new infections, but fewer hospitalisations and deaths than previous variants. The proposal includes maintaining a one-day quarantine requirement for visitors plus requiring negative Covid tests before departure and on arrival. Vietnam announced a record 31,814 new coronavirus cases on Tuesday, adding to the more than 2.54 million infections so far. It has recorded about 39,000 deaths overall. It imposed among the world’s strictest border controls two years ago as the coronavirus pandemic swept the globe. It saw some initial success in keeping the virus out, but the policy dealt a blow to its burgeoning tourism sector, which accounted for about 10% of gross domestic product in 2019. Foreign arrivals fell to 157,000 last year, compared with 18 million in 2019. Since November, Vietnam has allowed foreign tourists to visit designated places under a vaccine passport programme and had originally aimed to fully reopen the industry from June. Almost 77% of its 98 million population has been vaccinated, according to official data, one of the region’s highest rates. Hello, I’m Lucy Campbell, stepping in while Léonie has a break. Please feel free to get in touch with me as I work if you have a story or tips to share! Your thoughts are always welcome. Email: lucy.campbell@theguardian.com Twitter: @lucy_campbell_ Here’s a quick roundup of what’s been happening so far: Japan reported 236 Covid-19 deaths on Tuesday, the highest daily deaths since the pandemic began. The country has started to see a decline in daily new Covid cases but experts have warned that deaths may continue to increase due to a recent series of infection clusters at facilities for elderly people. South Korea also reported its highest number of Covid deaths in a month today as US health authorities advised Americans to avoid travelling to the country grappling with a fast-developing omicron surge. One of the last remaining countries without Covid – the small Pacific nation of Cook Islands – has reported its first case of the virus. Hong Kong’s chief executive, Carrie Lam, said she had “no plans whatsoever” to impose a mainland China-style “complete, wholesale” lockdown amid surging coronavirus cases that have left the city’s emergency resources overwhelmed. The UK’s high court has ruled that the former health secretary Matt Hancock did not comply with a public sector equality duty when he appointed the Conservative peer Dido Harding as head of a new public health quango. A new wave of infections from the Omicron variant of coronavirus is moving towards the east of Europe, the World Health Organization said on Tuesday, urging authorities to improve vaccination and other measures. Papua New Guinea will reopen to vaccinated travellers from Wednesday after two years of strict border rules. Some domestic restrictions will remain, including compulsory mask-wearing in markets, shops, on public transport and places of worship. A doctor from the German embassy in Moscow will conduct a coronavirus test on Olaf Scholz on his arrival in Russia, a German government source said, ahead of a meeting between the German chancellor and the Russian president, Vladimir Putin. The Queen has carried out her first official engagements since it was announced that Prince Charles had tested positive for Covid-19 on Thursday. I’ll be handing the blog over to my colleague Lucy Campbell for the next hour. Thank you for reading. Here’s an interesting thread from The Times’ science editor, Tom Whipple, on the UK’s Covid-19 testing and surveillance infrastructure. The Queen has carried out her first official engagements since it was announced that Prince Charles had tested positive for Covid-19 last week, having met with the Queen a couple of days earlier. The 95-year-old monarch held virtual audiences from Windsor Castle and was pictured speaking with the Estonian ambassador via video-link from Buckingham Palace. The Queen spent time with Charles last Tuesday, when the prince was carrying out an investiture on her behalf at her Windsor Castle home. On Thursday, he revealed he has tested positive for the virus. At the time Buckingham Palace said the Queen was not displaying any symptoms of the virus. Yesterday Clarence House confirmed that Camilla, Duchess of Cornwall, had also tested positive for the virus. The UK’s high court has ruled that the former health secretary Matt Hancock did not comply with a public sector equality duty when he appointed the Conservative peer Dido Harding as head of a new public health quango. The race and equality thinktank the Runnymede Trust successfully won its claim against the government over the appointment in August 2020 of Harding as interim executive chair of the National Institute for Health Protection, as well as the appointment in September 2020 of Mike Coupe as director of testing at NHS test and trace. Two judges granted a declaration to the Runnymede Trust on Tuesday after considering arguments at a high court hearing in December. The campaign group the Good Law Project had joined the trust in making complaints – arguing the government had not adopted an “open” process when making appointments to posts “critical to the pandemic response”. However, judges dismissed the claim by the Good Law Project. Lord Justice Singh and Mr Justice Swift concluded that Hancock had not complied with “the public sector equality duty” in relation to the appointments. Papua New Guinea will reopen to vaccinated travellers from Wednesday, marking the end of two years of strict border rules that have virtually sealed the country off. The country’s pandemic controller, David Manning, announced today that he had revoked rules requiring approval to enter Papua New Guinea and mandatory quarantine, Agence France-Presse reports. Some domestic restrictions will remain, including compulsory mask-wearing in markets, shops, on public transport and places of worship, as well as a limit of 100 people for gatherings. More than 37,000 Covid-19 cases have been recorded in Papua New Guinea since the start of the pandemic, but it is believed that the true number of cases is far higher, with low testing rates and widespread stigma about Covid-19. The country’s health care system has long been plagued by shortages of drugs, funding, an ailing infrastructure and a severe lack of health workers. It has one of the lowest rates of vaccination in the world, with around 4% of the total population vaccinated. Last year, the Lowy Institute in Australia conducted modelling that predicted Papua New Guinea would take five years to vaccinate just a third of its population. Russia has reported 166,631 new Covid-19 cases in the past 24-hour period, down from 180,456 the day before, and 704 further deaths, the federal response centre said. In addition, 21,833 people infected with Covid-19 have been hospitalised over the past 24 hours, a 108.9% increase from the day before. Our acting data projects editor, Pamela Duncan, looks into the UK’s latest Covid-19 deaths figures: The total number of deaths involving Covid in the UK reached 183,502 in early February, figures published this morning show. The Office for National Statistics recorded 1,242 registrations where Covid was mentioned on the death certificate in England and Wales in the week to 4 February, or one in 10 deaths. This was another decrease in the weekly number of Covid deaths, falling from 1,385 deaths or 11.2% of all deaths registered in the previous week. Two-thirds of the deaths recorded in the latest seven-day period had Covid listed as the underlying cause of death, rather than a contributory cause, down from 71.2% the previous week. Overall, the number of deaths occurring have remained below the five-year average for six weeks, now having been higher than normal for close to six months. There was a slight increase in the number of deaths among care home residents in England and Wales in the last week covered by the data. A total of 341 care home residents died with Covid in the week to 4 February, rising from 333 a week earlier. The figure recorded by the ONS is different to the government’s official count of 159,605 because the latter only records those deaths that are known to have occurred within 28 days of a positive coronavirus test, while the ONS counts all deaths where the virus was mentioned on the death certificate. A week after the Philippines reopened to foreign tourists for the first time in two years, the president’s spokesperson has declared the country is now at a “low risk” from the coronavirus pandemic. “The National Capital Region and the entire Philippines now have a low-risk classification” in terms of case growth, prevalence and health system capacity, said Karlo Nograles, person for President Rodrigo Duterte. Cases have averaged about 3,600 daily in the past week although there are concerns that infections may rise as campaigning for the 9 May presidential elections begins, with political rallies seen as potential super-spreader events. Health officials say the number of fully vaccinated people in the Phillippines has reached around 56% of the population and hospital bed occupancy rates are at about 30%. The government plans to lift all restrictions, the health undersecretary, Maria Rosario Vergeire, promised, but she refused to give a specific time frame. “When that happens, all restrictions will be lifted and everything will be under self-regulation,” she added. More than 55,000 people have died in the Phillippines, according to government data, although a recent new report suggests the true number of deaths may be double the health department’s official numbers. Our Rome correspondent, Angela Giuffrida, reports on the latest Covid-19 restrictions in Italy: All workers in Italy over the age of 50 are now obliged to show proof of vaccination or recovery from Covid-19 within the last six months to access their workplace. The measure was announced in early January, when daily infections were hovering around 200,000 a day and hospitals were under pressure, and took effect on Wednesday. The vaccine was also made mandatory for the over-50s on 8 January. Of the 2.4 million people over the age of 50 who had not been vaccinated on that date, about 1.7m are still unvaccinated, according to Wired Italia. Workers aged over 50 make up 8.8 million of the population. Italy has among the strictest Covid-19 rules in Europe, and is easing them slowly, for example the requirement to wear masks outside was scrapped last Friday. But Matteo Salvini, the leader of the League, the far-right party that is part of prime minister Mario Draghi’s broad coalition, is pushing for all restrictions to be lifted in March. “We can’t be the ones with the most rules,” he said. Infections have dropped sharply in recent weeks, with 28,630 registered on Monday, and hospitalisations have been falling. However, Italy is still recording a stubbornly high death rate, with 281 further fatalities reported on Monday. Japan reported 236 Covid-19 deaths on Tuesday, the highest daily deaths since the pandemic began and bringing the country’s cumulative death toll to 20,759. Japan has seen more than 100 daily deaths since early this year, mostly among the elderly population, amid a sixth wave of infections driven by the highly transmissible Omicron variant. The total number of cases in Japan has surpassed 4 million. The country has started to see a decline in daily new Covid cases but experts have warned that deaths may continue to increase due to a recent series of infection clusters at facilities for elderly people. “The growth in the number of severely ill patients is likely to continue for a while,” said Shigeru Omi, chairperson of the government’s coronavirus subcommittee on Monday. The latest figures come after the Imperial Household Agency confirmed that Princess Yoko of Japan has developed moderate pneumonia after testing positive for coronavirus. Yoko, 38, was admitted to the University of Tokyo hospital on Tuesday after complaining of a sore throat early last week. Hello everyone. It’s Léonie Chao-Fong here, taking over the live blog from Tom Ambrose to bring you all the latest global developments on the coronavirus pandemic. Feel free to get in touch on Twitter or via email. More on the worsening coronavirus situation in Hong Kong, where hospitals are buckling under the strain of soaring cases driven by the Omicron variant and at least two medical facilities have placed patients in beds outside their entrances. Hong Kong’s chief executive, Carrie Lam, told reporters today she had “no plans whatsoever” to impose a mainland China-style “complete, wholesale” lockdown. But she insisted zero-Covid remained her administration’s goal, despite mounting pressure from public health experts and business figures to switch to a mitigation strategy. Lam said: We have to continue to fight this anti-epidemic battle. Surrendering to the virus is not an option. Here is a round-up of the day’s main Covid stories so far: South Korea reported its highest number of Covid deaths in a month today as US health authorities advised Americans to avoid travelling to the country grappling with a fast-developing omicron surge. One of the last remaining countries without Covid – the small Pacific nation of Cook Islands – has reported its first case of the virus. The Canadian prime minister, Justin Trudeau, has announced his government will invoke the Emergencies Act as the country goes into a third week of “illegal and dangerous” blockades. A new wave of infections from the Omicron variant of coronavirus is moving towards the east of Europe, the World Health Organization said on Tuesday, urging authorities to improve vaccination and other measures. Novak Djokovic says he would rather miss out on grand slams than be vaccinated against Covid, in his first major interview since being deported from Australia earlier this year due to his vaccination status. A doctor from the German embassy in Moscow will conduct a coronavirus test on Olaf Scholz on his arrival in Russia, a German government source said, ahead of a meeting between the German chancellor and the Russian president, Vladimir Putin. Indonesia reported 57,049 new coronavirus cases on Tuesday, a record daily high, according to data from its Covid taskforce. Hong Kong’s leader said a surge of coronavirus cases is overwhelming the city’s emergency resources but defended strict measures that have been imposed. All remaining Covid legal restrictions in Northern Ireland are to be lifted and replaced by guidance. That’s it from me, Tom Ambrose, until tomorrow. My colleague Léonie Chao-Fong will be along shortly to continue bringing you all the latest coronavirus news throughout the rest of the day. Goodbye. Indonesia reported 57,049 new coronavirus cases on Tuesday, a record daily high, according to data from its Covid taskforce. The south-east Asian nation has recorded 4.9 million cases overall and more than 145,000 deaths. The Canadian prime minister, Justin Trudeau, has announced his government will invoke the Emergencies Act as the country goes into a third week of “illegal and dangerous” blockades. All remaining Covid legal restrictions in Northern Ireland are to be lifted and replaced by guidance. Northern Ireland’s health minister, Robin Swann, confirmed on Monday that all legal restrictions in the region would be replaced by guidance from 15 February. He will make an order revoking the remaining rules on Tuesday. Under current Covid regulations, people are still required to wear face coverings in public places and Covid certificates are needed for nightclubs. Swann, who tested positive for coronavirus on Sunday, was advised last week on the potential legal complications of him replacing Covid regulations with guidance, without the wider endorsement of an executive. A doctor from the German embassy in Moscow will conduct a coronavirus test on Olaf Scholz on his arrival in Russia, a German government source said, ahead of a meeting between the German chancellor and the Russian president, Vladimir Putin. Scholz headed to Moscow on Tuesday on a high-stakes mission to avert war, with Russia’s largest trading partner in Europe warning of far-reaching sanctions if Russia attacks Ukraine. The PCR test will be carried out on board the plane, which has landed in Moscow, the source said, adding that the chancellery had offered Russia the opportunity to send someone to observe the procedure. The French president, Emmanuel Macron, last week refused a Kremlin request that he take a Russian Covid test when he arrived to see Putin, to prevent the chance of Russia getting hold of Macron’s DNA, two sources in Macron’s entourage told Reuters. A new wave of infections from the Omicron variant of coronavirus is moving towards the east of Europe, the World Health Organization said on Tuesday, urging authorities to improve vaccination and other measures. Over the past two weeks, cases of Covid have more than doubled in Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, Russia and Ukraine, WHO’s Europe regional director Hans Kluge said in a statement. Novak Djokovic says he would rather miss out on grand slams than be vaccinated against Covid, in his first major interview since being deported from Australia earlier this year due to his vaccination status. Djokovic told the BBC on Tuesday he was not anti-vaccination in general but believed people had the right to choose whether they were jabbed or not. Asked if he would miss Wimbledon and the French Open over his vaccine stance, he replied: “That is the price that I’m willing to pay.” “The principles of decision making on my body are more important than any title or anything else,” Djokovic said. “I’m trying to be in tune with my body as much as I possibly can.” Djokovic said he had “always been a great student of wellness, wellbeing, health, nutrition”. “I was never against vaccination. I understand that, globally, everyone is trying to put a big effort into handling this virus and seeing, hopefully, an end soon to this virus,” he said. The 34-year-old did not rule being vaccinated for Covid in the future – telling the BBC he was keeping his “mind open”. One of the last remaining countries without Covid – the small Pacific nation of Cook Islands – has reported its first case of the virus. The prime minister, Mark Brown, said the first case arrived on an international flight from New Zealand on 10 February. “While she was asymptomatic, she returned a positive result in just a few hours later. The case been issued an isolation order. The case is travelling with two others, and they will all remain in isolation until they no longer test positive for Covid-19,” Brown said on Monday. The prime minister said at the weekend there could be “silent transmission” in the country after another traveller tested positive for Covid upon their return to New Zealand, having travelled through the Cook Islands from 31 January to 8 February. “It is likely that the person who tested positive was infectious while here and further likely that the virus is in our community,” the prime minister said of that case on social media on Saturday. Meanwhile, Hong Kong’s leader said a surge of coronavirus cases is overwhelming the city’s emergency resources but defended strict measures that have been imposed. Chief executive Carrie Lam said the Chinese central government was extending help to the city, which remains a nominally autonomous enclave, the Associated Press reported. Despite its varying success, Hong Kong has stuck with China’s zero-tolerance strategy requiring lockdowns, quarantines and mass testing for Covid. Lam said: So far, our measures to contain the spread of the disease remain legitimate and valid. The problem we are facing is given the magnitude, the pace of and the severity of this fifth wave. It has outgrown our capacity. The city reported a record 2,071 new cases on Monday, with that number expected to double on Tuesday with more than 4,500 preliminary positives identified. Lam added that authorities will designate as quarantine stations new public housing units that have yet to be occupied, along with around 10,000 hotel rooms. Hong Kong requires confirmed coronavirus cases to isolate. The city’s restrictions extend to limiting in-person gatherings to no more than two households, allowing only vaccinated people in shopping malls and supermarkets, and closing places of worship, hair salons and other businesses. Hello. I’m Tom Ambrose and will be bringing you the latest Covid news from around the world over the next few hours. We begin with the news that South Korea reported its highest number of Covid deaths in a month today as US health authorities advised Americans to avoid travelling to the country grappling with a fast-developing omicron surge. The 61 deaths reported by the Korea Disease Control and Prevention Agency on Tuesday was the highest daily tally since the 74 reported on 19 January, when the country was emerging from an outbreak driven by the Delta variant. While Omicron so far seems less likely to cause serious illness or death, the greater scale of the outbreak is fuelling concerns that hospitalisations and fatalities could spike in coming weeks, the Associated Press reported. The 57,177 new cases reported by the KDCA was another one-day record and more than a 12-fold increase from the levels seen in mid-January, when omicron became the dominant strain. The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention updated its travel notice for South Korea to level 4, the highest risk, advising Americans to avoid travel to the country or to make sure they are fully vaccinated if travelling is necessary. Park Hyang, a senior South Korean Health Ministry official, said the country’s hospital resources remain stable, with less than 27% of intensive care units designated for Covid currently being occupied.The iconic tenor of my lifetime – and in terms of sheer voice, the very best – was Luciano Pavarotti. I only heard him once in the flesh, in a production of Verdi’s Un Ballo in Maschera at London’s Royal Opera House. His interest in the stage action was limited, but his vocal resources were only marginally depleted after decades of shining high Cs, and I felt the magic. What had propelled Pavarotti into the stratosphere of international celebrity was a celebratory event at the 1990 World Cup in the Baths of Caracalla in Rome: the famous Three Tenors concert in which he sang Puccini’s aria from Turandot, Nessun Dorma, with its climactic high B on the word “vincero” – “I will win”. I was then a young singer making my way in the apparently more rarefied worlds of Lieder and Mozart opera, and I was more than a little snobbish about all this; a snobbishness that no doubt sprang from defensiveness about my vocal capacities, as well as protectiveness for the leaner repertoire that I performed and loved. Sir Colin Davis very adventurously once asked me to sing the Verdi Requiem, the nearest I ever got to the Italian big guns, but I knew it was not for me. But the Ron Howard documentary on Pavarotti set me thinking about what we really value in great singing. The triumphalism, the sheer athleticism of the classic tenor voice is all very well, but watching Pavarotti singing Puccini’s E lucevan le stelle from Tosca, late in his career, conducted by his friend and fellow tenor Plácido Domingo, I realised that he was not just a voice, not just a tenor, but an expressive artist of extraordinary gifts. The desperation of the aria draws from Pavarotti that miraculous interaction between the personal life experience and artistic material that is at the heart of what great singers do. Great singers such as Pavarotti, or Billie Holiday, or Bob Dylan. My latest recording is a collection of 17th-century Venetian and Neapolitan opera arias, written in an era in which the tenor was not the shining star he became in the course of the 19th and 20th centuries. Indeed, the beginnings of the tenor were lowly. The term itself comes from the Latin verb “tenere” – “to hold” – and emerged from medieval vocal ensemble music in which the higher male voice provided an underpinning in terms of pitch and long vowels. Nothing glamorous there. But by the early 17th century, the tenor had emerged as a crucial figure in the development of the new form of opera. The earliest opera that we still perform as part of the repertoire is Monteverdi’s Orfeo, written in 1607 for the Gonzaga court at Mantua, with the dominating title role played by a tenor. As Giovanni Battista Dona had it in 1635, “the tenor has a better adjusted and more perfectly organised body,” something with which we can all agree. The story that is usually told is that the glamour of the castrato singer – a male mezzo soprano or soprano with prodigious power and virtuosity – came in the course of the 17th century, to force the tenor into the shadows. While there is an element of truth in this, it remained the case that significant roles were written for particularly charismatic singers with tenor voices, well into the 18th century – not least the Handelian triumvirate of Francesco Borosini, Annibale Pio Fabri and John Beard. It’s also the case that arias written for high voices, castrato and female, were often reassigned to lower male voices in so-called octave transposition. Handel did this, as did many of his contemporaries, adjusting their music to the voices on hand. My recording includes both of these sorts of arias, and what has interested me most in them has been the opportunity they offer for a sort of singing that is far removed from the clarion high-wire ascendancy of the post-Romantic tenor and the roles for which Pavarotti and Domingo were most famous. The orchestras these arias were written for were smaller, as were most of the theatres they were sung in. The instruments were less loud. The vocal writing can be florid but it never focuses on sheer virtuosity, either in terms of fast passage work or cultivated high notes. There is an opportunity here to cultivate the ideal set out by one of the earliest opera composers, the tenor Jacopo Peri, of whom it was said that “his singing would have moved to tears any heart of stone”. The emphasis is on the natural voice, not over-projected, moving within a moderate extension of its speaking range and using vowel sounds and consonants to create colours in much the same way as the great jazz singers – Billie Holiday for example. I’ve spent quite a lot of time in the past couple of years working with the jazz pianist and composer Brad Mehldau. He wrote us a song cycle, The Folly of Desire, with texts by Blake, Brecht, Yeats and Cummings among others, and with a stylistic compass from the delicately classical to a raucous impersonation of Supertramp (“with Wurlitzer”, as the directions at the head of the song read). In recital we would then perform Schumann’s Dichterliebe and a set of jazz standards, on one occasion in Prague segueing seamlessly from Schubert’s Nacht und Träume into Cole Porter’s Night and Day. Returning to the baroque after this excursion, I remembered the great William Christie, creator of the French baroque group Les Arts Florissants, telling me 25 years ago – much to my bafflement – how much jazz there was in this music. And I note now that my favourite contemporary jazz vocalist is Cécile McLorin Salvant, trained in the French baroque. Maybe the artificial barriers are breaking down? And maybe classical singers are not first and foremost tenors, sopranos, baritones or what not, but just singers plain and simple. • Tormento d’amore is released by Warner Classics on 18 February. • This article was amended on 18 February: the Verdi opera Pavarotti sung in at the Royal Opera House was Un Ballo in Maschera.Here’s a roundup of the key developments of the day: Vladimir Putin has insisted that “of course” he does not want a war amid conflicting claims he had withdrawn some his country’s forces from Ukraine’s borders. Speaking at a news conference following talks with German chancellor Olaf Scholz, Putin suggested there was the opportunity for further talks between Moscow and the west. Putin said Russia had been told that Ukraine would not join Nato in the near future, but that Moscow did not think that was a good enough assurance and wanted to resolve the matter in its entirety now. Russia’s defence ministry has announced it is to withdraw some of its troops from the border with Ukraine in a possible de-escalation of the threat of a potential invasion. The size of the withdrawal remains unclear and may involve only a fraction of Russia’s forces at the Ukrainian border, which western officials estimate at more than 60% of the country’s ground forces. Boris Johnson said there were signs of a “diplomatic opening” to resolve the Ukraine crisis, but that there were “mixed signals” from Russia. He added that the “intelligence that we are seeing today is still not encouraging”, with Russian field hospitals being built close to Belarus’ border with Ukraine. Bob Seely, a Tory member of the commons foreign affairs committee, said reports of Russian troop withdrawals should not be seen as “the end of the story”. He said in a series of tweets that Moscow still had “many troops around Ukraine” and could “redeploy more at short notice”. A Russian invasion of Ukraine could pose a threat to Europe’s wider stability that emboldens aggressors around the world, Liz Truss said on Tuesday. The foreign secretary cited Iran and China as examples of potential aggressors who could be emboldened to expand their ambitions by seeing Russia attack Ukraine. Boris Johnson is expected to deny wrongdoing to the police by arguing his presence at Downing Street gatherings in lockdown was part of the working day, though No 10 said his official response to the Metropolitan police would remain private. The prime minister has until Friday to answer a questionnaire sent by the Met which may lead the force to issue a fixed penalty notice (FPN) or conclude there was no case to answer. The prime minister has insisted that “of course” he can lead the Tories in the next general election, despite ongoing questions over his leadership linked to lockdown parties in Downing Street. The total number of deaths involving Covid in the UK reached 183,502 in early February, figures published this morning show. The Office for National Statistics recorded 1,242 registrations where Covid was mentioned on the death certificate in England and Wales in the week to 4 February, or one in 10 deaths. A former Conservative minister, once at the heart of efforts to clamp down on money laundering in London, has revealed that during Theresa May’s premiership, No 10 “leant on him” when he tabled amendments to introduce a public register of overseas property owners. Thanks so much for joining me today and for all your tweets, emails and comments below the line. Sorry I couldn’t reply to everyone. We’re closing this blog but I’ll be back again tomorrow and we have some other live blogs which are still live. Our dedicated blog on the Ukraine crisis is here: If interested, we also have a live blog on the news Prince Andrew has settled sexual abuse lawsuit with Virginia Giuffre here: Vladimir Putin said Russia had been told that Ukraine would not join Nato in the near future, but that Moscow did not think that was a good enough assurance and wanted to resolve the matter in its entirety now. Russia is campaigning for security guarantees from the west including a veto on Ukraine ever joining the US-European military alliance. The Kremlin leader made the remark at a joint news conference after talks with German chancellor Olaf Scholz in Moscow, Reuters reports. Vladimir Putin has insisted that “of course” he does not want a war amid conflicting claims he had withdrawn some his country’s forces from Ukraine’s borders. Speaking at a news conference following talks with German chancellor Olaf Scholz, Putin suggested there was the opportunity for further talks between Moscow and the West. He said: Of course we don’t want it [war]. This is exactly why we put forward the proposal to start the negotiation process where the result should be an agreement of ensuring equal security of everyone, including our country. Unfortunately there was no constructive response to this proposal. Nevertheless we come from a position that even in the documents that were forwarded to us from Nato and Washington there are elements that can be discussed. But these need to be discussed comprehensively with all basic issues that we have highlighted today. Melinda Simmons, the British ambassador to Ukraine, has been winning plaudits for her decision to stay in post in Kyiv, working with a much-reduced staff to help UK citizens out of the country and to manage the steady flow of British dignitaries still flying to the country to show their solidarity. Given the clarity, frequency and urgency of the British intelligence warnings of an imminent Russian invasion, including the possibility of airstrikes, it is surprising that she has until now insisted she remain in situ alongside a core team. Her decision to stay put, along with most EU embassies, will be popular with Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy. He is deeply unhappy that some western embassies – including the US, Canada and Australia – decided to move from Kyiv to Lviv or other cities in the west of the country. At a joint briefing on Monday Zelinskiy said he was determined to prevent an exodus of his political and business class, and questioned their logic. “There is no western Ukraine,” he said. “There is Ukraine; it is integral. Because if, God forbid, something happens, it will be everywhere.” Simmons’s decision to stay may also be an implicit admission that the Foreign Office did not cover itself in glory in its handling of the fall of Kabul. It might be thought that the Conservative press would treat her decision to stay put as a sign of the sangfroid on which the British diplomatic class like to pride themselves. But Douglas Murray, associate editor of the Spectator, took umbrage at her admissions that she sometimes needed to take walks to relieve herself of stress. When exactly did Simmons-like behaviour become our national character? When did me-time and self-esteem replace stoicism? People used to talk of drawing on reserves in a crisis, not least because it gave confidence to our friends and allies as well as to ourselves. Clearly that isn’t the case now. Those that know her say she is the most businesslike and focused of the new breed of female ambassadors, and has absolutely thrown herself into the job. Read the full story here: Here’s a roundup of the key developments of the day: Russia’s defence ministry has announced it is to withdraw some of its troops from the border with Ukraine in a possible de-escalation of the threat of a potential invasion. The size of the withdrawal remains unclear and may involve only a fraction of Russia’s forces at the Ukrainian border, which western officials estimate at more than 60% of the country’s ground forces. Boris Johnson said there were signs of a “diplomatic opening” to resolve the Ukraine crisis, but that there were “mixed signals” from Russia. He added that the “intelligence that we are seeing today is still not encouraging”, with Russian field hospitals being built close to Belarus’ border with Ukraine. Bob Seely, a Tory member of the commons foreign affairs committee, said reports of Russian troop withdrawals should not be seen as “the end of the story”. He said in a series of tweets that Moscow still had “many troops around Ukraine” and could “redeploy more at short notice”. A Russian invasion of Ukraine could pose a threat to Europe’s wider stability that emboldens aggressors around the world, Liz Truss said on Tuesday. The foreign secretary cited Iran and China as examples of potential aggressors who could be emboldened to expand their ambitions by seeing Russia attack Ukraine. Boris Johnson is expected to deny wrongdoing to the police by arguing his presence at Downing Street gatherings in lockdown was part of the working day, though No 10 said his official response to the Metropolitan police would remain private. The prime minister has until Friday to answer a questionnaire sent by the Met which may lead the force to issue a fixed-penalty notice (FPN) or conclude there was no case to answer. The prime minister has insisted that “of course” he can lead the Tories in the next general election, despite ongoing questions over his leadership linked to lockdown parties in Downing Street. The total number of deaths involving Covid in the UK reached 183,502 in early February, figures published this morning show. The Office for National Statistics recorded 1,242 registrations where Covid was mentioned on the death certificate in England and Wales in the week to 4 February, or one in 10 deaths. A former Conservative minister, once at the heart of efforts to clamp down on money laundering in London, has revealed that during Theresa May’s premiership, No 10 “leant on him” when he tabled amendments to introduce a public register of overseas property owners. A spokesperson for Matt Hancock is claiming victory in relation to the high court ruling that found he did not comply with a public sector equality duty when he appointed the Conservative peer Dido Harding as head of a new public health quango. While the race and equality thinktank the Runnymede Trust successfully won its claim against the government over the appointment in August 2020 of Harding as interim executive chair of the National Institute for Health Protection, as well as the appointment in September 2020 of Mike Coupe as director of testing at NHS test and trace, judges dismissed the claim by the Good Law Project, which had joined the trust in making complaints. Lord Justice Singh and Mr Justice Swift, however, did conclude that Hancock had not complied with “the public sector equality duty” in relation to the appointments of Harding and Coupe. The spokesperson Hancock said: We’re delighted the department has won yet another court case against the discredited Good Law Project. Claims of ‘apparent bias’ and ‘indirect discrimination’ have been quashed and thrown out by the high court. What the judgment does make clear is that ‘the claim brought by Good Law Project fails in its entirety’, therefore highlighting the fact this group continues to waste the court’s time. The court judgment also states that ‘the evidence provides no support ... at all’ for the allegation that Dido Harding secured senior positions on the basis of ‘personal or political connections’ in the government. They accept these ‘were urgent recruitment processes which needed to find highly specialised, experienced and available candidates within a short space of time’. Let’s not forget, we were dealing with an unprecedented global pandemic, where time was of the essence in order to protect and save lives. Read more on that story from my colleague Jamie Grierson here: Keir Starmer has said it is “not entirely clear what’s happening on the border” of Ukraine and Russia. He said it was important for allies to stand together, adding: Whatever other arguments and quarrels we might have with the prime minister, when it comes up to standing for the sovereignty of Ukraine and standing up to Russian aggression, we stand as one United Kingdom. Following a meeting of the Cobra emergency committee, Boris Johnson said: Last night going into today, clearly there are signs of a diplomatic opening. He added that the “intelligence that we are seeing today is still not encouraging”, with Russian field hospitals being built close to Belarus’ border with Ukraine. That could only be “construed as preparation for an invasion”, the prime minister said. Despite Russian claims about troop withdrawals, Johnson said intelligence suggested “you have got more battalion tactical groups being brought closer to the border”. “So, mixed signals, I think, at the moment,” he added. Boris Johnson said there were signs of a “diplomatic opening” to resolve the Ukraine crisis, but that the intelligence was not encouraging and there were “mixed signals” from Russia. A former Conservative minister, once at the heart of efforts to clamp down on money laundering in London, has revealed that during Theresa May’s premiership, No 10 “leant on him” when he tabled amendments to introduce a public register of overseas property owners. Lord Faulks said he had first tried to put the register into the criminal finances bill in 2017 and then again into a government bill on money laundering in 2018. He had described the overseas ownership of dirty money in London as an obscenity. Faulks, a distinguished barrister and now an independent peer, told the Guardian he was rung by Downing Street during May’s tenure and told to go to a meeting where he met civil servants from four government departments including the Foreign Office, business officials and the Home Office. They told him to drop the amendments – for which he had a voting majority in the Lords – because they assured him Whitehall had the issue in hand. He told the Guardian: I was obviously misled because nothing has subsequently happened. I can only think a deluded desire to protect the City of London has led to all these delays. It is a real irony that our reputation for protecting the rule of law is one of the things that attracts people who have very little regard for the rule of law themselves and come from countries which ignore it almost altogether. Quite frankly, I was leant on. I was leant on by No 10 Downing Street and summoned to a meeting of officials from all sorts of different departments, who told me it was very unfortunate that I was going to do this because the matter was in hand. Read more here: The total number of deaths involving Covid in the UK reached 183,502 in early February, figures published this morning show. The Office for National Statistics recorded 1,242 registrations where Covid was mentioned on the death certificate in England and Wales in the week to 4 February, or one-in-ten deaths. This was another decrease in the weekly number of Covid deaths, falling from 1,385 deaths or 11.2% of all deaths registered in the previous week. Two thirds of the deaths recorded in the latest seven-day-period had Coivd listed as the underlying cause of death, rather than a contributory cause, down from 71.2% the previouse week. Overall the number of deaths occurring have remained below the five-year-average for six weeks now having been higher than normal for close to six months. There was a slight increase in the number of deaths among care home residents in England and Wales in the last week covered by the data. A total of 341 care home residents died with Covid in the week to 4 February, rising from 333 a week earlier. The figure recorded by the ONS is different to the government’s official count of 159,605 because the latter only records those deaths that are known to have occurred within 28 days of a positive coronavirus test while the ONS counts all deaths where the virus was mentioned on the death certificate. In a statement, the Runnymede Trust said the high court judgment that Matt Hancock did not comply with the law when appointing Dido Harding and Mike Coupe to posts during the pandemic was a “step in the right direction for equality and levelling up”. The charity said it was moved to join this Judicial Review at the peak of the pandemic when disabled, Black and minority ethnic citizens were dying disproportionately from Covid. The statement continues: It seemed logical and indeed imperative that those appointed to help lead the nation out of the pandemic were the best candidates for the job or, at a bare minimum, extensively experienced and fully qualified in the area of public health. Neither Baroness Harding nor Mr Coupe is medically trained. Neither has a lifetime of public administration under their belt. It should not be acceptable to drop our standards during complex health emergencies when countless lives are at stake, in particular the lives of some of our country’s most vulnerable citizens. This is when the rule of law most needs to be upheld. This is why the rule of law exists. The charity said that with the correct application of equalities law, government has the potential to exercise “a positive and transformative effect in its mission to level up society”. It added that the judgement sends a strong message to government that “it needs to take its obligations to reduce inequality far more seriously”. Meanwhile Jo Maugham, director of the Good Law Project, said: Change doesn’t happen, things don’t get better for those who are disadvantaged, unless those in power care. That means making sure they ask themselves: ‘How do I level society up for the disabled and ethnic minorities?’ And it means taking the time to find the best people – not the best-connected people – for the job. An independent thinktank has won a high court fight over government appointments made during the pandemic. Two judges have ruled that then health secretary, Matt Hancock, did not comply with a public sector equality duty when appointing Conservative peer Dido Harding and Mike Coupe, a former colleague of Baroness Harding, to posts in 2020, PA news reports. Lord Justice Singh and Mr Justice Swift granted a declaration to the Runnymede Trust on Tuesday after considering arguments at a High Court hearing in December. Campaign group the Good Law Project joined the trust in making complaints – arguing that the government had not adopted an “open” process when making appointments to posts “critical to the pandemic response” – but their claim was dismissed. Judges concluded that Hancock had not complied with “the public sector equality duty” in relation to the decisions to appoint Lady Harding as interim executive chair of the National Institute for Health Protection in August 2020 and Coupe as director of testing for NHS Test and Trace in September 2020. Lawyers representing the two organisations suggested that people “outside the tight circle” in which senior Conservative politicians and their friends moved were not being given opportunities. They said an unfair policy was being challenged. Ministers disputed the claims made against them. Jason Coppel QC, who led the two organisations’ legal teams, told Lord Justice Singh and Mr Justice Swift that the challenge was based on equality legislation and public law. He said the government had a “policy or practice” of “making appointments to posts critical to the pandemic response” without adopting any, or any sufficient, “fair or open competitive processes”. Coppel said people “less likely to be known or connected to decision-makers” were put at a disadvantage. He also said the government was failing to offer “remuneration for high-level full-time roles” and “excluding all candidates who were not already wealthy” or held other posts for which they would continue to be paid. Boris Johnson has insisted that “of course” he can lead the Tories in the next general election, despite ongoing questions over his leadership linked to lockdown parties in Downing Street. The prime minister has been sent a legal questionnaire from Scotland Yard officers to complete, as they investigate whether he broke his own Covid laws. Revelations about events in Downing Street during coronavirus lockdowns have resulted in Scottish Tory leader, Douglas Ross, calling for the prime minister to quit, claiming his position is no longer tenable. But Johnson, who did not meet with the Scottish Conservative leader on a trip north of the border on Monday, insisted Ross was doing a “very good job”, PA news reports. He insisted they could both still be in post as party leaders at the next general election – despite Ross’s demands for him to go. Asked whether he believed they will both lead the Conservatives into the next general election, Johnson said: “Of course.” His comments came as he again made clear his view that Scottish independence is “just not going to happen”. The prime minister told the Daily Mail newspaper that over the course of the Covid pandemic, “Scotland and the whole of the UK has benefited massively from the might of the UK exchequer”, highlighting the impact of schemes such as furlough. He declared: I think most people could see that it would be an economic disaster to split up our country. That is why it is just not going to happen. Speaking about the Scottish Tory leader, he insisted that Ross “has done a very good job indeed of leading the Scottish Conservatives”. In the 2021 Holyrood elections he said that Ross won “about 100,000 more votes than any previous Scottish Conservative leader” and had also “stopped the Scottish National party from getting the outright majority that they thought they could get”. Johnson added: Every day Douglas gets up and campaigns for the union of our country in a way that is absolutely passionate and I totally share. All I would say is there is far, far more that brings us together than separates us. Bob Seely, a Tory member of the commons foreign affairs committee, said reports of Russian troop withdrawals should not be seen as “the end of the story”. He said in a series of tweets that Moscow still had “many troops around Ukraine” and could “redeploy more at short notice”. Vladimir Putin had “already taken victories from the crisis”, including having more troops stationed in Belarus, he said. He added: “We need a long-term and coherent plan and a strategy to deal with a dangerous world.” Conor Murphy has said a draft three-year budget for Northern Ireland that prioritised action on the region’s spiralling health waiting lists cannot be introduced due to the powersharing crisis. The finance minister had sought legal advice from the attorney general on whether he could bring the draft budget for 2022 to 2025 to the assembly despite ministers having not signed off on it, PA news reports. The spending plan had been out for public consultation when the DUP withdrew first minister Paul Givan from the administration as part of its protest against Brexit’s Northern Ireland protocol. Murphy told MLAs on Tuesday: Since the resignation of the first minister I have considered all possible avenues that might have allowed me to proceed with a budget, including bringing it directly to the assembly. Unfortunately, the legal advice is clear that the budget must be agreed by the executive. This means that on 1 April the health service will not be able to plan on a three-year basis, nor will it be equipped with additional resources to invest in waiting lists, cancer services and mental health. In these circumstances, rather than improving, the health service will decline. Russia’s defence ministry has announced it is to withdraw some of its troops from the border with Ukraine in a possible de-escalation of the threat of a potential invasion. The size of the withdrawal remains unclear and may involve only a fraction of Russia’s forces at the Ukrainian border, which western officials estimate at more than 60% of the country’s ground forces. The announcement of the withdrawal came in a statement from the defence ministry spokesperson Igor Konashenkov, who described ongoing exercises that involved forces from “practically all military districts, fleets, and the airborne forces”. “Units of the southern and western military districts, which have accomplished their missions, are boarding trains and trucks and will head for their garrisons later today,” Konashenkov said in the statement. The defence ministry also released a video of Russian tanks and other heavy weaponry being loaded on to railway cars, the Interfax news service reported. Russia’s rouble currency reportedly posted gains following the announcement, indicating that investors hoped this would mark the beginning of a de-escalation of tensions between Russia and the west. Russia has previously announced the conclusion of military exercises near the Ukrainian border, but social media and satellite photography taken in the following days have not shown considerable changes to Russia’s force posture. Those exercises involved only a small number of troops. Many of the troops located close to the Ukrainian border are not involved in any formal training. When questioned on the buildup, Russia has said it has the right to move troops as it wishes within its own territory. Russia is holding large joint exercises with Belarus scheduled to end on 20 February. Western countries have warned that those drills could be used as cover to prepare for an attack on Ukraine, while Russia has said those troops will return to base once the exercises have concluded. Russian government officials moved quickly to accuse the west of hysteria and argue that the withdrawal of troops showed that Nato warnings of an invasion were spurious. Read the full story here: Liz Truss is said to be “very worried” about a “tank offensive” into Ukraine. However, speaking on LBC, the foreign secretary said tanks were “not the only possibility” as “there are all kinds of ways in which the attack could take place”. Asked what the Russians were capable of doing, Truss replied: They certainly are capable of staging a tank invasion. Meanwhile, she said the BBC was right not to apologise over a joke about Ukraine made by the chatshow host Graham Norton. The corporation caused controversy this month when the TV presenter said on his programme that Ukraine could soon be “south-west Russia”. Asked if the BBC should apologise for that, Truss told LBC: I’m a believer in free speech. I don’t necessarily believe that every joke on the BBC is in good taste but I certainly don’t support a censorship state that stops comedians making jokes. Radio presenter Tom Swarbrick then asked: “So, you don’t particularly find it funny but you think the BBC are right not to apologise on free speech grounds?” to which Truss replied “Yes”. Boris Johnson is expected to deny wrongdoing to the police by arguing his presence at Downing Street gatherings in lockdown was part of the working day, though No 10 said his official response to the Metropolitan police would remain private. The prime minister has until Friday to answer a questionnaire sent by the Met which may lead the force to issue a fixed penalty notice (FPN) or conclude there was no case to answer. Johnson is expected to reject the allegation that he broke any laws prohibiting gatherings, but No 10 said it would not make public his defence. His official spokesperson said: “We will respond as required. As you know, I think the Met made clear that that was in seven days, so we will comply with that requirement.” Questionnaires have been sent by the Met to dozens of aides and civil servants believed to have been at gatherings in Downing Street during lockdowns in 2020 and 2021. Scotland Yard will reportedly reveal the number of people fined at each “partygate” event being investigated and explain why the decision was taken, civil servants have been told. Speaking on a visit in Scotland, Johnson said he would have “a lot more in due course” to say on the partygate row once the police investigation was concluded. At that point, the full investigation by Sue Gray, the senior civil servant tasked with carrying out an inquiry, is expected to be published. Read more here: Liz Truss has said Russia could move swiftly to Kyiv after an attack on the border. When asked how quickly Russians could move to the Ukrainian capital if they decide to invade, the foreign secretary told Sky News: Very, very quickly. They have troops stationed around Ukraine. So, there could be an attack on Kyiv. There could be an attack from the east. What we also suspect is there could be a false flag operation. There could be false claims that they have been provoked to give a pretext for Russian invasion. What we have been doing is we’ve been calling out the Russians, we’ve been exposing their attempts to put a puppet government into Kyiv, we have been exposing their attempts to create a pretext. What we do expect over the next few days is there could be an attempt of a false flag operation to create a pretext to claim the Ukrainians are attacking them, so that the Russians have a justification for invading Ukraine. The UK foreign secretary, Liz Truss, cited Iran and China as examples of potential aggressors who could be emboldened to expand their ambitions by Russia attacking Ukraine. She warned of a “dangerous moment for the world” and said the “prospect of a Russian invasion of Ukraine was highly likely”. Speaking on Sky News, Truss said “we could be on the brink of a war in Europe, which would have severe consequences not just for the people of Russian and Ukraine but for the broader security in Europe”, adding she was “very worried”. Her comments came as last-ditch efforts for a diplomatic situation to the crisis on the Russia-Ukraine border are sought by world leaders including Boris Johnson and Joe Biden. A core pillar of the dispute is Russia’s demand for the west to guarantee Ukraine will not join Nato, the defensive alliance of 30 countries. Truss has said it was not for Russia to determine Ukraine’s security arrangements. She said: The big risk is if there is an invasion into Ukraine. That would be hugely damaging for Russia and Ukraine, and it would further undermine stability in Europe. President Putin has actively questioned why other countries in eastern Europe are members of Nato as well, so this I fear would not stop at Ukraine. This is an attack on the neighbouring states of Russia and other east European countries in trying to undermine the legitimacy of them being part of Nato. Read the full story here: A Russian invasion of Ukraine could pose a threat to Europe’s wider stability that emboldens aggressors around the world, Liz Truss said on Tuesday. The foreign secretary also said an attack is highly likely and could be imminent. Russia has more than 100,000 troops massed near the border of Ukraine. Russian political leaders deny western accusations that it is planning to invade, but say it could take unspecified “military-technical” action unless a range of demands are met, including barring Kyiv from ever joining the Nato alliance, PA news reports. Boris Johnson and Joe Biden agreed in a call on Monday that there was a crucial window for diplomacy, but Truss said an invasion could be imminent, and Russian troops could reach Kyiv “very, very quickly”. The foreign secretary told Sky News: This is ... about the wider stability of Europe. And it’s about wider global stability, and the message that we give to aggressors and we have to give the message to Vladimir Putin that there can be no reward for aggression. Truss echoed politicians in the US who have warned that a so-called “false flag” operation could be used by Moscow to trigger a conflict. She said: It is still the case that an invasion could be imminent, and it is highly likely. Welcome to today’s politics live blog. I’m Nicola Slawson and I’ll be taking the lead today. You can contact me on Twitter (@Nicola_Slawson) or via email (nicola.slawson@theguardian.com) if you have any questions or think I’m missing something. You can also check out our dedicated Ukraine crisis blog here: Our global coronavirus liveblog, meanwhile, is here:Republicans in states across America are targeting LGBTQ rights through a wave of “educational gag orders”, a free speech group has warned, as conservatives battle to censor discussion of race and sexual identities in schools. More than 100 bills censoring teachers have been introduced in state legislatures this year, according to a report by PEN America – a non-profit which works to protect freedom of expression in the US – in what the organization says is a “national assault on our education system”. The warning comes as conservatives have launched efforts to ban books pertaining to race and LGBTQ+ issues from classrooms in various states, while some legislatures are pushing to introduce laws which would ban teachers from discussing homosexuality. “From book bans to educational gag orders, schools and universities are being threatened today to a degree that has no recent parallel,” PEN America said. “There is a willingness, and even eagerness, to bring the weight and power of government to bear on controlling classroom speech.” In the last year, PEN America counted 155 bills introduced in 38 states that would censor what teachers can say or teach in classrooms. In 2022 there has been a “steep rise” in the introduction of what PEN America calls “gag orders”, the organization said. Florida’s ‘Don’t Say Gay’ bill, which would ban discussion of sexuality and gender identity in schools, has already been widely criticized, with Pete Buttigieg, the US transportation secretary, among those who have condemned the bill as dangerous. The legislation was passed by the statesenate’s education committee on February 8, and has been endorsed by Ron DeSantis, Florida’s governor. The bill, which must pass the full Florida senate and the house before becoming law, would allow parents to file lawsuits against school boards if they believe policies violate the law. A bill introduced in the Kansas house on February 9 would change the state’s obscenity law, PEN America reported, making it a class B misdemeanor for a teacher to use any material which depicts “homosexuality” in a classroom. In Arizona, Republicans have introduced a bill which would require parental consent for a student to join a school club “involving sexuality, gender or gender identity”. “As a result,” PEN America said, “gay and bisexual students seeking support from their classmates would essentially have to out themselves to their parents first.” PEN America said the wave of anti-LGBTQ+ legislation was linked to the anti-critical race theory (CRT) movement, which has seen some states ban discussion of the modern-day impact of historic racism in the US. CRT is an academic discipline that examines the ways in which racism operates in US laws and society. “[The anti-critical race theory movement] has primed the public to support sweeping censorship of classroom speech. For anti LGBTQ+ activists, this is a once-in-a-generation opportunity, a chance to ram through bills that are far more restrictive than anything the public would normally accept. The goal is quite simply to lock LGBTQ+ topics on the wrong side of the schoolhouse gate,” the report from PEN America said.A Black Lives Matter group in south Wales has closed down after revelations that a covert police unit attempted to recruit one of its members to be an informant. The Swansea BLM group said it had decided to dissolve itself for a number of reasons, including the attempted recruitment by the police and threats to its members’ physical and mental safety from far-right activists. Lowri Davies, one of the group’s main organisers, exposed a covert police operation to persuade her to become an informant last year by secretly recording the approach. It was the first public evidence that the police have sought to enlist a mole within the Black Lives Matter movement in the UK. On Tuesday, Davies said the attempt by South Wales police to recruit her had had “a massive impact” on the group, leading to members drifting away. She said supporters were too scared to join, adding: “It felt like we were fighting against the odds.” In a statement, BLM Swansea said: “While we have found that our organisation has done some important work, we have been subject to an attempt of infiltration at the hands of South Wales police” and harassment by far-right activists who have visited the homes of supporters and published its members’ personal information online. The group added: “Swansea has proven to be a tricky place to mobilise, and we have found it difficult to find volunteers and a considerable amount of our members left (understandably so) when South Wales police attempted their infiltration.” “We’ve had a great year and a half of organising but it’s time to dissolve our organisation, a decision which has been further cemented by the lack of community within organising spaces.” The group, which had about seven core members and hundreds of supporters online, was set up after the murder of George Floyd in the US by a white police officer in 2020. The group supported local campaigns against alleged police brutality and racism. Last March, Davies, a Swansea University law student, secretly recorded calls from one of the covert police officers seeking to persuade her to become an informant. She shared the recording with the Guardian to raise awareness of what she says were “distressing” techniques used to try to manipulate her into supplying information to the police. South Wales police said they neither confirmed nor denied any specific details, adding: “A complaint was received which refers to contact made by a covert officer. This is currently being investigated and therefore it would be inappropriate to comment further at this time.” The Network for Police Monitoring, a civil liberties group, said: “Police attempts to recruit informers in activist groups is about disruption as much as gathering intelligence and it takes its toll on campaigners’ morale.”Time to wrap up - here are today’s main stories: Goodnight. GW European stock markets have ended the day higher, as investors grasp onto hopes that the Ukraine crisis could be de-escalating. All the main indices recovered at least some of Monday’s falls, after Germany chancellor Olaf Scholz says diplomacy on Ukraine was ‘not exhausted’, and Russia’s defence ministry announced some troops were moving back from the border. In the City, the FTSE 100 finished 77 points higher at 7,608, up 1%, after falling 1.7% yesterday. AstraZeneca (+5.7%) led the risers after its prostate cancer drug trial news, with airline group IAG up 4.6% as Ukraine tensions eased and the oil price fell back. The drop in crude prices pulled Shell (-1%) and BP (-0.8%) down, with mining companis also lower. Germany’s DAX jumped 2%, France’s CAC gained 1.86%, and Italy’s FTSE Mib closed 2.1% higher. David Madden, analyst at Equiti Capital, says the mood in the markets is upbeat as the Russian government announced it will start to reduce the number of troops its has stationed on the Ukrainian border: A few hours ago, President Putin announced that he doesn’t want a war in Europe, and that added to optimistic sentiment. Tensions are still high as Moscow is clearly concerned about the possibility of Ukraine joining NATO, but for now traders only seem to care that a war will not break out. Continental equity markets such as the DAX and the CAC advanced at an impressive rate seeing as they have the most to benefit from a war being avoided. The impact of the first year of Brexit on Ireland has been revealed after official data showed cross-border trade between the republic and Northern Ireland jumped by €2.8bn (£2.3bn) in 2021. Full-year figures from Ireland’s Central Statistics Office show that imports to the Irish republic from Northern Ireland were up 65% to €3.9bn, a rise of €1.5bn compared with 2020. Exports from the republic to Northern Ireland also rocketed, up 54% to €3.7bn, an increase of €1.3bn compared with 2020 – a total trade rise of €2.8bn. Here’s the full story: The Unite union reports that Airbus workers at the company’s factories in Broughton, North Wales, and Filton, Gloucestershire have voted for strike action in a dispute over pay. Around 3,000 Airbus employees voted overwhelmingly to strike after the company refused to improve a pay offer for 2021, following a pay freeze in 2020. Strikes at the Broughton and Filton sites, which design, test and manufacture wings for Airbus’ commercial aircraft, could begin as early as March, Unite says, unless an improved offer is made. Unite general secretary Sharon Graham said: “This vote makes it abundantly clear that our members are totally dissatisfied with Airbus’ unacceptably low pay offer. Airbus needs to acknowledge that and table a sensible offer, one that amply reflects rising living costs, before this dispute escalates further. “The deal simply does not reflect our members’ hard work and dedication, nor the sacrifices they have made over the last two years. There is no excuse – Airbus can well afford to pay its workers the decent rise they deserve and it should move to do so without delay.” The UK’s productivity has exceeded pre-pandemic levels for the first time, the Office for National Statistics said today. Output per worker in October-December rose above the 2019 average level for the first time since the coronavirus pandemic began. It grew by 1.1% quarter-on-quarter, and was 0.8% up on 2019. Output per employee is still below the pre-pandemic trend, but output per hour worked is above trend growth, as these charts show: Pharmaceuticals giant AstraZeneca is leading the FTSE 100 risers today, after reporting positive results from late stage trials of its cancer drug Lynparza. AstraZeneca said that a Phase III trial had shown a “statistically significant and clinically meaningful improvement” in radiographic progression-free survival among prostate cancer patients who received Lynparza and abiraterone, a hormone therapy drug. Lynparza plus abiraterone reduced the risk of disease progression by 34% versus standard-of-care in 1st-line metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer, AstraZeneca reported. Susan Galbraith, executive vice president of Oncology R&amp;D, AstraZeneca, explained: “This Lynparza combination has the potential to afford first-line patients more time without disease progression while also maintaining their quality of life. The PROpel results are impressive because active comparator trials set a high bar and, in this trial, Lynparza plus abiraterone showed a significant clinical improvement when compared to an active standard of care in patients with metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer, regardless of whether they have an HRR gene mutation.” Shares in AstraZeneca are up 5.5%. The oil price has fallen further from Monday’s seven-year highs, following signs that the Ukraine crisis could be easing. US crude is now down over 4% at $91 per barrel, with Brent crude dropping to around $92.75/barrel. German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, has told a press conference in Moscow that he welcomed the pullback of some Russian troops from near Ukraine on Tuesday. Speaking after meeting president Vladimir Putin, Scholz added that a diplomatic solution remained possible, Reuters reports. The diplomatic possibilities are far from being exhausted … That we hear now some troops have withdrawn is a good sign, we hope more will follow. It should be possible to find a solution. No matter how difficult and serious the situation seems to be, I refuse to say it is hopeless. Putin told the joint press conference that western assurances that Ukraine will not join Nato anytime soon were not good enough and that Russia needed to resolve the issue now. A closely watched survey of factories in New York state has found that activity remains broadly flat this month. The Empire State manufacturing survey’s general business conditions index edged up four points to 3.1, from below zero in January. Economists had expected a stronger increase, to around 12.0. Thirty-four percent of respondents reported that conditions had improved over the month, while 30 percent reported that conditions had worsened. The survey also found that factories lifted their prices at a faster rate this month: New orders and shipments held steady, and unfilled orders increased. Delivery times continued to lengthen. Labor market indicators pointed to a solid increase in employment and a longer average workweek. The prices paid index remained near its recent peak, and the prices received index reached a new record high. Business optimim dipped, with manufacturers expecting longer delivery times, alongside higher prices and increases in employment in the coming months. UK ministers have outlined further details on how the government intends to make developers and manufacturers in the housing industry in England shoulder the costs of replacing dangerous cladding in an effort to protect leaseholders. The Department for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities said on Monday that under the plans developers and manufacturers could in effect be blocked from the housing market if they did not help fix cladding safety issues. The changes would put into law a commitment to protect leaseholders living in medium- or high-rise buildings from having to pay anything for the removal of unsafe cladding. Gemma Whittaker, principal associate at the law firm Gowling WLG, explains: “The proposed amendments to the Building Safety Bill reveal the finer detail of how the government intends to hold to account those it sees as ‘not doing the right thing’- for example the new plans include “cost contribution orders” for manufacturers who have been successfully prosecuted for breaching regulations, in order to force them to pay their “fair share”. “It will be interesting to see how developers, and their insurers, react to this attempt to spread the cost burden, particularly given some of the other proposed measures such as the ability to refuse planning permission or building control sign off for those that do not pay.” Former Post Office workers who were among those wrongfully convicted for theft, fraud and false accounting have called for the company’s former management to go to jail for their part in the long-running scandal. More than 700 Post Office operators were prosecuted between 2000 and 2014, based on evidence from the Horizon IT system, which was installed and maintained by Fujitsu. Damian Owen, who was manager of a Post Office branch in Bangor, north Wales, was jailed for eight months after he was accused of stealing £25,000 as a result of computer errors. His conviction was quashed in 2021. Owen was at times lost for words as he told the inquiry into the scandal about his time in prison. “I lost an awful lot of weight,” Owen told the inquiry. “I did what I could to pass the time as quickly as I could.” Owen said the £25,000 hole in his branch accounts appeared shortly after Horizon system was installed, and he knew the figures didn’t add up. “We never held that amount of money there. It was a small branch,” Owen said. “As far as I was aware, the most held there was £13,000.” Back in the UK, startup Britishvolt has gained new investment worth £40m from Glencore in the latest stage in its ambitious plan to build one of the UK’s only large-scale battery factories. It is aiming to treble its funding with £200m in a third funding round, with Glencore serving as the anchor investor. The FTSE 100 miner has already invested millions of pounds in Britishvolt in earlier funding rounds that valued the battery company at more than $1bn (£740m). The battery factory project is seen as key to the prospects for the UK automotive industry as it moves away from internal combustion engines and embraces battery electric vehicles with zero carbon emissions from the exhaust. The New York stock market has opened higher, on optimism that the Ukraine crisis may be easing. The S&amp;P 500 index of US stocks has risen 1.4% in early trading, as investors welcome the Russia’s defence ministry’s announcement it will withdraw some of its troops from the border with Ukraine. The Dow Jones industrial average of 30 large US companies has gained 451 points, or 1.3%, to 35,017, with the technology-focused Nasdaq up 1.75%. Craig Erlam, senior market analyst at brokerage OANDA, says: Risk appetite is much improved on Tuesday following reports that Russia is pulling back some troops, a significant de-escalation that makes the prospect of an invasion this week much less likely. The Kremlin maintains that it never intended to invade Ukraine and the return of some troops to their regular bases following military exercises is proceeding as was always planned. While risks remain elevated, this looks like a big step in the right direction, and investors, like everyone else, are breathing a huge sigh of relief. Nato secretary general Jens Stoltenberg has said Russia’s announcement of a troop withdrawal gives grounds for optimism, but the alliance has yet to see real de-escalation: Our Moscow correspondent, Andrew Roth, has more details : The size of the withdrawal remains unclear and may involve only a fraction of Russia’s forces at the border, which western officials estimate at more than 60% of the country’s ground forces. The announcement of the withdrawal came in a statement from the defence ministry spokesperson Igor Konashenkov, who described ongoing exercises that involved forces from “practically all military districts, fleets, and the airborne forces”. “Units of the southern and western military districts, which have accomplished their missions, are boarding trains and trucks and will head for their garrisons later today,” Konashenkov said. US intelligence officials have today accused right-leaning financial news website Zero Hedge of amplifying Kremlin propaganda, Associated Press reports: The officials said Zero Hedge, which has 1.2 million Twitter followers, published articles created by Moscow-controlled media that were then shared by outlets and people unaware of their nexus to Russian intelligence. The officials did not say whether they thought Zero Hedge knew of any links to spy agencies and did not allege direct links between the website and Russia. Zero Hedge denied the claims and said it tries to “publish a wide spectrum of views that cover both sides of a given story.” More here. January’s jump in US producer prices means more inflation is heading American consumers’ way, warns Mohamed El-Erian of Allianz: Greg Daco of Oxford Economics points out that core PPI inflation was also higher than forecast (that strips out food, energy and trade services). Just in: US producers raised their prices faster than expected last month, adding to the inflationary pressures hitting Americans. The PPI index rose by 1.0% in January - up from 0.4% in December, and twice as fast as expected. Goods prices jumped by 1.3% in the month, while services were up 0.7%. On an annual basis, final demand prices rose by 9.7%, as firms lifted their prices over the last year. That’s slightly lower thatn December’s 9.8%, but higher than Wall Street expected. The Bureau of Labour Statistics reports that hospital outpatient care prices, which rose 1.6 percent, lifted the services PPI index, adding: The indexes for machinery and vehicle wholesaling; apparel, jewelry, footwear, and accessories retailing; traveler accommodation services; portfolio management; and truck transportation of freight also moved higher. Goods inflation was lifted by more expensive motor vehicles and equipment, diesel fuel, gasoline, beef and veal, dairy products, and jet fuel. Scandal-hit mining companies BHP and Glencore have paid out a record $12bn in dividends to investors as the price of the materials the companies mine continues to boom. BHP, the world’s biggest mining group which scrapped its dual stock market structure dropping London last year for a sole listing in Sydney, announced a record $7.6bn half-year dividend on Tuesday. The company makes most of its profits from mining iron ore in the Pilbara region of Western Australia, where it has ministerial permission to destroy as many as 40 sites of cultural importance to the country’s native Aborigines. Following investor outrage at its mining plans, the company subsequently pledged not to damage any of the sites without “extensive consultation” with native owners. BHP is aiming to transition its business to derive half of revenues from “future facing commodities” – metals needed in a low-carbon economy beyond fossil fuels – by 2030. BHP made $9.7bn in adjusted profits for the half year to the end of December, a 57% year-on-year increase. Anglo-Swiss rival Glencore, one of the world’s biggest miners and commodity traders, has also benefited from the soaring price of oil, gas and metals as economies seek to recover from the pandemic. The company paid a $4bn dividend to shareholders as it reported record adjusted profits of $21.3bn last year, an 83% increase over 2020. Glencore also said it had set aside $1.5bn to pay for the costs of investigations into bribery and market manipulation. The number of company insolvencies in England and Wales doubled year-on-year in January, as rising inflationary pressures and the pandemic cause some firms to collapse. There were 1,560 company insolvencies in January, up from 758 in January 2021, and above pre-crisis levels of 1,508 in January 2020. It’s also an increase on December’s 1,486. Most of the insolvencies were directors voluntarily folding their companies because they couldn’t meet their financial obligations. There were 1,358 Creditors’ Voluntary Liquidations (CVLs), more than double the number in January 2021, and 34% higher than in January 2020. The number of compulsary liquidations also more than doubled year-on-year in January, to 118, still 60% lower than January 2020. Christina Fitzgerald, Vice President of insolvency and restructuring trade body R3, says firms faced a “perfect storm of issues” in the last two months New Covid restrictions, a slowdown in consumer spending, and rising inflation such as energy bills all hit companies: “The increase in corporate insolvencies is being driven by a rise in compulsory liquidations, which were 131.4% higher than this time last year. This suggests that creditors are now starting to take action over unpaid debt, having been legally prevented from doing so since the start of the pandemic. “Numbers of Creditors’ Voluntary Liquidations have remained similar compared to this time last month, which suggests that many company directors are continuing to choose to close their businesses rather than attempting to carry on trading in the current climate. Claire Burden, partner in the Advisory Consulting team at wealth management group Tilney Smith &amp; Williamson, agrees that rising costs are hurting companies: As the western world moves out of the pandemic, we are starting to see several macro-economic factors causing distress in businesses in the UK – primarily driven by global inflationary trends (which is resulting in increasing cost of living, bringing wage pressure) and also continued supply chain disruptions and raw material and commodity shortages. Sectors that are most vulnerable to all of these at the same time – such as construction, manufacturing and technology will be the most impacted. It may not be easy for SMEs to be able to pass cost increases onto the consumer, leading to short-term liquidity pressures and longer term distress. Businesses that thrived under the pandemic are now at risk – for example online low-cost retail businesses are now being put under considerable pressure as they struggle to pass price increases onto customers for fear of high volume demand falling away. We see clients in cyclical sectors such as agriculture suffering from liquidity pressures due to wage inflation, skills shortages, increases in cost of raw materials (due to supply disruptions and lower exports from producers) and, to some extent, the cost of transitioning to sustainable farming – which is impacting near-term cash availability. A record number of companies went into voluntary insolvency in England and Wales in the final quarter of 2021, the Insolvency Service reported late last month. The European Union’s securities watchdog has warned there is a high risk of market corrections, as the Ukraine crisis adds to nervousness. In its latest report on trends, risks and vulnerabilities, the European Securities and Markets Authority (ESMA) warns that retail investors are at particular risk if markets dive. The pandemic’s resurgence at the end of 2021 and an uncertain economic and monetary policy outlook are leading investors to adjust their growth and market expectations, ESMA points out. And it continues to see high risks of further “possibly significant” market corrections, as markets remain nervous and geopolitical tensions are rising. Verena Ross, Chair, said: “All investors should consider that the risk of market corrections remains acute. This was demonstrated last year in two episodes of sell-offs largely driven by news first related to Evergrande and then to the resurgence of Covid-19. The markets remain highly volatile and ESMA sees growing uncertainty for investors going forward.” “Retail investors are of particular concern to ESMA. Their participation in financial markets has increased substantially in recent years, with new investors taking advantage of the convenience and user-friendly features of mobile trading platforms. This diversification offers opportunities but also comes with risks, and ESMA remains concerned about risks to retail investors who buy assets with expectations of significant price growth, and without realising the high risks involved.” Up to a fifth of UK households have struggled to pay their TV, internet and phone bills in the last year, with some having to cancel services or cut back spending on essentials such as food and clothing to make payments, according to research by Ofcom. The telecoms regulator’s annual affordability report highlights the rising pressure on household finances, with consumers facing a further inflation-busting increase in mobile, telephone and broadband bills of as much as 10% this year. “People rely on their broadband for staying in touch, working and learning from home,” said Lindsey Fussell, group director of network and communications at Ofcom. “But for those who are really struggling with rising bills, every penny counts.” Ofcom warned that with the above-inflation price increases outstripping expected rises in benefits such as universal credit, more than 4m homes are facing the prospect of a further fall in income in real terms. More here: We also have jobs data from the eurozone, which shows that employment in the euro area rose above its pre-pandemic highs at the end of last year. The nmber of people in work in the eurozone rose to nearly 161.8m in Q4 2021, an increase of 0.5% on the third quarter, and 2.1% up on a year ago. The third quarterly increase, despite the autumn wave of Covid-19 infections, lifted the eurozone employment total over the level in Q4 2019, just before the pandemic. It suggests that Europe’s economy handled the latest surge of infections relatively well, with the eurozone economy growing 0.3% in October-December, and the unemployment hitting a record low in December. Here’s a chart showing real wages shrank at the end of last year: German investor sentiment has picked up, on hopes that the economy will pick up as Covid-19 restrictions are eased. The ZEW economic research institute’s economic sentiment index rose to 54.3 this month, from 51.7 in January. ZEW President Achim Wambach said in a statement: “The economic outlook for Germany continues to improve in February despite growing economic and political uncertainties,” The German economy shrank by 0.7% in the last quarter of 2021, as a wave of Covid-19 cases led to new restrictions, and manufacturers faced ongoing supply chain problems. Gas prices, which jumped yesterday on Ukraine invasion worries, have dipped this morning. The day-ahead contract for wholesale gas delivery in the UK has dropped by 8% to 173p per therm. That’s the lowest since the start of February; yesterday it hit two-week highs of nearly 200p/therm. Oil has dipped back from yesterday’s seven-year highs above $96 per barrel. Brent crude has slipped back below $94/barrel, down 2.5% today. Analysts at SP Angel’s Energy Team explain: Oil prices have slipped from fresh highs on reports that some troops in Russia’s military districts adjacent to Ukraine are returning to bases, a move that could de-escalate tension between the two countries Russia’s defence ministry has confirmed that while large-scale drills across the country continued, some units of the Southern and Western military districts have completed their exercises and started returning to base European stock markest have risen this morning after yesterday’s slide, lifted by hopes of a possible de-escalation of the Ukraine crisis. The UK’s FTSE 100 index is currently up 40 points, or 0.5%, clawing back a little of Monday’s 129-point fall (-1.7%). Travel stocks are recovering, with British Airways parent company IAG up 3.3%. Russian steelmaker Evraz has gained 4%, while engineering group Melrose, whose aerospace arm will benefit from a travel recovery, is up 4.3%. On the smaller FTSE 250, holiday group TUI (+4%) and budget airline Wizz Air (+4.1%) are leading the rally. There are chunkier gains in Frankfurt, where Germany’s DAX is up 1.1%, as is France’s CAC index in Paris, after both fell around 2% yesterday. The recovery comes after Russia’s defence ministry that it will withdraw some of its troops from the border with Ukraine, in a possible de-escalation of the threat of a potential invasion. But the size of the withdrawal remains unclear and may involve just a fraction of Russia’s forces at the Ukrainian border, as our Ukraine crisis liveblog explains: Victoria Scholar, head of investment at interactive investor, says there is still nervousness towards the possibility of a Russian invasion of Ukraine: UK Foreign Secretary Liz Truss has warned on Tuesday that an invasion of Ukraine is highly likely. However more positive comments this morning from IFAX which said that Russia’s military says some units are returning to their bases have lifted market sentiment with European markets now trading in a more upbeat manner. UK wage growth picked up in January as job vacancies hit a new record high, but pay failed to keep pace with the highest inflation rate for three decades. The Office for National Statistics said the annual growth rate for average total pay, including bonuses, increased to 4.3% in the three months to December, up from a rate of 4.2% in the three months to November. The rate was boosted by bonus payments in December, with the strongest pay growth for workers in finance, insurance and the property industry. Regular wage growth excluding bonuses eased by 0.1 percentage points to an annual rate of 3.7%. The performance beat the expectations of City economists for total wage growth of 3.8% and a rise of 3.6% for regular pay. However, taking into account inflation – which is at the highest level since the early 1990s amid a dramatic increase in household energy costs and wider cost of living crisis – real pay fell on the year by 0.1%. Wages excluding bonuses fell by 0.8%. Sam Beckett, the head of economic statistics at the ONS, said: “After taking account of recent rises in consumer prices, real total pay fell in the year to October-December 2021, despite a strong recovery in bonuses.” The number of job vacancies across the UK increased in January to a fresh record high of almost 1.3 million after two consecutive monthly falls when some employers paused their hiring plans amid increased uncertainty over the economic outlook due to Omicron. In a sign of rising confidence among firms, the number of employees on UK company payrolls increased by 108,000 in January to a record 29.5 million. The unemployment rate for the three months to December fell by 0.2 percentage points to 4.1%, although remains 0.1 percentage points higher than before the coronavirus pandemic. Here’s the full story: Despite the cost of living squeeze, Charles Hepworth, investment director, GAM Investments, predicts the Bank of England will continue to lift interest rates -- with the City expecting a series of hikes in 2022. “UK unemployment continues its improving trend, falling by 38,000 in the final quarter of 2021. While average wages have bumped higher over the year by 3.6%, this is still well below the average inflation rate, so a continual cost of living squeeze for employed and unemployed alike. “Still, the healthy jobs market can only push the Bank of England further into more hawkish tilting. Markets are now more than convinced that further hikes to the base rate are coming this year, with at least six quarter point hikes priced in by December 2022. Such a rapid turnaround in central bank policy is what happens when they find themselves firmly stuck behind the curve, playing catch-up.” The cost of living crisis is likely to worsen in the coming months, warns Stephen Evans, Chief Executive of Learning and Work Institute. “The cost of living crisis is setting in, with real wages falling in the last quarter of 2021. This is only likely to worsen with current inflation and rising energy prices - the Government must do far more to help protect living standards. Meanwhile, the recruitment crisis continues. The Government’s Way to Work initiative is focused on the wrong problem and it should instead do more to help the 1.1 million fewer people in the labour market than on pre-pandemic trends, driven by rising numbers of people who are long-term sick. This shortage of workers is making recruitment difficult and means employment is still almost 600,000 lower than pre-pandemic despite record vacancies. We need a new Plan for Jobs, Growth and Living Standards.” The number of people out of the labour force increased during the last quarter of 2021, partly due to a worrying increase in long-term sickness. The economic inactivity rate increased by 0.1 percentage points in the October-December quarter, to 21.2%. In total, there were nearly 400,000 more people neither working nor looking for a job, compared to before the pandemic. Earliier in the pandemic, this had been driven by a jump in students. That trend has reversed, though, while the long-term sickness total has swelled: James Smith, economist at ING, explains: Economic inactivity is another potential source of recent worker shortages. Like we’ve seen in the US, there’s been a pronounced increase in the number of working-age people neither in nor actively looking for work since the pandemic began. But unlike the US, where a lot of this trend has been attributed to early retirements, it’s long-term sickness rates that have risen and helped prevent UK employment from reaching pre-virus levels. How much of this is linked to long-Covid is not yet clear. Despite payroll totals reaching new records, the number of people employed in the UK was still over half a million below pre-Covid-19 levels in October-December. The 587k drop in employment since the pandemic began is driven by a big fall in self-employment (down 850,000 compared to December-February 2020), as this chart shows: Tony Wilson, director of the Institute for Employment Studies, says many older workers have dropped out of the labour force: “Supply simply can’t keep up with the demand in the labour market at the moment. Despite vacancies hitting another record high, employment is still stuck more than half a million below pre-pandemic levels, with low unemployment appearing to be the result of people leaving the labour market entirely. As a result this is now the tightest labour market in at least fifty years, with nearly as many vacancies as there are unemployed. These trends are being driven in particular by older people leaving work. There are now nearly six hundred thousand fewer older people in the labour market than on the eve of the pandemic, falls which dwarf anything that we have seen in at least thirty years. Overall, four fifths of the fall in labour force participation is due to fewer older people in the labour market. The ONS has also released data showing that pay growth accelerated in January. That would bring some relief to employees facing the pain of inflation, but could also spur the Bank of England to raise interest rates at a faster pace. Early estimates for January 2022 indicate that median monthly pay increased by 6.3% compared with January 2021, and was 10.3% higher than pre-pandemic levels (February 2020). That’s according to experimental monthly estimates of payrolled employees produced by HMRC. Danni Hewson, AJ Bell financial analyst, says it’s a sign that some employees are lifting pay rates to fill vacancies. “Andrew Bailey might have urged employers not to raise pay in a bid to keep inflation in check but when faced with record vacancy levels, even if the number of new vacancies hitting the market is slowing, employers are having to reach for the cheque book. Workers have been feeling the squeeze with the price of just about everything going up and wage growth over the three months to the end of the year is simply not keeping pace. Early indications for January suggest that’s changing as businesses battle to not only recruit workers but to keep their existing ones with the number of people hopping from job to job reaching record levels. Hannah Slaughter, Senior Economist at the Resolution Foundation, says: “The UK labour market has defied the Omicron wave and continued to tighten, with jobs, vacancies and job moves up, and unemployment continuing to fall. “There are nascent signs that this welcome activity may be starting to feed through into stronger pay growth – though how much pay pressure remains unclear. “While some policy makers are rightly worried about accelerating nominal wages boosting UK inflation, they should also be worried about Britain simultaneously experiencing the tightest real wage squeeze in generations. To square this circle, the UK needs faster productivity growth.” In December alone, regular pay (excluding bonuses) shrank by 1.2% year-on-year once you account for inflation, the worst fall since 2014. That shows that workers felt mounting cost of living pressures at the end of last year, due to rising prices for goods and services. Total pay was up 0.1% after inflation in December, though, due to the increase in bonus payments (which boosted pay in the financial and business services sector). The TUC says: Today’s labour market figures show real wages fell by 1.2 per cent in the year to December – the largest fall in the value of earnings in eight years The unemployment rate for BME workers is still more than twice as bad as the rate for white workers Number of people on zero-hours contracts hits 1 million TUC General Secretary Frances O’Grady said: “Working families need financial security. But they face a perfect cost-of-living storm. “Pay packets are plummeting in value as bills and prices sky-rocket. “This huge pressure on household budgets will only get worse unless the government takes proper action. “That means working with unions and employers to get pay rising across the economy. After the longest wage squeeze in more than 200 years, Britain urgently needs a pay rise.” Pat McFadden MP, Labour’s Shadow Chief Secretary to the Treasury, has warned that wages will be further squeezed when gas and electricity bills surge in April when the energy cap is lifted. “These figures confirm working people still face a fragile recovery in the face of a growing cost of living crisis and spiralling inflation. “12 years of the Conservatives’ record means working people today will not only be paying more in tax under the Conservatives but face heating bills rocketing, prices rising and falling real wages. “Our plan to deal with rising energy bills is funded by a one-off windfall tax on oil and gas producers, and would save most households around £200, with £600 off bills for those who need it most. “The Tory proposals for a buy now pay later loan on energy just don’t measure up to the scale of the pressures being faced by households.” The number of vacancies at UK firms continued to rise across most industries, with 10 of the 18 categories displaying record highs in the three months to January. Vacancies picked up in January, after dipping in the previous two months. The largest quarterly increase was in accommodation and food service activities, which grew by 21,400 (13.6%) as bars, restaurants, hotels and other leisure firms struggled to recruit staff. But the overall rate of growth slowed, to 9.6% in November-January, the lowest since February to April 2021, and down from 24.7% in the previous quarter. Vacancies rose to a record 1,298,400, but for the first time since December 2020 to February 2021 the number of unemployed people per vacancy didn’t fall (it remained at 1.1). The single-month vacancy estimate for January 2022 showed an increase after two consecutive monthly falls, while data from jobs search engine Adzuna shows a strengthening of vacancies in the latter part of January, tthe ONA adds. Public sector workers were hit hardest by the cost of living squeeze, while financial workers saw their pay packets boosted by bonuses at the end of the year. Average total pay growth across the public sector was 2.6% in October-December, well below inflation, which averaged 4.4% (on the CPIH measure which includes owner occupiers’ housing costs). Average total pay for the private sector grew by 4.6% over the period, slightly ahead of CPIH inflation. Private sector pay was lifted by the finance and business services sector, where pay grew by 8.1% after an increase in bonus payments compared with December 2020. Chancellor of the Exchequer, Rishi Sunak said: “Our £400bn economic plan has protected our jobs market through the pandemic and it is now healthier than most could have hoped for. “Payrolled employee numbers are at a record high and redundancies are at an all time low thanks to our Plan for Jobs. “We’re continuing to help more people into work, and are providing support for the cost of living worth over £20 billion across this financial year and next.” Minister for Employment, Mims Davies MP said: “Today’s figures show further positive signs of recovery, with unemployment continuing to drop and 436,000 people joining company payrolls since the start of the pandemic, a record high number of employees including more young and older workers. “Through our Way to Work campaign we are making sure that anyone who is ready to work can get into a job faster than ever before, allowing them to progress to a fulfilling career, giving them financial independence as well as improved wellbeing.” Here’s ONS head of economic statistics Sam Beckett with the key points from the jobs report: This chart shows how earnings growth has slowed, with real pay falling below inflation in the three months to December. This is the first quarter since June to August 2020 that total pay growth (including bonuses) has fallen behind inflation, or May to July 2020 for regular pay, the ONS explains. Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. Wages across the UK are lagging behind inflation, as the cost of living squeeze hit households at the end of last year, even as vacancies hit record levels. The latest UK labour force statistics, just released, show that earnings failed to keep up with rising prices in the last quarter of 2021. Basic pay rose by 3.7% per year in the October-December, while total pay (including bonuses) grew by 4.3% -- up from 4.2% a month ago. That means that real pay packets fell, once you adjust for inflation over the quarter. However, the wages figures - especially for total pay, are higher than City economists expected. The Office for National Statistics explains: In real terms (adjusted for inflation), total and regular pay fell on the year at negative 0.1% for total pay and negative 0.8% for regular pay. Previous months’ strong growth rates were affected upwards by base and compositional effects. These temporary factors have largely worked their way out of the latest growth rates, however, a small amount of base effect for certain sectors may still be present. UK inflation hit 5.4% in the 12 months to December, and is expected to climb above 7% by April before easing off. That will leave households facing the worst squeeze on their disposable incomes for at least 30 years, the Bank of England warned earlier this month. The jobs report also shows that the UK unemployment remained at 4.1%, the same as a month ago, in the first three months covering the end of the furlough scheme. That’s a drop of 0.2% on the previous quarter, when it was 4.3%. The number of job vacancies in November 2021 to January 2022 rose to a new record of 1,298,400, an increase of 513,700 from its pre-coronavirus January to March 2020 level. However, the rate of growth in vacancies continued to slow down, the ONS says. It also estimates that the number of payrolled employees rose again, by 108,000 in January, to a record 29.5 million. But, the number of people in employment remains below pre-pandemic levels. We’ll have more details and reaction to the jobs report shortly. Elsewhere, European stock markets are expected to open lower, after fears of a Russian invasion of Ukraine hit shares yesterday. German chancellor Olaf Scholz is travelling to Moscow today to meet Vladimir Putin in a bid to avert war. The agenda 7am GMT: UK labour force report 10am GMT: Eurozone GDP report for Q4 (second estimate) 10am GMT: ZEW index of German economic sentiment 1.30pm GMT: US producer price inflation index for JanuaryThe stripping of Prince Andrew’s military roles and royal patronages marked a nadir for the Queen’s second son since sexual assault accusations arose amid concern over his relationship with the convicted child sex offender Jeffrey Epstein. It was a fall from grace for the 61-year-old, who was once second in line to the throne. 19 February 1960 Prince Andrew is born at Buckingham Palace, becoming the first child born to a reigning monarch since Princess Beatrice to Queen Victoria. 1979 Andrew joins the Royal Navy as a trainee helicopter pilot. He studies at Dartmouth naval college and completes Royal Marines courses. 1982 The prince serves in the Falklands war, after Argentinian forces invade the British overseas territory in the south Atlantic. He serves on HMS Invincible as a Sea King helicopter co-pilot. 1984 Andrew is promoted to lieutenant, and the Queen makes him her personal aide-de-camp. He serves onboard HMS Brazen as a flight pilot until 1986. July 1986 Thousands line the streets in central London as Andrew marries Sarah Ferguson at Westminster Abbey, and on the same day the Queen makes him Duke of York, Earl of Inverness and Baron Killyleagh. They go on to have two daughters – Princess Beatrice, born in August 1988, and Princess Eugenie, born in March 1990. March 1992 The Duke and Duchess of York announce they are to separate. Divorce is finalised in May 1996, although the two remain close. 1999 Andrew is reportedly introduced to Epstein, an investment banker and financier, through a mutual friend, Ghislaine Maxwell – the daughter of the late media tycoon Robert Maxwell. A photograph that comes to light during Maxwell’s 2021 trial for sex trafficking shows her and Epstein at the Queen’s Balmoral residence that year. 2000 Epstein, Maxwell and Andrew are seen at Donald Trump’s Mar-a-Lago club in Florida. Later that year, Epstein and Maxwell attend a joint birthday party at Windsor Castle hosted by the Queen, and the prince throws a shooting weekend for Maxwell’s birthday. March 2001 According to Virginia Giuffre, Andrew sexually assaults her at Maxwell’s home in Belgravia, London, and also twice more, at Epstein’s New York home and at an “orgy” on his private island in the Caribbean when she was 17. The allegation prompts a comprehensive denial from the Duke of York. July 2001 Andrew retires from the Royal Navy as commander. He is later promoted to rear admiral, in 2010, and vice admiral, in 2015. The government appoints him as special representative for international trade and investment. He represents the UK at trade fairs and conferences around the world. December 2010 The prince visits Epstein in New York after Epstein’s release from prison for pleading guilty to prostituting minors. They are photographed walking through Central Park. May 2010 The Duchess of York is filmed by a tabloid reporter claiming the prince would meet a donor and pass on business contacts if she receives £500,000. July 2011 Andrew quits his trade envoy role after a furore about him visiting Epstein in New York after he had been jailed for sexual offences. Ferguson admits accepting money from Epstein to pay off debts. April 2015 Allegations that Andrew had sex with Giuffre emerge in court documents in Florida related to Epstein. They say she was forced to have sex with him when she was 17, which is under the age of consent under Florida law. Buckingham Palace denies the allegations. August 2019 Epstein is found dead in his jail cell after being re-arrested and charged with sex trafficking. November 2019 Andrew steps back from public duties “for the foreseeable future” after a disastrous BBC TV interview where he claims he could not have had sex with Giuffre because he was at home after a visit to Pizza Express in Woking, that her description of his dancing with her beforehand could not be true because he was unable to sweat, and that he had “no recollection of ever meeting this lady”. 12 January 2022 A New York judge rejects the prince’s attempts to throw out a sexual abuse civil lawsuit brought against him by Giuffre. 13 January 2022 The Queen strips her son of a range of military affiliations and royal patronages after more than 150 veterans write to describe their “upset and anger”. Giuffre’s lawyer insists she would be unlikely to accept a “purely financial settlement” to end her sexual assault civil lawsuit against the royal. The lawyer says that although she does not have a firm idea of what she wants, it is important that any resolution happens “in a way that vindicates her and vindicates the other victims”. 14 January 2022 Giuffre requests testimony from Andrew’s former assistant Robert Olney on the grounds that she has “reason to believe” he has “relevant information about Prince Andrew’s relationship with Jeffrey Epstein”. 15 January 2022 Andrew’s lawyers ask to question Giuffre’s husband and psychologist on the grounds that she may have “false memories”. 18 January 2022 Shukri Walker, who may have seen Andrew with Giuffre at a London nightclub 20 years ago, says she is willing to provide testimony in Giuffre’s civil lawsuit. Her lawyer said “she remembers the night clearly because she never saw a royal before or since”. 26 January 2022 In legal filings submitted to the New York court, Andrew denies he was a co-conspirator of Epstein and that the disgraced financier trafficked girls to him, and insists on a jury trial. His lawyers reiterate their previously unsuccessful claim that Giuffre’s 2009 settlement with Epstein shields Andrew from litigation. 5 February 2022 A date in March is set for Andrew to give evidence under oath. 15 February 2022 In a remarkable turnaround, Andrew reaches a settlement in principle with Giuffre in which he agrees to make a “substantial donation” to a charity, and accepts that Giuffre “suffered as an established victim of abuse”. In a document submitted to the New York court, Andrew says he regrets his association with Epstein.SCHADENFREUDE AND PETROHUBRIS The knockout stage of Big Cup begins this evening, and thoughts naturally turn to Barcelona. They’re not in it, of course, but that’s exactly why everyone’s thinking about them. Barça shipped three goals on three occasions in the groups, and so now they’ve got a battle on to make the last 16 of Big Vase instead. Looking on the bright side, at least the likes of Bayern Munich, Roma and Liverpool can’t get at them from where they are now – though let’s hang fire on confidently declaring this new environment a humiliation-free safe space until we see what Napoli do to them in that Vase play-off game. There is one player still in Big Cup who, if you cut him, would bleed blaugrana. Yes, it’s Lionel Messi, now plying his trade with all the other good-time charlies at PSG. Only the fiercely partisan, or those without a grasp of the fundamentals of broad-brush slapstick, would fail to find great humour in the GOAT suffering yet another 8-2 hiding on the biggest stage in club football. Nothing personal, you understand, but with the petroclubs having long gained the upper hand, we have to take our fun where we can get it, and if that means Messi once again watching in impotent despair from afar as ball after ball whistles into the net up the other end, each goal taking an oil-fuelled superclub further away from that elusive holy grail, then so be it. Take a hit for Team Humanity, Leo. But, truth be told, such delicious waves of bittersweet schadenfreude are unlikely to wash over us and cleanse the soul. For a start, PSG face Real Madrid in their Round of Arsenal tie, so any satisfaction derived by the pricking of petrohubris would be almost completely offset by the identity of their conquerors. It’s not exactly a romantic David-Goliath match-up, is it? Also, Real have only scored one goal in their last three games, their attack so blunt of late that Carlo Ancelotti has been forced to recall Golf’s Gareth Bale, so they’re unlikely to rout PSG tonight. Also also, there’s a fair chance Messi, Neymar and Kylian Mbappé will run up a cricket score themselves. Should they put on a show for the ages, The Fiver reserves the right to perform a brazen about-turn, and rhapsodise over them tomorrow when we’re feeling less mean. LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE Big Cup is back, baby! Join Tim de Lisle for Sporting 1-2 Manchester City and/or Scott Murray for PSG 0-0 Real Madrid (both 8pm GMT). QUOTE OF THE DAY “I felt isolated and alone … I had never experienced it before. I had no way to describe my feelings and I felt paralysed and upset … from the Middlesex FA I have had no support” – 12-year-old Sathi Balaguru, whose family have spoken out over a lack of action after he was racially abused during a nine-a-side game in London. RECOMMENDED LOOKING David Squires tackles the Kurt Zouma saga, with apologies to Dr Seuss. It’s good stuff. FIVER LETTERS “Oh, Sad and Lonely Fiver on Valentine’s Day [Monday’s last line]. A ready meal for two, now for one? Well, at least you get the joy of sharing it with *shuffles through TV listings of Big Paper* West Brom 0-0 Blackburn? Better luck next year” – Mike Wilner. “Re: Williams’ letter [yesterday’s Fiver]. Why are Formula One teams now writing in and winning letter o’ the day? Are you making these up?” – McLaren [aka Antony Train]. “Perhaps somebody should explain to Brian Ross, who did not win prizeless letter of the day yesterday, both the concept of a joke and the purpose of question marks” – Ian Copestake [Yowza! – Reader Beef Ed]. “There was a Ronny Rosenthal-esque miss from The Fiver yesterday, by not starting the first News/Bit/Bob with ‘Sixty-three-year-old Ralf Rangnick…’ “– Jim Hearson. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’ the day is … Mike Wilner. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS Emiliano Sala’s mother, Mercedes Taffarel, has told an inquest that her son felt “pressure” from both Nantes and Cardiff to complete his fateful transfer quickly. Sala died in January 2019 when his plane crashed into the English Channel. James Vaughan has been appointed Tranmere’s sporting director at the age of 33, after retiring from playing at the end of last season. “James is young, modern and dynamic,” cheered manager Micky Mellon. In a busy day of League Two comings and goings, Michael Flynn has been appointed the new Walsall head coach, while Derek Adams has been shown the fabled D.M.D.O. at Bradford City. Transfer doyen Fabrizio Romano reckons Manchester City are in line to beat Arsenal to sign 17-year-old Brazilian winger Sávio from Atlético Mineiro, while Liverpool will offer James Milner, 57, a new one-year deal. With City and Liverpool in Big Cup action this week, Trent Alexander-Arnold has weighed in on his side’s European success. “Obviously not making any digs but you look at Manchester City’s amazing team and they haven’t been able to lift [Big Cup],” the full-back trilled, trowel in hand. Arsenal’s Leah Williamson will captain England at the upcoming four-team Arnold Clark Cup. The Lionesses kick off against Canada at the Riverside on Thursday, before further games against Spain at Carrow Road on Sunday and then Germany at Molineux on 23 February. Bad news for Fifa: a survey by the international players’ union, Fifpro, has found that 75% of male players want to keep the World Cup every four years, thanks very much. Good news for fans of the Queen’s Celtic and Pope’s O’Rangers: away supporters will be allowed at the last two Old Firm derbies of the season, although at a reduced allocation of 900 tickets each. And Ralf Rangnick, 64 in June, has said Manchester United’s main target is snaffling that sweet, sweet fourth Big Cup spot. ‘This is the highest possible achievement we can get,’’ sighed the s£xagenarian. STILL WANT MORE? Paris Saint-Germain are in a mess before tonight’s meeting with Real Madrid but with Kylian Mbappé anything is possible, writes Adam White. How have Sporting succeeded in overcoming their troubles to land a Big Cup meeting with Manchester City? David Hytner takes a look. ‘What they think is what we think, to go through’: Carlo Ancelotti plays a straight bat before Real Madrid’s showdown in Paris. There was romance and heartbreak in the Catalan derby, reports a loved-up Sid Lowe. Don’t forget to give Monday’s Football Weekly a spin. And if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! BIRTHDAY BANGERThe work of the American photographer Jesse Alexander, who has died aged 92, captured an era of international motor racing in which the personalities of the drivers and the sleek lines of the cars they drove were not yet obscured by the visual noise of sponsors’ insignia. At a time when competitors, photographers and journalists stayed in the same hotels, dined together and gave each other lifts to and from races across Europe, Alexander became a friend of many of the grand prix aces. Not just the Americans who crossed the Atlantic to try their luck during the postwar years, such as Masten Gregory, Dan Gurney, Richie Ginther and Phil Hill, the fellow Californian who in 1961 would become the US’s first world champion, but such European stars as Stirling Moss, Wolfgang von Trips and Jim Clark. The action shots he provided for magazines such as Sports Illustrated and Car and Driver were outstanding, but the trust engendered by these personal friendships enabled him to take revealing photographs of the drivers in their less obviously heroic moments. A portrait of Clark at Spa in Belgium in 1962 showed not the elation of a young driver in the immediate aftermath of collecting the first world championship grand prix win of his career, but his exhaustion after a two-hour battle to fight his way up from 12th place on the starting grid to victory on a fast and notoriously dangerous track. Alexander’s backstage shots could include the more light-hearted image of an informal backgammon game on the steps of a hotel between two playboy drivers, the Franco-American Harry Schell and the Spanish aristocrat Alfonso de Portago. But they often reflected his interest in the less glamorous side of the sport, particularly among the men who wielded spanners and oily rags. “Perhaps the most important side of my work is the human side to it,” he once said. “A part of me somehow relates to the people who do the grunt work. In the 1950s the mechanics got their hands dirty and were as emotionally involved in the sport as the drivers.” To that end, between trips to Formula One races, Le Mans, the Mille Miglia and the Targa Florio, he visited workshops and test sessions where he could portray the hard work undertaken away from the crowds and the spotlight. But even a photograph of a car being unloaded from a transporter, a factory interior or a shirtsleeved Enzo Ferrari conferring with his chief designer would be composed and lit with an eye developed through his admiration of such photographers as Edward Steichen, W Eugene Smith, Jacques Henri Lartigue, Henri Cartier-Bresson and Robert Capa. Born into a wealthy family in Santa Barbara, California, Jesse was the son of Florence (nee Lyman) and Junius Alexander and grew up in Montecito, close to the ocean. After boarding schools in Massachusetts and Connecticut, he returned to study photography at the University of California in Santa Barbara. Already car-mad, he bought an MG TD in which he drove to watch races at Pebble Beach, Golden Gate Park and his local track, laid out on an airfield. In 1953 he travelled to Mexico to watch and photograph the Carrera Panamericana, a spectacular and highly dangerous four-day race over 1,900 miles of open roads, won by Juan Manuel Fangio in a Lancia. The following year Alexander took his wife and the first of their four daughters to Europe, where at the first race he attended, the French Grand Prix at Reims, the Mercedes-Benz team made their return to Formula One, with Fangio as the No 1 driver. A memorable photo taken during a break in practice for that race shows the 42-year-old Argentinian perched on a pit counter as three younger drivers – Eugenio Castellotti, Peter Collins and Olivier Gendebien – listen intently to what he has to say. In 1958 Alexander commissioned the architect Ernst E Anderegg, a student of Frank Lloyd Wright, to design a house for his family in Hohfluh, Switzerland, where his motor racing friends often came to stay. Once built, its appearance so scandalised the local authorities that they changed their building regulations. Covering thousands of miles in a Porsche coupe laden with the latest cameras, Alexander was a regular presence at the circuits until the early 70s, thereafter making occasional trips back to Europe for the 24 Hours of Le Mans or, latterly, the Goodwood Festival of Speed. Outside motor sport, he co-directed short films about Billingsgate fish market in London in the 60s and the construction of a modernist house in the hills above Santa Barbara. He took pictures of Bobby Kennedy on the campaign trail and, in his later years, birds being cared for at a raptor centre. His several books of motor racing photographs include At Speed (1972), Looking Back (1982) and Driven (2000), for which Moss provided an affectionate foreword. Alexander is survived by his second wife, Nancy, whom he married in 1965, their son, Jess, and his four daughters, Rori, Heidi, Andi and Susie, from his first marriage, to Patricia Beckham, which ended in divorce. • Jesse Alexander, photographer, born 15 April 1929; died 14 December 2021Over the past 11 years of men’s tennis, during which Novak Djokovic rose to dominance and improbably positioned himself as one of the greatest to play the game, the only time his success has been in doubt came after the summer of 2017 when he suffered through many months with an elbow injury. The injury became a point of contention between himself and his then-coach, Andre Agassi, who later said he had swiftly advocated surgery. But Djokovic addressed the injury by resting for nearly six months, believing his body was built to heal itself naturally. It was not. After returning the next year to pain and early losses Djokovic finally underwent surgery in February 2018. As he digested his guilt about agreeing to the surgery, he cried for days. On Tuesday Djokovic gave his first full interview since his deportation from Australia after arriving there to play in the Open without being vaccinated against Covid. Djokovic acknowledged that, as things stand in a worldwide sport that moves from country to country each week, his unvaccinated status means he is unable to play in the majority of tournaments. “That is the price I am willing to pay,” he said. In the same breath, Djokovic said with a smile that at such a critical moment in tennis history he understands his actions may deprive him of the possibility of winning the highest number of grand slam tournaments. He framed his decision in libertarian terms: “The principles of decision making on my body are more important than any title or anything else.” Djokovic’s conversation with the BBC was a reminder that his propensity for self-sabotage has become a defining trait. The principles that made him so averse to surgery in 2017 were not in tune with reality. After his surgery he won the final two majors of that 2018 season and he has won eight since. The most controversial on-court moment of his career so far, his disqualification from the 2020 US Open after unintentionally hitting a line judge with a ball, came after near misses from which he failed to learn. Here he is again, his own worst enemy. As Djokovic attempts to navigate the world while unvaccinated – and while his biggest rival, Rafael Nadal, took advantage of his absence to win a historic 21st grand slam title at the Australian Open – according to the ATP 99% of the top 100 is now vaccinated. He stands alone. Within the context of his career Djokovic’s stubbornness has been an admirable quality. He emerged when Roger Federer and Nadal were competing to be the greatest of their generation yet he not only had the audacity to believe he could break the duopoly, while so many crumbled in their presence, but did so in time. He has spent his career constantly recovering from impossible deficits, defying crowds roaring for his demise. Although invaluable to an elite sportsman, those qualities outside the sporting bubble often scan as selfish and hubristic. While the experience of twice being detained in Australia and then being deported might lead some to consider their decisions and look to make their life easier, it is hard not to think that in his case the experience has only strengthened Djokovic’s beliefs further. During his interview Djokovic continually attempted to distance himself from the anti-vax movement. His actions speak louder than words. While he may not publicly spread Covid conspiracy theories, he was evidently prepared to risk spreading the virus when he decided to conduct an interview with a L’Équipe journalist in December two days after testing positive. “I was never against vaccination. I understand that, globally, everyone is trying to put a big effort into handling this virus,” he said. He recognises the effect the pandemic has had on the world, yet he has opted out of the current push to address it. Djokovic further claimed he is keeping his “mind open” to vaccination in the future, yet he foreshadowed this entire scenario nearly two years ago in a widely circulated online discussion with his fellow Serbian players. Long before vaccines had come to light he expressed his concern about the possibility of having to be vaccinated in order to travel. More than a year since the vaccine campaign began, there are numerous types of vaccines and answers to many questions Djokovic could be seeking. Rather than having an open mind, it seems as if his thoughts have been set for some time. While he may not want to be seen as someone actively campaigning against vaccination, the result of his actions are evident. Djokovic has already ensured he will be celebrated by such people and the far right, and the manner in which the vultures descended during his time in Australia was telling, with his family even breaking bread with Nigel Farage at Djokovic’s restaurant as they followed one of the Serb’s court hearings. The reality for Djokovic now is no different from the two excellent weeks of tennis in Australia following his deportation. This sport stops for nobody and the other 99 players in the top 100 will continue to compete around the world. As long as Djokovic treads this path and vaccination restrictions remain, he will have to face the consequences of his decisions.Former Post Office workers who were among those wrongfully convicted for theft, fraud and false accounting have called for the company’s former management to go to jail for their part in the long-running scandal. More than 700 Post Office operators were prosecuted between 2000 and 2014, based on evidence from the Horizon IT system, which was installed and maintained by Fujitsu. Damian Owen, who was manager of a Post Office branch in Bangor, north Wales, was jailed for eight months after he was accused of stealing £25,000 as a result of computer errors. His conviction was quashed in 2021. Owen was at times lost for words as he told the inquiry into the scandal about his time in prison. “I lost an awful lot of weight,” Owen told the inquiry. “I did what I could to pass the time as quickly as I could.” Owen said the £25,000 hole in his branch accounts appeared shortly after Horizon system was installed, and he knew the figures didn’t add up. “We never held that amount of money there. It was a small branch,” Owen said. “As far as I was aware, the most held there was £13,000.” Owen was giving evidence to the second day of the inquiry into the human impact of the failings of the company’s software. The inquiry is part of an investigation into one of the biggest miscarriages of justice in British legal history. Some of the convicted workers were sent to prison, others lost their livelihoods and their homes. Many went bankrupt, and some died before their names were cleared. The inquiry, which is being chaired by the retired high court judge Sir Wyn Williams, is expected to hear evidence from about 60 former Post Office workers over the coming weeks. Owen called for former Post Office management to face charges. “I want there to be convictions, not only for the people who have perpetuated the whole conspiracy inside the Post Office, everyone from the top down who knew and was still pushing charges,” he said. “I want charges against people not only in my court case who came to give evidence and lied under oath, I want each of them to receive a perjury charge.” Lorraine Margery Williams, a former sub-postmistress from Anglesey, also called for prosecutions of former Post Office managers. “I want them to go to jail for what they have done. But that would be an easy life for them. They’d come out and still have their money,” she said. “I want them to feel the way I felt and the way we suffered financially. I just want somebody to be accountable. It has gone on for so long and people are hiding. Somebody has got to be accountable for this.” Williams, who received a suspended prison sentence in 2012 before her conviction was quashed in 2021, said she had struggled to find work after her conviction, which also caused her family’s mortgage repayments to quadruple. Williams said the experience had profoundly affected her, her husband and her daughter. “I was a recluse, I wouldn’t go out. I still don’t feel I am the same person. I get angry at times,” she said. “I don’t trust anybody any more and it’s difficult.” Lisa Brennan, a former Post Office counter clerk from Huyton near Liverpool, ended up homeless after her conviction for theft in 2003. “I had no job and I couldn’t afford the mortgage. I had to sofa surf,” Brennan told the inquiry, adding she felt too ashamed to return to her home after being found guilty. Brennan insisted on her innocence throughout her trial and said she had planned to kill herself if she had been sent to prison, despite her daughter only being six years old at the time. She was given a suspended prison sentence, a conviction that was quashed last year. “It was the end of the world to me,” she said. “That was my life, all I had known was the Post Office from 16, and just to be told: ‘You’re a thief’ is horrible. I wasn’t, and hadn’t taken anything.” After her conviction, Brennan was declared bankrupt, her marriage ended and she attempted to take an overdose. “I used to drink a lot,” she said. “Vodka, wine, anything just to numb it.” Talking about her almost 20-year ordeal, Brennan said: “It is just scandalous. It should never have happened. I wasn’t the only one. All of us say the same thing, we were told: ‘It’s only you. Nobody else is making these mistakes.’” Janine Powell, originally from Tiverton in Devon, cried as she described how she was accused by the Post Office of stealing more than £71,000. When Powell was sent to prison in 2008, she was separated from her children, which she said had a big impact on their relationship. “We were all very close, and I think [my daughter] blamed me for leaving her,” she said. “It was hard to get that relationship back on track.” Powell had to wait for more than a decade until her conviction was quashed. The inquiry continues.Fans of the original Star Wars trilogy, your time is up. Remember when you knew that the one true set of works based in a galaxy far, far away were the ones about Luke Skywalker? That the dreadful Attack of the Clones couldn’t be held up to The Empire Strikes Back? And that just thinking about Jar Jar Binks and Jake Lloyd’s acting was enough to make a million voices cry out in terror? Bad news: if you think like that, then when it comes to TV, Star Wars is no longer for you. Disney+ has confirmed that 25 May will be the launch date of its new Star Wars spin-off series: Obi-Wan Kenobi. After the announcement, Ewan McGregor – who reprises his role from the prequel trilogy of the late 90s and early 00s – explained who this show is being made for. “People in their late teens or early 20s, those people who were kids who we made those films for, they loved them,” he told Forbes. “To them, they’re their Star Wars films, you know? For us, it was the original films of the 70s, but for them, it was our films were their Star Wars. So to step back into his shoes again now and do a series, a whole series about Obi-Wan Kenobi for those fans, it just makes me really happy.” That this is the show’s target audience probably shouldn’t come as a surprise, given that the Disney+ series directly follows on from Episode III – Revenge of the Sith, and takes place at a point where McGregor is yet to become Sir Alec Guinness. But the actor’s words confirm something that has seemed increasingly obvious to watchers of The Mandalorian and The Book of Boba Fett: Star Wars really isn’t aimed at diehard fans of the original trilogy any more. It’s not just that Disney+’s Star Wars series are created with a younger generation in mind, they’re also clearly created for those who have followed post-prequel content like the animated shows, novels and comics. They’re full of nerd-pleasing references to what I’m going to call “New Star Wars”, which expands on events hinted at in the original trilogy and introduces a raft of new characters. Unless you’d followed the animated series Star Wars: The Clone Wars or Star Wars Rebels, to watch The Book of Boba Fett was to find yourself repeatedly asking things like: “When did that pointy black lightsaber become a thing? What does this Ahsoka person have to do with anything? And who the hell is Cad Bane, and why does he look like an alien Clint Eastwood?” Given its target audience and the period in which it’s set, the Obi-Wan series is likely to feature its fair share of references like this. Is absolutely everyone aware that Darth Maul was glued back together after being lopped in half and definitely killed in The Phantom Menace? If you were confused by his cameo in 2018’s Solo, prepare for further befuddlement. What’s ironic about Star Wars targeting younger audiences, though, is that about 87% of the franchise’s appeal comes from pure nostalgia. No matter how much additional material is introduced, fans new and old will always be drawn in by images of Darth Vader, the Millennium Falcon and Luke Skywalker doing a flip while wearing Yoda as a backpack. But it’s a more recent form of nostalgia Disney+ is increasingly targeting: nostalgia for the prequels and the immediate content that followed. Many will be delighted to see that Hayden Christensen is back as Anakin Skywalker/Darth Vader for Obi-Wan Kenobi – even if his face is covered by a black helmet most of the time. They’ll also be eager to spend more time with McGregor’s Obi-Wan, who, in fairness, alongside Ian McDiarmid’s Chancellor Palpatine/Darth Sidious, was one of the best things about the prequels. Is it a good idea to keep revisiting old characters and filling in the blanks, though? The real concern here is that this show will commit the same crime as The Book of Boba Fett: ruin an iconic character’s mystique and legacy by exploring a story that really didn’t need to be told. Do we really need to see what Obi-Wan got up to on Tatooine while watching over a baby Luke Skywalker? Presumably there was a lot of hanging around while trying not to look creepy. There will surely also be a bit that explains why Obi-Wan has no recollection of R2-D2 when he meets him in the original trilogy, despite spending a significant chunk of his life with the bin-shaped droid. A fan of New Star Wars would argue that this kind of continuity correction is reason enough for the show to exist. Others would happily go without. Like The Mandalorian, there will undoubtedly be plenty to enjoy about Obi-Wan Kenobi. If the thought of it being aimed at prequel-loving fans who need to explore every corner of the galaxy fills you with abject horror, though, you should probably temper your expectations now.Americans lost more than $1bn in 2021 alone to “romance scams” such as the one documented in the hit Netflix documentary The Tinder Swindler, according to the FBI. The majority of the victims who were cheated out of their money were women older than 40, and women who are widowed, divorced, elderly or disabled, the FBI’s Internet Crime Complaint Center (IC3) said in a press statement last week. Scammers often use poetry, flowers and other gifts to charm their victims, while keeping them concerned with stories of severe life circumstances, tragedies, death and injuries. “The criminals spend hours honing their skills, relying on well-rehearsed scripts that have been used repeatedly and successfully, and sometimes keep journals on their victims to better understand how to manipulate and exploit them,” the FBI said. “In some cases, victims may be recruited, unknowingly, to transfer illegally on behalf of others.” In 2020, there were approximately 24,000 complaints filed to IC3 that were categorized as romance scams, nearly 4,300 more than the previous year. The estimated losses in 2020 totaled approximately $605m – though the real figure is likely to be higher, given many victims feel too embarrassed, ashamed or humiliated to report being taken advantage of. Perhaps the most notable recent example of romance scams is the Tinder Swindler, the moniker given to the Israeli-born Simon Leviev, who pretended to be the son of a billionaire diamond dealer and defrauded unsuspecting women on dating apps of an estimated $10m. “Most often these scammers leave victims financially and emotionally devastated. Many victims may not have the ability to recover from the financial loss,” said Luis Quesada, special agent in charge of the FBI El Paso division. A study released last year by the cyber protection agency Malwarebytes revealed that people with less digital literacy are more prone to such scams. Those typically include ethnic minorities, women and older people, according to Malwarebytes. The FBI has offered tips on how to protect yourself online against potential abusers, including researching the person’s photo and profile to see if their images or details have been used elsewhere, being judicious about how much personal information you post – a “good scammer can turn a tiny bit of detail into a very effective punch”, the agency said – and never helping anyone move money, lest you become an unwitting money mule. “While we recognize that it may be embarrassing for victims to report this type of fraud, it’s important to do so, so that the FBI and our law enforcement partners can do everything in our power to ensure these online imposters are held accountable,” said Quesada.Marina Hyde and John Crace have been unmissable for their take on recent events in Downing Street and the Met police. But on Friday, Vlad did it backwards and in heels (Cryptic crossword, 11 February), centring on George Washington’s reputed admission of truthfulness. Whether readers do cryptic crosswords or not, I urge them to read the clues for this extraordinary encapsulation of the same events. Clare Smedley Rudyard, Staffordshire • The recorder can also sound beautiful in modern music, eg Fool on the Hill by the Beatles, Ruby Tuesday by the Rolling Stones and Led Zeppelin’s Stairway to Heaven (Letters, 11 February). John Rix Rugby, Warwickshire • I welcome the opening (finally) of the Post Office public inquiry (‘I knew something was wrong’: first witness in Post Office hearing breaks down, 14 February). But can someone please explain to me why this is a public inquiry rather than a police investigation? Peter Hughes Newton, Cambridgeshire • I worked at Whitechapel library in London (Letters, 9 February) in 1967-69. A few years ago, I booked a meal at Angela Hartnett’s Whitechapel restaurant. Imagine my surprise to find that not only was my office now a restaurant but the card catalogue held the cutlery. Moira Gray Newcastle upon Tyne • At the risk of propelling mushrooms into the same arena as those once-popular 35mm film canisters, could I suggest replacing the small knob of butter (Letters, 11 February) with a healthy squirt of mayonnaise? Mark Hainge Hay-on-Wye, Powys • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.I cannot believe that you could not find a place in the list of live shows that changed music (11 February) for Patti Smith’s concert at the Roundhouse in Camden on 16 May 1976. That brilliant night taught a lot of people that there was a new way for female artists to command the stage. She combined high-energy driving rock and punk poetry in a passionate display of total commitment to her music. It is difficult to think of a single female singer since then who does not owe her a debt. Owen Davies Clapham, London • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.If everything in Hamlet is as straightforward as Rhoda Koenig seems to think (Letters, 13 February), why does Hamlet agonise over the reasons for his “dull revenge” in his soliloquy at the end of act 4, scene 4? He coolly sends Rosencrantz and Guildenstern to their deaths but lets “all sleep” with regard to his father’s murderer – to his own bafflement and frustration. There will always be people who think that critics are serving their own interests by making things unnecessarily complicated. But the reason Hamlet has generated so many theories over the past 400 years is that it is genuinely a complex play that resists easy explanation. Robin Jarvis Emeritus professor of English literature, University of the West of England • From the many thousands of books and academic articles that have been written about the “real meaning” of Hamlet, Rhoda Koenig chooses as “definitive” the late Bernard Grebanier’s The Heart of Hamlet, and claims not to have known of any reader who has disagreed with its central thesis. Perhaps she has not come across the review by Julian Markels in Shakespeare Quarterly (1 April 1961), in which Markels dismisses Grebanier’s book as “garrulous and incoherent”, characterises its methodology as “irresponsible” and goes on to imply that Grebanier has, in any case, merely rewritten the work of an academic predecessor. Michael Pyke Shenstone, Staffordshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Your editorial (8 February) criticising the draft police bill for further marginalising the already isolated Traveller community is both timeous and accurate. Rather than continued reliance within the bill on the sledgehammer approach of moving the problem of unauthorised encampments from one area to another – a proven costly failure – both central and local governments should look to replicate small successes from the past. In the 1980s and 90s, Strathclyde regional council, in partnership with central government, the 19 constituent district councils and representatives of the Traveller community, developed a network of serviced authorised sites for Traveller use across the region, the costs of which were shared by all councils, whether or not they actually hosted a site. While such an innovative policy required sustained political commitment, and on occasion created controversy and friction, it was broadly successful in ensuring the availability of secure accommodation for a persecuted minority, while at the same time enhancing knowledge and understanding between the Traveller and settled communities. Phil Murray Linlithgow, West Lothian • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.The shameful racial inequalities documented by the NHS Race and Health Observatory report (Radical action needed to tackle racial health inequality in NHS, says damning report, 14 February) have rightly led to calls for action. But what has been missed is that even in the last decade alone, there have been a myriad of NHS-led plans, strategies and initiatives to tackle inequality. Some, such as the workforce race equality standard, had investment of millions of pounds. Yet the comparatively poorer experiences of black, Asian and minority ethnic patients and workers persist. In understanding why, we must look at where accountability has gone. Almost every equality plan or initiative has had some form of oversight group. Almost always, these are led and dominated by the NHS, with race equality organisations such as ours often in a minority of one. With critical voices often ignored and regulators, such as the Equality and Human Rights Commission or Care Quality Commission, rarely acting when failures to progress racial equality are found, we are left with NHS leaders able to jump from one initiative to the next without any real change. Unless we have accountability that is not led by the usual suspects and have regulators that are willing to act, the actions that follow this damning report will go the same way as in the past. Jabeer Butt Chief executive, Race Equality Foundation • Your article highlights that the pandemic has had a disproportionate effect on minority ethnic groups. This certainly echoes our experience as ethnic minority health and social care professionals. It is imperative that this matter is not just included in the terms of reference in the Covid-19 inquiry this spring, but forms a central part of Lady Hallett’s investigations. We make this call with a clear-eyed view of the pressures on the 73-year-old NHS and with hope for what an inquiry could do. Our members, who include clinicians, researchers and ancillary workers, are facing these challenges daily – from the lack of appropriate PPE during the pandemic to the heavy losses among our ranks and our loved ones. The inquiry must make space to hear our unique perspectives on how health inequality is experienced in terms of race and ethnic origin as a matter of national importance. Ade Adeyemi Secretary, Federation of Ethnic Minority Healthcare Organisations • The NHS Race and Health Observatory report is incredibly important and action needs to be taken now at all levels. C3 Collaborating for Health has been working for a decade to highlight the burden of ill health and premature mortality from the main chronic diseases (cancer, diabetes, heart disease, stroke) that occur disproportionately in minority populations – the same issues led to the high rates of death and serious illness from Covid-19. With the support of the Burdett Trust for Nursing, we will be working with nurses of black or Asian heritage who can engage with their local communities and improve health outcomes among minority ethnic patients. The “radical action” called for in the report needs to be addressed by better support for disadvantaged patients and for the key staff who can play a major part in the changes that are needed. Christine Hancock Founder, C3 Collaborating for Health; former general secretary, Royal College of Nursing • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Russian lawmakers have passed a direct appeal to Vladimir Putin to recognise the Russian-controlled separatist states of Donetsk and Luhansk, providing a way to up the ante in the regional crisis without launching an attack on Ukraine. Putin has said he will not immediately recognise the so-called republics but he is likely to wield that option as a bargaining chip as he continues to demand security guarantees from the west. The stage-managed manoeuvre unfolded on Tuesday as Putin also confirmed a “partial” withdrawal of Russian forces from the Ukrainian border, a decision that would reduce the potential for a war if it involves a large number of troops. It is not yet clear that it will. Since 2014, Russia has used the deadly Donbas conflict to divert attention from its annexation of Crimea and as part of its strategy to maintain control over Ukraine’s geopolitical future. The Minsk ceasefire deal signed in 2015 formalised a plan to reinsert the Donbas territories into Ukraine but give them a veto over Kyiv’s foreign policy choices, including potential accession to Nato. But the deal has stalled over ceasefire violations, disagreements about what steps to take first, and a growing belief in Ukraine that the deal was signed at gunpoint and is no longer politically viable. Hawkish officials and prominent figures in Russia such as the head of RT, Margarita Simonyan, have called for recognition of the regions’ independence. But that is far from a popular sentiment and would remove a key element of the Kremlin’s leverage over Ukraine by killing the Minsk deal. “The recognition of the LPR and DPR [Luhansk and Donetsk people’s republics] by Russia would signify its intentional withdrawal from the Minsk agreements,” a Ukrainian foreign ministry spokesperson said on Tuesday. Moscow has already made it difficult to reintegrate the territories by issuing hundreds of thousands of Russian passports there and arming and backing their governments since 2014. Still, a formal recognition of independence would be seen as a considerable escalation. The Nato secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, said recognition would be a “blatant violation of Ukraine’s territorial integrity and sovereignty”. And some European officials have said it would trigger sanctions packages put together to deter a Russian invasion. “The call of Russia’s State Duma to recognise the occupied territories of Ukraine is an open escalation,” said Gabrielius Landsbergis, Lithuania’s foreign minister. “Approval by Kremlin should be met with swift and decisive sanctions.” The decision may give Putin a way to save face from the crisis, after trying and so far failing to achieve guarantees that Nato will not admit Ukraine and will remove its infrastructure from countries that joined after 1997. Rather than starting a war, he could kick out the legs from under the ceasefire settlement and move troops into Donbas or even provoke a Ukrainian attack, giving Russia a casus belli. While Putin argued in his remarks that his deputies were “following public opinion”, it is clear that the Duma vote on Tuesday was largely managed by the Kremlin. As Putin noted, the decision for a partial withdrawal from the borders was directly tied to the vote on recognising the republics. One form of pressure on Ukraine was being swapped for another. At an impasse in negotiations with the west, Putin is threatening to demolish the status quo. It may mean Russia is considering other options besides war to achieve its goals, but it also signals the Kremlin is growing impatient. “Russia hears that Ukraine is not prepared to join Nato today, and we know this premise,” Putin said after talks with the German chancellor, Olaf Scholz. “And they say right away that it won’t be admitted tomorrow, but will be admitted when they prepare it for this. But this might be too late for us. Therefore, we want this issue to be settled now, right now, in the near future, through a negotiating process, by peaceful means.”Uefa has been accused of exposing supporters to “crypto-mercenaries” after becoming the latest football organisation to sign a deal with the fan token company Socios.com. The European governing body has agreed a licensing and sponsorship arrangement with Socios.com, which produces tokens for 53 football clubs across the world, including Crystal Palace, Leeds United, Manchester City, Everton and Aston Villa. Fan tokens allow supporters to vote on certain matters decided by a club and to enter competitions. They must be bought, using Socios.com’s cryptocurrency Chiliz, and can be traded on cryptocurrency markets. Football Supporters Europe was highly critical of the three-year agreement. “We are appalled by Uefa’s decision to team up with Socios, a company that monetises fan engagement at the expense of match-going fans,” it said in a statement. “This is an incomprehensible move at a time when football needs protection from crypto-mercenaries.” FSE, who receive funding from Uefa, continued: “Uefa’s partnership with Socios legitimises risky investments in highly volatile and largely unregulated financial assets.” Another respected fan organisation, SD Europe, was also critical of the deal, which it said came in “stark contrast” to Uefa’s decision on Monday to give 30,000 free tickets to match-going fans for the finals of this year’s continental club competitions. “Meaningful fan engagement should be democratic, inclusive and transparent via formal mechanisms such as supporter involvement in governance structures, share ownership, voting rights and representative supporter groups,” SD Europe said. A Uefa spokesperson said: “This regional sponsorship and global licensing agreement will not affect Uefa’s strong commitment to continuously engage and discuss relevant matters of interest directly with fan organisations.” As part of the arrangement with Uefa, Socios.com will produce “add-on fan tokens” with Uefa branding which will be awarded to customers currently holding tokens in clubs. A Socios.com spokesperson said uses for the add-on tokens would be disclosed soon but that they would not be sold to customers nor available for trade. Socios.com was founded by the former poker entrepreneur Alexandre Dreyfus and has become the market leader in linking sport to cryptocurrency and blockchain technology. Dreyfus says that fan tokens enable clubs to better interact with the digital aspects of their fanbase. “The value that is provided is not financial and will never be financial,” he told Sky News last month, “The value is about the experience and the connection that is provided between the fan and the club.” The link between fan tokens and speculative trading has been part of the Socios.com offering since its launch in 2019. Some tokens have seen substantial falls in value, with the Arsenal token losing 60% since its launch in November last year. In December the Advertising Standards Authority called the club “irresponsible” and “misleading” for the way they had marketed their token, saying they had “failed to illustrate the risk of the investment”.At least seven people have died and 14 are missing after a Spanish fishing boat sank in bitterly cold seas off the north-east coast of Canada early on Tuesday morning. Spain’s maritime rescue service said an international operation was under way to locate the crew of the Villa de Pitanxo, a boat from the north-western Galicia region that went down 280 miles (450km) off the Newfoundland coast. Three people have been plucked from a life raft and seven bodies have been recovered in a search operation that has been hindered by wind, rough seas and reduced visibility. “An air and sea operation has been launched to rescue the 24 crew members of the Villa de Pitanxo fishing vessel, a 50-metre-long fishing boat that operates from Marín, in Pontevedra,” it said. “The crew is made up of 16 Spaniards, five Peruvians and three Ghanaians.” A plane, two helicopters and four boats are combing the area for survivors. Canadian rescuers said they were optimistic, despite the bad weather. “The fact that we have already found three survivors in a life raft gives us that hope that others were able to either get into their survival suits, get into life rafts and get off the vessel,” Brian Owens, of Canada’s Joint Rescue Coordination Centre, told AFP. The centre added: “The search continues for the remaining crew and we hold out hope that we will find them. We will update as soon as more information becomes available.” It said the Villa de Pitanxo sent out a distress signal just after midnight local time on Tuesday. Spain’s prime minister, Pedro Sánchez, said the government was in constant contact with the rescue services. “We’re following the search and rescue effort for the crew of the Galician boat that sank off Newfoundland with worry and concern,” Sánchez tweeted. “All my love to their families.” Alberto Núñez Feijóo, the regional president of Galicia, also said his thoughts were with the families of the crew. “We’re following the terrible news that has reached us from Canada of the sinking of the Villa de Pitanxo, a boat from Marín,” he said, adding that the regional government was ready to do whatever it could to help.Andriy, a 34-year-old bank clerk living in Kyiv, was feeling very pleased with the announcement on Tuesday that some Russian troops had started to move away from the border with Ukraine. First, it seemed to lower the threat of an all-out Russian attack on Kyiv. And second, it meant he might win a bet with his sister. Most locals are going about their lives as normal. “She took a plane to Poland on Saturday with her kids because she was reading about all this war threat, but I didn’t believe in it, and also I wanted to stay because had a haircut booked,” he said, as he took a stroll in the sunshine on the central Khreshchatyk street on Tuesday afternoon. “We had a bet about whether the Russians would attack,” he said. In recent days, many Kyiv residents, while alarmed by the military buildup, have shared Andriy’s scepticism about American warnings that their lives were about to be disrupted by missile barrages and that tank incursions would come to pass. The reports of US diplomats destroying equipment and shredding documents at the embassy in Kyiv before fleeing the capital, reminiscent of desperate scrambles to evacuate burning cities on the brink of capture, have sat strangely with the atmosphere of calm in most of the Ukrainian capital over recent days. On Monday evening, bars and restaurants were full of couples enjoying Valentine’s Day dates. During the day on Tuesday, the streets were busy with people going about their daily business. “Kyiv is calm. National currency stable. Restaurants and supermarkets full. The absence of diplomats is compensated by abundance of journalists,” wrote Olexander Scherba, a former Ukrainian diplomat, on Twitter. Indeed, the world’s newspaper and television crews have descended on Kyiv in recent weeks, awaiting the Russian assault threatened by Putin’s massed troops and promised by White House briefings. The Russian announcement on Tuesday that some troops were being withdrawn from the border appeared to make that maximal outcome less likely, though the Ukrainian government is not relaxing yet. The foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, wrote on Twitter: “We in Ukraine have a rule: we don’t believe what we hear, we believe what we see. If a real withdrawal follows these statements, we will believe in the beginning of a real de-escalation.” But even if the withdrawal does continue, news on Tuesday evening of a potential hacking attack against several Ukrainian banks and the website of the ministry of defence was a reminder that Russia’s long, hybrid grind against Ukraine has been going on for some time and is likely to continue. This kind of messy, piecemeal attack is what Ukrainian leaders have always believed to be more likely than the all-out war scenario briefed by the White House. Underneath the calm of recent days, plenty of Kyiv residents have been making contingency plans, as local television news bulletins have drummed home the possibility of Russian action. The mayor of Kyiv, Vitaly Klitschko, said on Monday the city was working to ensure that power, heating and water supplies would be uninterrupted in the case of a military incursion. His administration released a map showing 4,500 possible bomb shelters for use in case of an attack on Kyiv. They included shops, bars, metro stations – and in one case, a strip club – all of which have promised to shelter people in the event of airstrikes. Some people have bought water and food supplies in case they get stuck at home for days. While many foreign diplomats have been sent home or evacuated to Lviv, in the west of the country, many foreign residents of Kyiv have decided to ignore apocalyptic warnings from their embassies to leave Ukraine immediately. “I’m staying for now, this is a massive city, even if the Russians do start something, I just can’t see it getting too dangerous to stay here,” said Bryan, a 48-year-old American businessman who has been living in Kyiv for the past four years. “I find it a bit strange that our diplomats fled so quickly. That embassy is like a fortress; surely they have somewhere secure to be there,” he added.Authorities are monitoring parts of the north Wales coast for an oil slick after hydrocarbons were released into the sea following a pipeline failure. The pipeline, which connects two oil installations in the Irish Sea, had a failure about 20 miles from the north Wales coast. According to Eni UK, the company that operates the pipeline, the incident involved less than 500 barrels and was reported on Monday. The company confirmed that hydrocarbons had been released from its pipeline running between Conwy and Douglas oil installations, sparking fears of an oil slick. It said: “Eni UK Ltd can confirm that a release of hydrocarbons from its pipeline between the Conwy and Douglas installations, approximately 33km from the north Wales coast, was reported on Monday 14 February.” It said the details of the incident were still being confirmed but the “Conwy to Douglas line was shut immediately and remains off”. It added: “All relevant authorities were promptly informed. There was no impact at any personnel on the installations. A further statement will be made as soon as more information becomes available.” A spokesperson for the Maritime and Coastguard Agency said it was monitoring Eni UK’s response and assisting local authorities. News of the spill came on the 26th anniversary of what has been called Wales’ worst ecological disaster, when 72,000 tonnes of crude spilled from the Sea Empress oil tanker off the Pembrokeshire coast. Large numbers of seaweeds and invertebrates were killed on the beaches where it drifted ashore, and it took over a year to clean the slick. Doug Parr, the chief scientist for Greenpeace UK, said: “This week marks the anniversary of the Sea Empress oil spill. A quarter of a century on, we still find that oil is a dirty business at every stage, whether that’s through planet-warming emissions or leakages like this that harm marine life. The ongoing environmental damage oil causes should be a major incentive to drive forward the cleaner, cheaper energy technologies that now exist.” Dr Richard Benwell, the CEO of Wildlife and Countryside Link, said: “It’s 26 years to the day since the Sea Empress disaster wrought ecological havoc on the Welsh coast … Fossil fuel spills are again threatening the wildlife in our waters, which are already in a precarious state. The sooner we break our dependence on these dirty fuels the better.”Vladimir Putin has confirmed a “partial” drawdown of Russian forces near the Ukrainian border, in a step that could begin a de-escalation of tensions but has left western officials sceptical that the Kremlin has ruled out an attack in the near future. The size of the withdrawal remains unclear and it may involve only a fraction of Russia’s forces at the border, which western officials estimate at more than 130,000 troops, at least 60% of the country’s ground forces. Western officials said there were no immediate signs of a Russian drawdown. “So far we have not seen any de-escalation on the ground from the Russian side. Over the last weeks and days we have seen the opposite,” Jens Stoltenberg, Nato’s secretary general, said on Tuesday. Security officials said they had seen “reinforcements of combat and other capabilities close to the Ukraine border”. Russia has always denied planning to invade Ukraine, saying it can exercise troops on its own territory as it sees fit. It has been pressing for a set of security guarantees from the west, including a guarantee that Ukraine will never join Nato. Asked for the reason for the drawdown on Tuesday, Putin was not forthcoming. “It’s a partial withdrawal of troops from the areas of our exercises,” he said in response to a question during a press conference with the German chancellor, Olaf Scholz. “What is there to comment on?” In another sign of Russia turning the screw on Ukraine, the State Duma voted on Tuesday to ask Putin to recognise the independence of the two Russian-controlled separatist regions in the east of the country. Putin, hinting that he intended to use them as leverage, said he would not recognise the “republics” immediately, but called on Nato to negotiate with him on Russia’s security guarantees before it was “too late”. “We hear that Ukraine is not ready to join Nato; we know that,” Putin said. “At the same time, they say it’s not going to join tomorrow. But by the time they get ready for it, it may be too late for us. So we have to decide this question now, right now, in the very near future, we have to have a negotiation process for this.” The drawdown was first announced on Tuesday morning by the defence ministry spokesperson Igor Konashenkov, who described ongoing exercises that involved forces from “practically all military districts, fleets, and the airborne forces”. “Units of the southern and western military districts, which have accomplished their missions, are boarding trains and trucks and will head for their garrisons later today,” Konashenkov said. The defence ministry released video apparently shot in Crimea of Russian tanks and other heavy weaponry from two brigades being loaded on to railway cars. Otherwise, the Russian military gave little information about which forces would be withdrawn and where they would be sent. Nato’s Stoltenberg said: “We believe there is some ground for cautious optimism based on the signals and signs coming from Moscow, that they are ready to engage in a diplomatic effort and we are ready to continue to engage in a diplomatic effort.” Ukrainian officials said they would not take Moscow at its word about a drawdown. “Many statements are constantly being made from [Russia], so we have a rule: we’ll believe it when we see it,” said Dmytro Kuleba, Ukraine’s foreign minister. “If we see the withdrawal then we will believe in de-escalation.” The Kremlin spokesperson Dmitry Peskov accused the west of manufacturing “manic information madness”. “We’ve always said the troops will return to their bases after the exercises are over. This is the case this time as well,” he said. Peskov said Putin had joked about US intelligence reports that he could give an order to launch an invasion as early as this week. “He asks [us] to find out if the exact time, to the hour, of the start of the war has been published. It’s impossible to be understanding of this manic information madness. Russian state media pundits rushed to praise Putin’s use of military pressure on the west. “Before, no one wanted to talk to us about security; now look at the line of those wanting to visit Moscow in February,” wrote the RT head, Margarita Simonyan, in an apparent reference to visits by leaders such as Scholtz and Emmanuel Macron. “At the same time, Kyiv’s economy has been torn to shreds … it’s a small thing but nice to see.” Russia’s rouble currency posted gains after the announcement, indicating that investors hoped this would mark the beginning of a de-escalation of tensions between Russia and the west. Scholz arrived in Moscow on Tuesday for meetings with Putin, the latest in a series of visits and phone calls from western leaders seeking to avert a potential war through negotiations. Putin said he was “ready to work further” with the west on how to de-escalate the crisis on the Ukrainian border, while Germany’s chancellor said the diplomatic channels were “not yet exhausted”, at a joint press conference marked by subtle swipes and simmering historical resentment. “We are ready to work further together, we are ready to go down the negotiations track,” said Putin, who denied that his country was seeking an invasion of Ukraine. “As to whether we want [war]: of course not. That’s why we have made these proposals about negotiations, the results of which should be an agreement about equal security for all countries, including ours.” The US and other western countries have called a Russian drawdown of its troops on the border a precondition for successful negotiations on the Kremlin’s demands for “security guarantees”. Russia has previously announced the conclusion of military exercises near the Ukrainian border, but social media and satellite photography taken in the following days have not shown considerable changes to Russia’s force posture. Those exercises involved only a small number of troops. Many of the troops located close to the Ukrainian border are not involved in any formal training. When questioned on the buildup, Russia has said it has the right to move troops as it wishes within its own territory. Russia is holding large joint exercises with Belarus scheduled to end on 20 February. Western countries have said those drills could be used as cover to prepare for an attack on Ukraine, while Russia has said the troops will return to base once the exercises have concluded. On Tuesday, Russia also deployed long-range nuclear-capable bombers and fighter jets carrying state-of-the-art hypersonic missiles to its airbase in Syria for massive naval drills in the region. Defense minister Sergey Shoigu met Syria’s president Bashar al-Assad after arriving in Syria to oversee the drills that mark the biggest Russian naval deployment to the Mediterranean Sea since cold war. Additional reporting by Daniel Boffey in Brussels and Patrick Wintour in LondonLiz Truss has said she hopes Britain will soon be in a position to pay the £400m debt overdue to Iran, according to an Iranian account of the phone call between the foreign secretary and her Tehran counterpart, Hossein Amir-Abdollahian. UK government officials have been exploring legal ways to pay Britain’s historical debt, although international economic sanctions on Iran have made it difficult. The UK Foreign Office did not proactively brief reporters on the call, but when contacted for comment it confirmed that the conversation had happened on Monday, saying: “We continue to explore options as a matter of urgency to resolve this case.” It said the UK had always been committed to paying the debt. With talks on the Iran nuclear deal reaching their decisive stage in Vienna, it is possible Truss wanted to stress the upside of both sides reaching a deal. The two countries insist that the £400m debt – dating back to the sale of tanks to the shah of Iran in the mid-1970s – has always been treated as independent of the Vienna talks and the fate of three British dual nationals held in Evin prison or, in the case of Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe, denied the right to leave Iran. The tone of the call, according to the Iranian account, appeared to have been warmer than for some time, with Iran eager to see the UK do more to help with the Afghan refugee crisis on its borders. According to Iran, Truss praised Tehran for housing as many as 2 million refugees. The foreign ministry said: “Amir-Abdollahian positively assessed the relations between the two countries.” It may have been significant that the Irish foreign minister, Simon Coveney, was in Tehran on Monday. He has acted as a conciliator on political prisoner issues in the past. In the UK parliament last month, Boris Johnson again blamed the threat of sanctions for the block on the payment. The Vienna talks will mean many of sanctions could be lifted, but it has been argued that the UK has been responsible for its own sanctions laws since Brexit and so could pay the debt now if it is not tied up in a wider negotiation.Those who save the lives of others need protection themselves. At least 415 attacks against health workers and facilities have been carried out since last year’s coup in Myanmar, according to a report published recently. It has become one of the most dangerous places on Earth for medics, with half of all such global attacks in the first six months of last year. The war in Ethiopia’s Tigray region has seen the large-scale destruction of facilities. With the crisis deepening in Sudan, last month the UN reported 15 healthcare attacks since November. It is over a century and a half since the agreement of the first Geneva convention, an international prohibition on attacking the sick and wounded, assaulting or punishing those who offer them healthcare, and inflicting violence on hospitals and ambulances. Those protections have since been broadened and strengthened repeatedly. Yet attacks on healthcare facilities and workers, often deliberately targeting them, have come to seem like a new normal, from the former Yugoslavia to Syria to Central African Republic. In 2019, at least 1,200 of these acts took place across 20 countries. Hatred, dehumanisation and genocidal thinking as well as the military demand for rapid victory have contributed. Sickeningly, measures meant to protect hospitals and clinics – such as giving their locations to combatants – have in the worst cases facilitated attacks on them. Accountability is vanishingly rare. When Human Rights Watch examined 25 major cases, it found that 16 involved potential war crimes. Just five cases saw a full investigation with published findings. In only one were soldiers disciplined. The Assads of this world are the most obvious culprits, but the US, UK and others are hardly without taint. In October 2015, a US attack on a hospital in Kunduz, Afghanistan, killed 42 civilians. Countries also bear responsibility when their partners and allies carry out attacks with the weapons they supply. They almost always seek to duck it: “The support by the US and UK for Saudi Arabia’s war in Yemen, and the rationalisations offered for it, is the quintessential example of this conduct,” writes Leonard Rubenstein, a human rights lawyer who has investigated many such atrocities, in his recent book Perilous Medicine. It would be easy to despair. Yet Mr Rubenstein argues that such attacks are now more likely to be reported and that global indifference shifted to attention in the last decade, though action remained limited. Campaigning by civil society and the medical community has had a measurable impact at times. Some governments have made improvements. In 2018, the World Health Organization introduced a system for monitoring and reporting attacks, though it has not proved as effective as anticipated. The International Committee of the Red Cross has brought together military representatives, armed groups, experts and healthcare workers to discuss pragmatic measures such as running checkpoints in a way that does not unduly interfere with medical care. We know what needs to be done. In 2016, the then UN secretary general, Ban Ki-moon, sent a detailed and lengthy set of recommendations for tackling the issue to the security council. Members took the opportunity to trade recriminations, but no action resulted. Even countries that pledged support failed to follow through, for example, by ensuring that domestic laws incorporate the Geneva conventions. Protecting healthcare is not an utterly hopeless task – but the ongoing attacks it faces show how desperately sustained effort is needed.Pay growth in the UK continued to lag behind inflation in December as households faced the biggest fall in living standards in three decades. Average weekly pay, excluding bonuses, fell in real terms, according to official figures. The Guardian spoke to workers and employers about the pressure to keep up with inflation. Home From Home Care, Lincolnshire Paul de Savary has raised pay to recruit and retain staff at the care home provider he runs in Lincolnshire. With shortages of staff in the sector nationwide, the managing director of Home From Home Care has raised the firm’s wage bill by 20% in a year to avoid losing staff. “We saw a situation building in the summer where we were going to run out of staff if we weren’t careful. They were all going to hospitality and other sectors than care,” he said. The operator of 11 care homes, which has 450 staff and supports adults with learning difficulties and complex needs, has raised starting pay from the £8.91 national living wage to at least £10 an hour. This is above increased legal pay floor of £9.50 an hour due from April. However, the firm faces spiralling costs across the board, including for energy bills and insurance, and lacks the ability to pass on bumper prices to its customers owing to a lack of adequate government funding for social care. Still, de Savary said retaining staff was vital, even if at the expense of profitability in the short-term. “We were concerned about the cost of living for our staff,” he said. “If they’re worrying about things, we have to help them. They’re at the heart of everything we do.” Matthew Tovey, NHS nurse, south Wales “It seems to me like I’m just working to be able to cover the bills,” said Matthew Tovey. The 30-year-old from Merthyr Tydfil, south Wales, said his pay had not risen above inflation for a decade under the Conservatives’ austerity drive. Tovey, who uses his car to commute to work, has seen the cost of diesel rise sharply and is concerned that his pay packet will not keep up with the surge in gas and electricity bills due in April. “I’m quite fearful of how I’m going to manage,” he said. He said it felt as if NHS staff had been ignored despite being on the frontline of the pandemic. “I worked through three waves, and they stood on their doorsteps and clapped, but they’re taking food away from our tables, really.” Having gone to university to become a nurse, Tovey says he probably earns more than other people but is still struggling. “It feels like if I’ve worked hard and gone into a profession to better myself, and I’m in this position, how the hell are other people coping? “It impacts on your mental health, there’s nowhere to turn. You’re caught between a rock and a hard place and you wonder, when are we going to have a break?” Jaltek, Luton The Luton-based electronics manufacturer Jaltek has found hiring staff tougher as Brexit barriers and Covid-19 have reduced the number of EU workers in Britain, while rising inflation has led the company to increase pay. “It’s a scarcity of people,” said Steve Blythe, the business manager at the family-owned company. “It’s an employees’ market. I think short-term that will put pressure on wages. It goes back to when Brexit happened. Some staff went back to Romania, Poland. These aren’t people who politicians would have you believe are low-paid and low-skilled. They have degrees in science and engineering and are on good money. It leaves you looking for a pool of people who are scarce in the UK.” The firm, which is a member of the Make UK trade body and builds electronics for cars, spacecraft and medical devices, is raising pay to compensate workers for higher rates of inflation, though this is made harder as inflation climbs more than expected. “When we looked at pay a month ago it’s a different picture to where we’re even at now. We have to monitor inflation keenly,” Blythe said.Amid the gloom of February and the cost-of-living crisis, there are at least some reasons to be cheerful when it comes to coronavirus in the UK. Vaccinations have saved countless lives and allowed people to return to many of the activities they missed. The Omicron variant did not lead to the rocketing rates of hospitalisation and death initially feared, and infection and mortality rates are declining again. The desire to return to pre-pandemic life is natural – a reaction to the sacrifices made and, more generally, to the exhaustion and emotional toll of the past two years. People are tired of thinking about Covid. But the best hope of maximising our freedoms is to rigorously monitor the spread of infection and enable people to protect themselves and others. The government appears set on dismantling the very things that make this possible. Last Wednesday, Boris Johnson announced abruptly that he plans to end all domestic Covid regulations from next week, including the requirement to self-isolate on testing positive. The prime minister was led by Tory backbench instincts, not science, or even popular demand; fewer than one in five support the change. Though his spokesman subsequently said that “we would never recommend anyone goes to work when they have an infectious disease”, many will be genuinely confused by the messaging, and less scrupulous bosses will press infected people back to work – at a time when deaths are still averaging more than 175 a day. The lack of adequate sick pay already means that some workers cannot afford to stay home. Problems will be further exacerbated by the proposals to phase out free testing, at least for all but the most vulnerable and for high-risk settings. The better-off will still be able to minimise the risk to their loved ones or co-workers; the poorer will have to take their chances. It cannot be in the best interests of the economy for sick workers to infect colleagues and customers. Short-term savings must be set against the impact of sickness on businesses, the costs of long Covid and the setbacks in tackling hospital backlogs that are likely to result. Even worse is the threat to prematurely end the Office for National Statistics surveillance survey on Covid – genuinely world-class research. In the words of Stephen Reicher, a member of the Sage subcommittee advising on behavioural science, this is “like switching off the radar before the Battle of Britain was finished”. Critical data on the prevalence of infection and emergence of mutations will be unavailable, and less will be known about the long-term impact. Experts will be less well equipped to monitor the pandemic, and individuals less able to make informed choices in weighing up risks. The clinically vulnerable, in particular, will be stranded further from normal life; for them, this means much less freedom, not more. The Treasury’s eagerness to save pennies and the prime minister’s need to buy support mean that the UK is jettisoning essential tools too early. Proper monitoring and support for people to stay at home when infectious, as well as encouraging masking and ensuring better ventilation, are crucial. Better support for the global vaccination drive is also essential to reduce the risk of new variants emerging. We all long to reach the other side of the pandemic and we hope that we can at last glimpse it. Shutting our eyes is the worst way to navigate there.The worst of Storm Dudley should have passed over Teesside by the time England kick off against Canada on Thursday night but Sarina Wiegman’s players must remain braced for a potentially hurricane‑force challenge. After scoring 53 goals – including 20 in one game against Latvia alone – during six successive wins against modest opposition since Wiegman took charge last September, the Lionesses face their first real test at Middlesbrough’s Riverside Stadium. An Olympic gold medal-winning Canada, managed by Bev Priestman – previously England’s No2 under Phil Neville – represent the first of three tough games in the inaugural Arnold Clark Cup. Played across six days in a round-robin format as Wiegman’s squad prepare to host the European Championship this summer, the tournament also features a Germany side ranked third in the world (England stand eighth) and a Spain team heavily staffed by key components of Barcelona’s Champions League‑winning XI. The good news for Wiegman is that she is able to work with arguably her best player for the first time since swapping coaching the Netherlands for England. Lucy Bronze is ready to start against Canada after missing the first half of this season because of knee surgery. “My match fitness and my performances are coming back so hopefully I can get back to the very top of my game in the next months,” said the Manchester City right-back, speaking from England’s borrowed base at Middlesbrough’s Rockliffe Park training ground near Darlington. “This is the first time we’ve played high-ranked opposition with Sarina as our manager and our new way of playing, so it’s a good test.” Bronze is determined to make up for lost time after a “frustrating” few months spent recovering from the fifth knee operation of her career. By way of complication, this latest problem was so rare her surgeon had performed the procedure only twice before. “I played a whole year injured and wasn’t at my best, before the surgery so it’s nice to be back,” the Northumberland-born former Sunderland and Lyon full-back said. “And it’s also nice to be back in the north east – even if it’s colder than Manchester.” The 30-year-old is enjoying her crash course in Wiegman’s tactical thought process. “I’ve missed the last three camps so we’re playing catchup; I’m trying to get to know her quite quickly,” Bronze said. “But the team’s playing with a lot of energy – we want to win the ball back quickly and score a lot of goals.” Arsenal’s Leah Williamson will continue as captain in Steph Houghton’s absence.Boris Johnson has said the UK is not yet convinced by Russia’s announcement that it was withdrawing troops from the borders of Ukraine, adding: “The intelligence we are seeing is not encouraging.” Speaking shortly after an emergency mid-morning Cobra meeting on Tuesday, the prime minister said there “mixed signals” coming from Moscow, while other ministers and officials warned Russian troop numbers were still increasing. “We’ve got Russian field hospitals being constructed near the border with Ukraine in Belarus [that] only can be construed as preparation for an invasion,” Johnson said. “You’ve got more [Russian] battalion tactical groups actually been brought closer to the border with Ukraine, according to the intelligence that we’re seeing.” The cautious British assessment contrasts with Russian defence ministry statements that it is withdrawing troops from is southern and western military districts, supported by footage that appeared to be shot in Crimea. In a conference call with MPs, Ben Wallace, the defence secretary, said Russian forces – estimated at 150,000 – were if anything stepping up, not down. The Kremlin needed to be “judged by its actions”, the minister stressed. Other western officials were in line with his remarks. “We see no sign of Russian de-escalation,” they said. “We see the opposite.” They said there was continuing concern that the Kremlin would manufacture a pretext to justify a military intervention. Nevertheless, Johnson also said “we are seeing a Russia openness to conversations” and that “we think there is an avenue for diplomacy”, based on remarks coming from the Kremlin. On Monday, Sergei Lavrov, the Russian foreign minister, told Vladimir Putin to continue and expand negotiations with the west. Reflecting on that and similar exchanges, Johnson said: “We are seeing mixed signals.” Britain’s embassy in Kyiv will be kept open, Johnson said, in contrast with the US announcement made on Monday night to relocate all its embassy staff and operations to Lviv in the west of Ukraine. The prime minister said: “One of the things we want to do is to show the UK’s continued support for Ukraine, for stability in Ukraine – and I believe that keeping our embassy going for as long as possible is an important symbol.” The Cobra meeting reviewed the security situation. On Monday, it emerged that Britain believed that Russia was in the process of sending thousands more troops to the borders of Ukraine, with another 14 battalions to join the 100 already positioned near its neighbour. Ministers fear that an attack directed at Kyiv could still take place at any moment. But some analysts are unsure that Russia has the capability to hold what is likely to be a hostile country. Henry Boyd, from the International Institute of Strategic Studies, said there was a difference between “a large scale military offensive and an invasion and occupation of the whole country”. He added: “I think the ability of Russia conducting the former is reasonably certain. Its ability to successfully conduct the latter is much more questionable.” Johnson repeated that an economic crime bill would be brought forward in the next session of parliament – a commitment that had briefly been dropped, prompting the resignation of the Lords Treasury minister, Theodore Agnew. The prime minister also committed to introducing registers that would spell out the beneficial ownership of luxury properties and businesses in the UK, as part of the legislation. The planned measure, he said, would be to “open up the Matryoshka doll if you like” to reveal “who really owns the companies that we’re talking about, who really owns the properties that we’re talking about”. Britain, working in conjunction with the US and the EU, has also threatened to bring forward sanctions against Russian oligarchs close to the Kremlin if Russia was to launch an invasion.A gunmaker has been held liable for a mass shooting in the United States for the first time after Remington Arms agreed to pay $73m to the families of five adults and four children killed in the Sandy Hook elementary school massacre. Twenty students and six adults were killed on 14 December 2012 in Newtown, Connecticut, by Adam Lanza, who used a Remington Bushmaster AR-15 rifle to shoot his way into the school after killing his mother at home. Remington Arms will pay $73m to the families and release all the discovery and deposition material to the public, attorneys for the families said on Tuesday. The settlement will be paid through insurance policies. The nine families sued in 2014 and spent years in the courts trying to hold Remington liable, despite a US law that protects firearm manufacturers and dealers from most civil litigation. In 2019 the supreme court decided against taking up an appeal by Remington, allowing the lawsuit to move forward. Last summer, Remington proposed a settlement worth approximately $33m to the families, who refused “because they wanted to ensure they had obtained enough documents and taken enough depositions to prove Remington’s misconduct” and to “ensure the case’s message to the insurance industry was clear”, attorneys said in a statement on Tuesday. The families have “obtained and can make public thousands of pages of internal company documents that prove Remington’s wrongdoing and carry important lessons for helping to prevent future mass shootings”, the statement said. “They had the energy, drive and motivation to do one thing,” said Josh Koskoff, an attorney for the families. “That was to do whatever they could so that other families … would not have to go through the pain and loss that they have.” He added: “This victory should serve as a wake-up call not only to the gun industry, but also the insurance and banking companies that prop it up.” The Sandy Hook families found a way around the legal protection for gunmakers by claiming that Remington’s marketing of firearms contributed to the massacre. Attorneys argued that Remington violated Connecticut’s state trade law by irresponsibly targeting its AR-15 Bushmaster rifle at young, high-risk males through militaristic marketing campaigns and first-person shooter video games. Despite the settlement, the parents of six-year-old Noah Pozner, who was killed in the shooting, said they do not completely feel that justice has been served. Lenny Pozner and Veronique De La Rosa said their loss is “irreversible, and in that sense, this outcome is neither redemptive nor restorative”, according to CNN. “One moment we had this dazzling, energetic six-year-old little boy, and the next all we had left, were echoes of the past, photographs of a lost boy who will never grow older, calendars marking a horrifying new anniversary, a lonely grave, and pieces of Noah’s life stored in a backpack and boxes. “What is lost remains forever. However, the resolution does provide a measure of accountability in an industry that has thus far operated with impunity. For this we are grateful,” they said. Other gun control advocates have since been encouraged to follow the Sandy Hook families’ strategy of looking at gunmaker’s marketing techniques, including New Jersey’s attorney general, who is investigating marketing by Smith &amp; Wesson. Mexico also filed a US lawsuit last year seeking $10bn from several gunmakers, accusing them of marketing their weapons to the country’s underworld. New York last year enacted a law that allows firearm sellers, manufacturers and distributors to be sued for creating a “public nuisance” that endangers the public’s safety and health. Gun manufacturers have challenged the law in court. Gun groups have also been using the courts and state legislatures to expand gun rights, and scored victories at the supreme court in 2008 and 2010 that solidified an individual’s right to keep a gun at home for self-defense.A little sibling rivalry is common in most families. But within a family of aviators, one child aiming to beat a world record held by his sibling could be seen to be taking it to the next level. Mack Rutherford, a 16-year-old British-Belgian pilot, will begin his attempt to become the youngest person to fly across the world solo in a small plane on 17 March. Rutherford’s parents are both pilots, and his 19-year-old sister, Zara, made history by becoming the youngest woman to fly across the world in January. She also became the youngest person to circumnavigate the world in a microlight, a Guinness world record her brother will break if he completes his attempt. Flying has been a passion of the younger Rutherford sibling since he was eight, frequently accompanying his father and flying with him. At 15 he became the youngest pilot in the world after qualifying for his pilot licence in July 2020. Rutherford said he always wanted to do something special with his flying career, but it wasn’t until his sister made history that he knew he wanted to attempt the same. “I definitely think a lot of my inspiration for wanting to fly across the world comes from my sister,” he said. If his attempt succeeds, he will also become the youngest male to fly solo across the world, a record currently held by Travis Ludlow, who completed the feat in 2021 at 18. His journey will begin in Bulgaria, from where he will fly south to Africa, visiting countries including Madagascar and Mauritius. Next he will head north to Oman, crossing Russia, before heading to the US, Iceland, the UK, and then finishing his journey back in Bulgaria. Rutherford’s mother, Beatrice De Smet, said she had reservations when her son told her what he wanted to do. “When Mack first told us that he wanted to fly across the world, I said: ‘No way.’ I didn’t want to hear about it because I thought he was too young.” She didn’t change her mind until he wrote her a letter outlining how it was his passion to set the record. As a pilot herself, the one piece of advice she would give to her son is to always make sure he is confident in his abilities before setting off. “Never go if you don’t feel confident, for whatever reason,” she said. Although Rutherford was looking forward to beginning his journey, there was still trepidation at the prospect of what truly flying solo at such a young age entailed. “I’m really quite excited, but obviously I’m quite nervous, particularly for long overseas journeys,” he said. “For one of my flights, I have to fly about eight hours over the ocean, and so if something goes wrong there isn’t much I can do. But I trust in my aircraft wholeheartedly.” Rutherford will be flying in a Shark, one of the fastest ultralight aircrafts in the world with a cruising speed of up to 300km/h. It is the same aircraft his sister used for her record-breaking journey. The aircraft has been specially prepared for long journeys, and the trip is being sponsored by the web hosting company ICDSoft, which has loaned him the plane. Balancing school-work with attempting this record-breaking feat is also something Rutherford has had to consider. Currently studying for A-levels in history, economics and biology, he said: “I’ve definitely had to ask teachers to extend homework for a few days, but they’ve supported me wholeheartedly.”It was always going to come to this. Prince Andrew’s American lawyer’s statement in New York this afternoon announcing the agreed settlement with Virginia Giuffre sets the seal on the prince’s humiliation over his association with the convicted sex abuser Jeffrey Epstein and his friend, the woman who procured girls for him, Ghislaine Maxwell. It has cost the prince his much-prized royal position on palace balconies, his perks – all those helicopter flights to golf matches at public expense, all those private flights across the world to shake hands with sheikhs – and all his military ranks, titles and honorifics. No more honorary colonelcies: colonel of the Grenadier Guards, commodore-in-chief of the Fleet Air Arm, to say nothing of the colonelcy of the New Zealand Army Logistic Regiment and the Princess Louise Fusiliers of Canada. All gone. Strangely, he remains a vice-admiral, but the full admiral title will now for ever elude him. He may be a duke, but he is no longer an HRH. The retreat is complete. Perhaps the mystery is why it has taken so long. But Andrew has always been cloth-eared about public opinion. The tales of his private boorishness are common, but his insouciance and disdain for what others thought, most obviously on display in his disastrous television interview with Emily Maitlis in November 2019 – which he characteristically thought he’d handled rather well – meant that he has been slow to wake up not only to what was happening to his own reputation, but to its disastrous effect on the monarchy itself. No wonder they’ve cut him off and he’s left dependent at the age of 61 on Mummy’s largesse. She’ll be doubtless paying for the settlement too. It was perhaps unwise to rely on famously aggressive lawyers on both sides of the Atlantic too, but who knows the extent to which he followed their advice. Perhaps they were cowed by his princely majesty, though that seems a trifle unlikely given their hard-faced New York reputation. Only yesterday they were demanding the original of the photograph of Andrew with his arm around the teenaged Giuffre’s waist while Maxwell grinned wolfishly in the background, so that they could apparently test its authenticity. Now, fortunately, Andrew will not have his day in court. He’s run out of road. Someone must finally have seen sense. Prince Andrew – for all his denials, and with no admission of liability – was nevertheless bunkered. He was never going to win. And now his stupidity and arrogance have cost him almost everything he values. His mother could have told him that a sense of duty and public service – the monarchy’s not-so secret weapon – has kept the family publicly respected and on the throne for generations. She has a jubilee year to mark, which may still be blighted by his very public disgrace, but perhaps now less so. For him, the future will be anything but celebratory. A stain on his reputation, and that of the institution. A stain that may never go away. • Stephen Bates is an author and former religious affairs and royal correspondent of the GuardianThe family of the late cinematographer Halyna Hutchins has filed a lawsuit against actor Alec Baldwin and other members of the film Rust, alleging that reckless behavior and cost-cutting led to Hutchins’ wrongful death on set. Hutchins, a 42-year-old film veteran, was shot and killed on 21 October last year while preparing for a scene at the Bonanza Creek Ranch outside Santa Fe, New Mexico, when a gun held by Baldwin accidentally went off, in an incident that shocked Hollywood and prompted a reckoning over production safety and the use of weapons on set. Baldwin has since said in an emotional interview with ABC News that he believed the gun to be safe and did not pull the trigger. “Someone is responsible for what happened, and I can’t say who that is, but it’s not me,” Baldwin said. The bullet from Baldwin’s gun struck Hutchins in the torso and lodged in the shoulder of the director, Joel Souza. Hutchins was airlifted to a hospital in Albuquerque, where she died. She is survived by her husband, Matthew Hutchins, and a nine-year-old son. The suit also names seven producers as defendants – Ryan Smith, Allen Cheney, Nathan Klingher, Ryan Winterstern, Anjul Nigam, Matthew DelPiano and Emily Salveson – as well as crew members Sarah Zachry, Dave Halls, Hannah Gutierrez Reed, Gabrielle Pickle and Seth Kenney, among others. “We’re used to people coming in from out of town to play cowboy who don’t know how to use guns,” said Randi McGinn, the estate’s attorney in Albuquerque. “You don’t hand somebody a gun until you give them safety training … No one should ever die with a real gun on a make-believe movie set.” The Santa Fe sheriff’s office has been investigating the incident, and determined that Gutierrez Reed, the film’s inexperienced 24-year-old armorer and key prop assistant, loaded the Colt .45 with what she believed were dummy rounds, then gave the gun to Halls, the first assistant director. Halls declared “cold gun” before handing the weapon to Baldwin. Gutierrez has since sued Kenney, who supplied ammunition to the set, alleging that he supplied a mislabeled box of live ammunition. Three other crew members have also filed suit: Mamie Mitchell, the script supervisor; Serge Svetnoy, the gaffer; and Cherlyn Schaefer, the key medic. In response to the lawsuit, the film’s producers, including Baldwin, say the case should be thrown out because it involves a workplace accident, and thus should go through the state’s worker compensation system.The deadly impact of the Covid-19 pandemic on the most deprived areas in England and Wales has been even more pronounced than first thought, according to research that reveals the north-west lost three times more years of life than the south-west. Deaths have been unevenly distributed socioeconomically and geographically ever since the crisis began. However, until now, the full scale of inequalities has been underestimated, a study published in the journal PLOS Medicine suggests. Comparing the number of deaths during the pandemic with data from previous years can shed light on its impact, researchers said, but looking at excess deaths alone underestimates years of life lost and does not account for the differences in ages at which people die in different social groups. In the new study, led by the University of Manchester, researchers measured years of life lost attributable to the pandemic – directly or indirectly, as well as excess deaths. Years of life lost is a strong measure of premature mortality because it takes into account both the number of deaths and the age at which they occur. The findings of the new analysis are striking, researchers say, and suggest the true toll of the pandemic has been even deadlier in poorer areas than initially thought. “The impact of the pandemic, when quantified using years of life lost, was higher than previously thought on the most deprived areas of England and Wales, widening pre-existing health inequalities,” said Evangelos Kontopantelis, who led the research. Between March and December 2020, 1,645 years of life were lost per 100,000 of the population in the most deprived areas of England and Wales. In the most affluent areas, 916 years of life were lost per 100,000 people. The figures mean that almost twice as many years of life were lost in the very poorest areas of the country compared with the wealthiest. Broken down by geographic region, the highest rate was found in the north-west, where 1,550 years of life were lost per 100,000 of the population. The north-east (1,519) was the second worst hit area, followed by the West Midlands (1,475). The lowest rate was in the south-west, where 490 years of life were lost per 100,000 of the population. Next was the south central region (735), followed by the east of England (779). Stark inequalities were also found when examining excess deaths, especially in younger age groups, the researchers said. There were 11 times as many excess deaths in deprived areas compared with the most affluent areas in 15- to 44-year-olds, three times as many in 45- to 64-year-olds, and almost twice as many in 65- to 74-year-olds. Excess deaths were 40% higher in 75- to 84-year-olds living in the most deprived areas compared with the least. “Inequalities between socioeconomic and geographic groups resulting from the Covid-19 pandemic are more pronounced than previously reported,” the researchers wrote. They added that future plans to manage pandemics should include an understanding of regional and socioeconomic variation in years of life lost and how this has exacerbated long-standing health inequalities. Hannah Davies, of the Northern Health Science Alliance, who was not involved with the research, said the study was further evidence of “how devastating the impact of Covid-19 has been” in communities in the north of England that were already suffering from deprivation before the pandemic. Clare Bambra, a professor of public health at the University of Newcastle, added: “These findings reiterate that the pandemic has been very unequal – people in our most deprived communities have suffered most.”The Metropolitan Museum of Art has announced its latest fashion exhibition, which will be a follow-up to In America: A Lexicon of Fashion. In America: An Anthology of Fashion will look at the genesis of American style, focusing on the 19th century to the latter part of the 20th century. Opening in May at the New York art museum, it will provide the theme and dress code for the Met Gala this year. If the focus sounds academic, the exhibition is sponsored by Instagram and the presentation of more than 100 items brings a modern, social media-friendly lens. Eight different films directors – including Tom Ford, Sofia Coppola and Judy Dash, who directed 1991’s influential Daughters of the Dust – will create three-dimensional cinematic “freeze frames” featuring the clothes. Rather than a sterile white-walled gallery, these will be set up in the period rooms of the museum – which range from a 19th-century parlour to a living room designed by architect Frank Lloyd Wright. Andrew Bolton, the head curator of the Met’s Costume Institute, explained that the focus was on designers and dressmakers who were not household names, those who had become “the footnotes in the annals of fashion history”. “It is through these largely hidden stories that a nuanced picture of American fashion comes into focus,” he said, “one in which the sum of its parts are as significant as the whole.” This exhibition is designed to give these forgotten talents a long-overdue spotlight. They include Ann Lowe, the African American designer who learned dressmaking from her grandmother and went on to make Jacqueline Bouvier’s wedding dress in which she married John F Kennedy in 1953, and Elizabeth Hawes, a kind of Elsa Schiaparelli of America. A 1937 dress displayed here – which Hawes called “the Tart’s Dress” – featured arrows pointing to its wearer’s breasts and bottom. In addition to this, gowns by Charles James, Halston and Stephen Burrows will be displayed. Six case studies of specific items will provide talking points too. They include a jacket thought to be worn by George Washington to his inauguration in 1789, and two Brooks Brothers items – one worn by Abraham Lincoln, the other a livery worn by a an unidentified enslaved man, from around 1857-65. There has been some criticism around In America: A Lexicon of Fashion since it opened in September. Korina Emmerich, who has an outfit included in the exhibition, spoke out about the fact that she was the only indigenous designer included. “I’m half-white and urban – I didn’t grow up on the reservation. I know I’m more palatable in situations like this,” she told the Cut. “But there are people who have been doing couture for a lot longer than I have: celebrated elders in our community.” Emmerich‘s outfit was a protest – the stripes reference those on the Hudson Bay blanket that were given out or traded to indigenous people, and spread smallpox among their population. In America: A Lexicon of Fashion displayed this outfit next to one using similar stripes by André Walker. While the captions explain the problematic history around these stripes and Emmerich‘a intentions, Walker’s design is labelled “comfort”. When the Met shared Walker’s cape on Instagram in September, with the caption “This cape by André Walker will represent the qualities of warmth and comfort” it received a backlash. “A symbol of genocide and colonialism, not warmth and comfort,” read one comment. The Lexicon exhibition will run concurrently with Anthology. Bolton said 30 more garments will be added to the current exhibition at the end of March, focusing on new designers. “These additions will reflect the vitality and diversity of contemporary American fashion,” a press release said.Tiger Roll, the Grand National winner in 2018 and 2019, has been ruled out of an attempt to equal Red Rum’s record of three Aintree victories in April after the 12-year-old was handed a rating of 161 for this year’s race when the weights were published on Tuesday in Liverpool. Michael O’Leary, Tiger Roll’s owner, has strongly criticised the weight allotted to his horse in the past two seasons and ran him in a Grade One contest at level weights at the Grand National meeting last year in preference to the big race. Despite a 5lb drop in the ratings from last year’s mark, O’Leary issued a statement soon after the weights had been published, which again included fierce criticism of Martin Greenwood, the British Horseracing Authority’s senior chase handicapper. “Tiger Roll is now 12 years old,” the statement said. “He is clearly not as good as he was at eight or nine and yet the UK handicapper now rates him 2lb higher than his 159 rating in April 2019, when he won both the Boyne Hurdle and the Aintree Grand National. “This rating is absurd and unfair on a 12-year-old chaser. It is a pity that the handicapper won’t give Tiger Roll either a fair rating or a fair weight in the Aintree Grand National, where he could at least try to emulate Red Rum’s three wins.” The statement added: “Since we are responsible for the welfare of Tiger Roll, we must protect him from the idiotic opinion of this handicapper. We therefore regret to announce that he will not run in the year’s Aintree Grand National. “Instead Tiger Roll will be trained for the cross-country race in Cheltenham [on 16 March] and there is every likelihood that win, lose or draw, this will be his last racecourse appearance. He will then return home for his well-earned retirement for the rest of his days. “It’s sadly clear from his ratings that this handicapper doesn’t want Tiger Roll to run in this year’s Grand National. He won’t give him a fair chance and sadly the race will be poorer for his absence.” Greenwood had earlier told a ceremony to mark the publication of the National weights that he had “relented a bit with Tiger Roll” while also pointing out “you can’t just ignore his win in the Cross-Country Chase at Cheltenham last season, which was less than 12 months ago, when he easily defeated two good horses in Easysland and Some Neck”. In Tiger Roll’s apparent absence, Minella Times will be the only previous National winner in this year’s field, with Rachael Blackmore hope to repeat her historic victory in front of empty stands last season – but this time with 80,000 spectators in attendance. “He’s been a little disappointing this season but I know Henry [de Bromhead, his trainer] will get him there in tip-top shape,” Blackmore said on Tuesday. “It’s going to be unbelievable to have the crowds back,. We had them at the Dublin Racing Festival the other week and I forgot how special it was to have people there. I don’t think last year could have been any better but having crowds back is going to be massive.” Any Second Now, Snow Leopardess and Escaria Ten head the early market for the Grand National on 16-1, while Minella Times is 25-1 to repeat last year’s success.A children’s home in Bolton has been shut down after inspectors found that one boy had not bathed, changed his clothes or been provided with a home-cooked meal since he arrived in September 2021. Inexperienced and underqualified staff had not entered one bedroom for more than four months despite evidence of flies and “a pungent smell” that spread throughout the home, Ofsted inspectors discovered. Another child was placed at risk of harm by staff carrying out “unnecessary” cardiac pulmonary resuscitation on them. After the inspection on 5 and 6 January, Ofsted took immediate action and suspended the registration of the home. The private home only opened in August 2021. It was run by Achieve Care Homes Ltd, which offers what it describes as “therapeutic residential placements” in “the absolute best home environment” for young people aged eight to 18 with emotional, behavioural and socially challenging behaviour. Campaigners said it was an example of how unsuitable private providers were allowed to enter the market without sufficient checks during the pandemic. Martin Barrow, a foster carer and former journalist who campaigns on children’s social care, wrote on Twitter: “There was a rush to approve children’s homes during the pandemic. Many do not meet the lowest threshold for quality of care. These arrangements should now be reviewed.” The children’s rights campaigner Carolyne Willow said: “I’ve read hundreds and hundreds of inspection reports over the years but this really stood out for being disgraceful on every count. It is absolutely appalling and heart-stopping in places and it signals a whole catalogue of failures.” The inspection found “serious and widespread failures that mean children and young people are not protected or their welfare is not promoted or safeguarded, and the care and experiences of children and young people are poor, and they are not making progress”. Staff were found to spend “very little time” with some children, and were unable to build a positive and meaningful relationship with them. “One child spends most of their time in their bedroom, including eating all their meals in there. The daily records show that staff carry out a ‘welfare check’ approximately every hour during the day, with very little interaction recorded. This is not a caring or nurturing environment for the children,” the inspectors wrote. They added: “Staff lack the skills to challenge inappropriate behaviour effectively, such as the children refusing to allow staff to access their bedrooms. Consequently, staff left a child living in squalid conditions, which placed them at the risk of harm.” Staff also did not sufficiently support or encourage children to attend education. One child was scheduled to see a tutor for up to 30 minutes every other day, but the sessions often didn’t happen and no records were kept to monitor the attendance. Only two members of staff at the home held childcare qualifications. The fact they allowed one child’s room to be so dirty that it attracted flies “demonstrates that managers and staff do not understand their roles and responsibilities in providing basic nurturing care or appropriate support to children that they are responsible for”, the inspector concluded. Achieve Care Homes Ltd also admitted children into the home outside their conditions of registration. This is an offence under the Care Standards Act 2015, the inspection notes. Achieve Care Homes has been contacted for comment. A Department for Education spokesperson said: “We continue to work with Ofsted – as the regulator of children’s homes – to assess the situation at the Achieve Care Home in Bolton and ensure the children are being kept safe. “Any institution seeking to register an independent school must meet the independent school standards and the secretary of state must be satisfied that they are likely to do so, considering any available evidence to make a decision. There is no live application from the company in question to set up an independent school.”Downing Street staff have been told not to confer with each other when answering a Metropolitan police questionnaire about potentially Covid rule-breaking parties, with a warning this could constitute a “separate offence”. Fresh guidance issued by the Cabinet Office on Tuesday to those who may be contacted by Scotland Yard about the dozen gatherings under investigation said they could still “seek legal advice” before responding. The questionnaires began to be issued late last week – including to the prime minister, Boris Johnson – and officers will “continue to contact individuals this coming week”, the leaked document said. Officials were told they could call a “legal information helpline at no cost to the individual”, which is an existing resource available to all civil servants. It gives them access to a 20-minute general consultation with a dedicated legal adviser on a range of issues, including the “impact of criminal activities”. While the document said the Met had not told the Cabinet Office how long the investigation would take, it noted that inquiries were “progressing at pace”. Those asked to fill in the questionnaire were told they should give an explanation for their alleged attendance at the event in question, allowing them a chance to provide “further circumstances you want the Met to take into account”. It added: “You are entitled to seek legal advice before you respond to the questionnaire and you can discuss your response with your legal adviser. “If you discuss your answers with anyone else who may have been involved this could amount to a separate offence.” Scotland Yard has said all responses to the questionnaires issued must be submitted within seven days of receipt. In the question and answer document prepared by a special liaison unit set up in the Cabinet Office, government workers were told to “make arrangements to ensure you can access your emails if you are on holiday” to ensure they met the deadline. If uncomfortable about the Met contacting them via their work email address, officials were reassured they could give the Cabinet Office “an alternative email address” for any further contact. The document confirmed a previous commitment that anyone who receives a fixed penalty notice “will not be publicly identified” by the Met. It said Scotland Yard “will not make public the details of their investigation and therefore your line manager will not be notified”. The document also warned that while fines for attendance at events that broke Covid laws started at £100, anyone found to “have organised or facilitated a large gathering” could face a charge of up to £10,000. Despite the Met having been passed 300 photographs as part of its investigation – known as Operation Hillman – the memo said the Cabinet Office “would not expect the Met to publish photographs”. The Cabinet Office also said it did not know if the Met would release a breakdown of how many fixed penalty notices would be handed out for each event. Last week, Downing Street pledged to reveal if Johnson is fined by police for attending any parties while Covid restrictions were in force. However the prime minister refused to rule out staying on even if he is found to have broken the law. He told journalists: “We’re going to wait for the process to be completed.” Once the Met’s investigation is over, the full findings of an investigation run by the senior civil servant Sue Gray are expected to be published.A day after Canada’s prime minister announced a dramatic escalation in his government’s fight against blockades across the country, protesters in the nation’s capital were scheduling haircuts and receiving massages, apparently unfazed by the prospect of ramped-up police enforcement. Hundreds of semi-trucks which have been parked out front of Canada’s parliament since late January have become emblematic of the protests, but planning and logistics for the occupation is run from a second site in a hotel parking lot on Coventry Road, 5km east of the downtown area. Sandwiched between a baseball diamond and a detachment of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police, the encampment offers meals, shelter, warm clothes and restrooms for the protesters. It also has barber services and two saunas. Jeff, a retired trucker who arrived in Ottawa 17 days ago, said a shared sense of purpose has only increased the protesters’ resolve. “There’s a sense of unity here – and I think it’s only increased since yesterday. When you’ve seen the light, it’s hard to [go] back to the dark.” Justin Trudeau announced on Monday he would invoke the Emergencies Act, granting the government broad powers as it seeks to dismantle a three-week old blockade that has paralysed Ottawa. Protesters also blocked the Ambassador Bridge, the busiest crossing between the US-Canada, for six days before police dispersed them on Sunday. Three other border crossings reopened on Tuesday. And on Tuesday, in a tacit acknowledgement that the barricades in the capital were becoming increasingly entrenched, the Ottawa police chief, Peter Sloly, stepped down. Meanwhile, camp residents were holding an “open-mic” event to share their stories. “Everyone here had a story of loss, or tragedy,” said Jeff. “So many people have suffered in these last few years. They’ve lost jobs, they’ve lost homes, they’ve lost family. That’s why they’re here.” The high level of organization – with delegated roles and a growing cadre of volunteers – reflects protesters’ intentions to remain in the city for the foreseeable future, despite opposition from local residents and the increasing exasperation of city, provincial and federal governments. The emergency legislation includes measures intended to put immense pressure on protesters, including the possibility of losing their commercial vehicle licenses, but none of the camp members said they were prepared to leave. “We knew Trudeau would try to batter us. We knew it was coming,” said Angel Godsoe, a small business owner from Lindsay, Ontario. “We’re the ones standing on guard for Canada. We’re the ones that care about saving our country.” Godsoe spends her morning helping to assign jobs, including security patrols and the transportation of fuel down to the trucks outside parliament (which is illegal under city bylaws). On the desk in front of her are sign-up sheets, binders with job descriptions and a growing list of volunteers. “You should see my desk at home,” said the mother of nine. “I haven’t been able to do my taxes in two years.” A steady stream of camp residents and new arrivals passed through the tarpaulin doors of the tent, either popping in to say hello or to find a job to help out. “Do you do laundry?” asked one trucker, who had spent the last few days in her truck near parliament. After a brief discussion, Rosalind, a nurse, offered to do the laundry at her house. A resident of Ottawa, Rosalind came out of retirement to help out in during the surge of coronavirus cases that overwhelmed the city’s hospitals. But she was terminated after she refused to get a Covid-19 vaccination. “If she’d kept her job, she wouldn’t be here with us,” said Godsoe. Some in the encampment claimed that like 88% of Canadians above the age of five, they were fully vaccinated, but were nonetheless frustrated with the lengthy and restrictive nature of both provincial and federal public health measures. Others invoked global conspiracy theories to justify the protests. While protesters say the federal government’s enforcement actions did not come as a surprise, some have nonetheless taken defensive steps. “I pulled all of my money out my bank account last night and transferred it to my husband,” said Glory, a Christian blogger who has spent the last six days living in the camp. “We’ve got people here who lost their jobs. People who can’t pay their mortgages,” said Godsoe. “One trucker told me he last cried when his child was born 17 years ago. And this week he said he’s cried three times.” Ontario’s government announced on Monday it would speed up its reopening, dropping capacity requirements for restaurant and businesses, as well as drop its vaccine passport on 1 March. But those at the camp, whose protests against vaccine mandates and broader public health measures have snarled key trade routes across the country and paralyzed sections of Ottawa, were skeptical. “We just don’t believe them,” said one camp resident. “They can’t be trusted. Until we see proof of it, we’re not going to take them at their word. Campbell says he never imagined the protests would evolve into a sustained presence in the city, with a fully operational camp. But he said he had no intention of leaving any time soon. “Something’s gotta change. So much of what the government is doing is dividing us,” said Campbell. “I don’t know what’s going to happen from here. But something special is here and it’s really fired people up.”Covid vaccination reduces the risk of developing long Covid, while current sufferers may experience an improvement in symptoms after getting jabbed, a comprehensive review by the UK Health Security Agency suggests. The “rapid evidence briefing” drew together data from 15 UK and international studies, about half of which examined whether Covid vaccination protected against developing long Covid if someone had never been infected, while the rest looked at the impact of vaccination among people who already had long Covid. It found that, as well as any benefit obtained by not catching the virus in the first place, those who do catch it are less likely to develop long Covid if they have received one or two doses of vaccine compared with unvaccinated individuals. According to the two studies that measured individual long Covid symptoms, the fully vaccinated were less likely than unvaccinated people to develop medium- or long-term symptoms such as fatigue, headache, weakness in the arms and legs, persistent muscle pain, hair loss, dizziness, shortness of breath, loss of smell or scarring of the lungs. “There is also evidence that unvaccinated people with long Covid who were subsequently vaccinated had, on average, reduced long Covid symptoms, or fewer long Covid symptoms than those who remained unvaccinated,” the review said. There were, however, some people who reported worsened symptoms after vaccination, it added. Deborah Dunn-Walters, chair of the British Society for Immunology Covid-19 taskforce and a professor of immunology at the University of Surrey, said there was not yet enough information to explain why vaccination should lead to an improvement in people’s symptoms. “The term ‘long Covid’ covers a wide range of post-Covid conditions and so we don’t yet fully understand all the processes involved,” she said. One theory is that it may help clear up remaining reservoirs of virus in the body, or fragments of virus that are triggering ongoing inflammation. Another possibility is that vaccination rebalances the immune response in individuals whose symptoms are being driven by autoimmune-like processes – this may also explain why a few people report worse symptoms after vaccination, Dunn-Walters added. She said: “This review re-emphasises the importance of everyone, no matter their age, getting vaccinated against Covid-19. Although there has been a high uptake of the vaccines in the UK so far, a significant number of people still need to come forward for a first or second dose. We must continue to make every effort to reach these people and encourage them to come forward for Covid-19 vaccination.” Prof Stephen Powis, the national medical director of NHS England, said: “With more than 10,000 people in hospital with Covid [in the UK], this study is a timely and important reminder that vaccines remain our best protection against the virus, reducing the chances of becoming seriously unwell as well as the effects of long Covid.”News of the Duke of York’s settlement was met with silence by Buckingham Palace. There was no official comment from the Queen, who just last month sought to distance the monarchy as an institution from the fallout over her second son’s legal woes. But it is understood that the very decisive action taken by the Queen last month, when she stripped Prince Andrew of his royal patronages, honorary military titles and any official use of his HRH title, still stands firm. Indeed, it would be hard to imagine a return to royal duties and public engagements given that the out-of-court settlement announced on Tuesday raises many questions, but answers none. Andrew does not, in the statement, dispute the very serious allegation of sexual assault put by Virginia Giuffre in her civil case. Nor does he admit it. His lawyer had previously in court dismissed the case as “baseless” and accused Giuffre, who settled her claim against Jeffrey Epstein for $500,000 in 2009, of seeking another “payday”. The announcement of the settlement is unlikely to exonerate Andrew in the court of public opinion. So, his patronages are very unlikely to be returned to him – indeed, they are already being shared out among other members of the royal family. He will remain sidelined in any official royal capacity. Yet he is the Queen’s son. In the three years since Giuffre dropped her legal bombshell, the Queen has made clear her support through her actions. Andrew has been invited to Balmoral. The Queen allowed him to play a prominent part in the public tributes to the Duke of Edinburgh after his death last April. She and Andrew have been riding together. And it is possible we will see him during her platinum jubilee celebrations in June, as a member of her family. Andrew now faces paying a hefty bill in legal costs and an undisclosed sum that could run into millions. One unconfirmed report put it at £7.5m, while lawyers said it could exceed £10m. It is not known if the Queen, who supported Andrew’s royal work from the private income she receives from the Duchy of Lancaster estate, will be contributing to his costs and settlement. Andrew recently sold a Swiss ski chalet that he bought in 2014 with his ex-wife Sarah Ferguson for a reported £18m. Royal and legal experts hailed the settlement as good news for the institution, if not for Andrew. David McClure, an author on royal finances, tweeted: “This was always the only outcome for the royal family in terms of damage limitation.” Nick Goldstone, a lawyer with the disputes resolution firm Ince, said of the out-of-court settlement: “A good day for the royal family. A huge relief for that institution. Probably a good day for Ms Giuffre and a recognition of the impossible position Prince Andrew was in and the cessation of hostilities.” He said: “A ‘settlement in principle’ needs to be ratified by court order and until we see that, I would not hold your breath. Clearly this is a settlement on very generous financial terms for the complainant and a degree of back pedalling by the defendant. “In terms of ‘the court of public opinion’, this looks likes an admission of bad conduct on the part of Andrew and I suspect he will remain ‘off-stage’ from the royal family for the rest of his life. Perhaps he intends to rehabilitate himself by supporting the fight against the evils of sex trafficking and supporting its victims over the years. What appears to have truly motivated him has been his loss of honorary title and royal associations.” The settlement was announced weeks before Andrew was scheduled to give a deposition in the case under oath to Giuffre’s lawyers. The statement marks a change of tone from Andrew compared with his infamous Newsnight interview with Emily Maitlis in 2019, during which he failed to express sympathy for Epstein’s victims. The court document states that Andrew “regrets his association with Epstein, and commends the bravery of Giuffre and other survivors in standing up for themselves and others”. The royal author Penny Junor said: “At last he’s expressing some regret and some empathy for those girls.” The Newsnight interview had been “all about him” she said. “He’s got it right now, it took him a long time to get there but I think he’s got it right.” Asked if there was a way back to public royal life for the prince, she replied: “I think it’s very, very unlikely.” Andrew would be “for ever tainted”, said Joe Little, the editor of Majesty magazine. “I just don’t think he’s ever likely to resume work as a working member of the royal family. I think that too much water has gone under the bridge for that and the institution of monarchy has been tainted by his association with Epstein and I just think that there’s no going back on all that.” Of the likely reaction of the rest of the royal family, he said: “I’m sure that they’re glad this [settlement agreement] has happened, but does it exonerate the prince who really has not been charged with anything criminal? He will, I think, for ever be tainted by this scandal, for want of a better way of describing it.”What has happened? In an unexpected twist to a case that has been the subject of intense media scrutiny, documents submitted to a civil court in New York on Tuesday reveal that Prince Andrew plans to settle with Virginia Giuffre. She had claimed she was trafficked to have sex with the Queen’s second son on three occasions when she was 17, a claim he has consistently denied. Prior to the settlement, the case was in the “discovery” phase, meaning that several witnesses, including Andrew and Giuffre, were lined up to give depositions. A civil sex assault trial was scheduled to follow between September and December. What were the allegations? Andrew was reportedly introduced to disgraced financier Jeffrey Epstein by British media heiress Ghislaine Maxwell in 1999. Epstein killed himself in his jail cell after he was arrested for sex trafficking girls as young as 14 in 2019. Maxwell, Epstein’s co-conspirator, was recently convicted as a sex trafficker for luring girls into his orbit. Giuffre, who is now 38, has alleged that Andrew met her in the Tramp nightclub in London in 2001 and sexually assaulted her at Maxwell’s home in Belgravia, London. She said he assaulted her on two further occasions, at Epstein’s New York home and at an “orgy” on his private island in the Caribbean. Giuffre has also accused Andrew of engaging in sexual misconduct on other occasions as an associate of Epstein’s. It wasn’t until 2015 that details became public, when court documents filed in Florida in which Giuffre accused Epstein of trafficking her also alleged that Andrew had sexually assaulted her. Was the case headed for court? In August last year, Giuffre filed a suit in New York against the royal, citing battery and intentional infliction of emotional distress. Andrew attempted to block the lawsuit on grounds that Giuffre’s $500,000 2009 settlement with Epstein shielded him after this was unsealed on 3 January. However on 12 January Judge Lewis Kaplan ruled that the suit could go forward. Kaplan also rejected Andrew’s claims that Giuffre’s civil allegations lacked necessary specificity. Andrew’s former assistant, Robert Olney, and Shukri Walker, who claims to have seen Andrew in the Tramp nightclub, were to give their depositions following Andrew’s in March. Giuffre had not yet set a date in court for when she would give a detailed account of what happened. Andrew’s legal team had asked to question Giuffre’s husband and her psychologist, claiming that she “may suffer from false memories”. Giuffre’s lawyer has said separately that their strategy was “to attack her character, her moral credibility”. A date in March had been set for Andrew to give evidence under oath. Was this expected? Absolutely not. Andrew has strenuously denied the accusations until this point and has said he would never settle. Last month, his lawyers said he was not a co-conspirator of Epstein, demanded a jury trial and listed several reasons why they believe Giuffre’s case should not stand. Giuffre’s lawyer had also insisted she wanted the case heard in court and that she would be unlikely to accept a “purely financial settlement”. He added that any resolution must “vindicate her and vindicate the other victims”. It is thought the settlement will come as a relief to the Queen, since the royal family had feared the court case would overshadow platinum jubilee celebrations this year. What does the settlement entail? The full details, including the sum that Andrew will pay out, are not disclosed in the document, but Andrew has agreed to make a “substantial donation” to a charity supporting victims’ rights, and has accepted that Giuffre “suffered as an established victim of abuse”. He makes no admission of liability. In the document he also commends Giuffre’s bravery and regrets his association with Epstein, stating that Andrew will demonstrate this “by supporting the fight against the evils of sex trafficking, and by supporting its victims”. The text further outlines how Giuffre will dismiss the case once she receives the settlement. What has the fallout been for Andrew so far? Andrew’s reputation and standing within the royal family have taken a serious beating. Andrew stepped back from his public duties as a member of the royal family in 2019 after a disastrous BBC TV interview where he claims he could not have had sex with Giuffre because he was at home after a visit to Pizza Express in Woking. He also attempted to refute Giuffre’s claim that the royal was “sweating profusely all over me” when they met at Tramp, stating he had a “peculiar medical condition which is that I don’t sweat or I didn’t sweat at the time”. The Queen stripped her son of a range of military affiliations and royal patronages.Good morning! There is plenty of commentary this morning about Prince Andrew’s surprise settlement with Virginia Giuffre, as well as developments in the face-off between Russia and Ukraine. The Duke of York has reached a settlement in the civil sex claim filed by Virginia Giuffre in the US. In the unexpected development, Prince Andrew agreed to make a “substantial donation” to Giuffre’s charity and accepted that she “suffered as an established victim of abuse”. The move is a remarkable turnaround for Andrew, who had pledged to fight to clear his name in court. A document submitted to court on Tuesday said the prince also regretted his association with the financier Jeffrey Epstein, who took his life in prison while facing trial for sex trafficking. The prince “was never going to win”, writes former Guardian royal correspondent Stephen Bates: “And now his stupidity and arrogance have cost him almost everything he values.” The Morrison government is considering whether a little-known section of national environmental laws could be used to allow developments in some parts of the country to proceed without the need for federal approval. The move, revealed in documents released to Guardian Australia under freedom of information laws, could allow the commonwealth to reduce its role in environmental decision-making without needing support for a bill to transfer power to the states and territories, which has been blocked by the Senate since last year. The Coalition used its $187m safer communities grants program to fund at least 10 projects that had been deemed “unsuitable” by the department after the project applicants were visited in person by Peter Dutton’s assistant minister, Jason Wood. Over five rounds of the program, 225 applications were awarded funding worth $47.9m against the recommendations of the department. Of these, 23 projects worth a combined $7m were “assessed as either ineligible or unsuitable”. Russia claims it is withdrawing troops from near Ukraine’s borders but Kyiv and western diplomats remain cautious, while some residents are relieved. Nato’s secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, said he had seen no sign yet of a withdrawal of troops and equipment. Nato’s scepticism was echoed by the UK prime minister, Boris Johnson, who described the intelligence his government is seeing as “not encouraging”. Russian field hospitals were being constructed, which “only can be construed as preparation for an invasion”, Johnson said. Australia Private school funding has increased at nearly five times the rate of public school funding over the past 10 years. Government funding for independent schools increased by $3,338 a student over a decade, compared with $703 more per student for public schools. Lethal “blackwater” in the Barwon-Darling River has prompted fears of another mass fish kill similar to the 2019 event in which more than a million fish died. Blackwater events are caused when heavy rains wash leaf litter that has collected on a floodplain into a major river, and expert say the problem is “accelerated by poor management”. The Future Fund has been forced to divest about $5m in taxpayers’ money from a Chinese state-controlled weapons manufacturer sanctioned for selling arms to the genocidal Myanmar military. The world Russia could extend the opposition leader Alexei Navalny’s imprisonment for up to a further 15 years in a fresh criminal trial at a penal colony far from his support base on charges of embezzlement. The New York congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez has said there is “a very real risk” democracy will cease to exist in the US within a decade. She told the New Yorker that efforts by Republicans to restrict voting rights could result in a return to the Jim Crow era. The US west has spent the last two decades in what scientists are now saying is the most extreme megadrought in at least 1,200 years, according to a new study. Recommended reads It was by chance that Archie Roach met the woman who would be his collaborator and the love of his life. Their love story is the subject of the writer-director Philippa Bateman’s new documentary Wash My Soul in the River’s Flow, to be released in cinemas in March. “Archie is my silent hero and I’m his rowdy troublemaker,” Ruby Hunter says in the film. “She just had this cheeky way about her,” Roach recalls. “Not so much making trouble but had this glint in her eye.” “When my son Connor first told me he was transgender and was not, in fact, the daughter I thought he was for the first 12 years of his life, I could have handled it a lot better,” writes Carolyn Tate. “It’s not that I kicked and screamed. I didn’t throw him out or call him vile names. I wasn’t even disappointed. It almost feels worse than all that: I didn’t believe him.” In our weekly interview about objects, comedian Dave Hughes shares his love of tennis, and the diaries he kept as an unemployed twentysomething: “I went to the Australian Open final a few years ago and saw Rafael Nadal play Roger Federer. I had front row seats, which I’d paid quite a bit of money for. As part of getting the seats, I got to keep some of the balls that Roger and Rafael used during the match. But sometime later my dogs got hold of them, chewed them up and they’re gone. I lost a part of history.” Listen With more than 100,000 Russian troops at Ukraine’s border, there are fears Europe is facing its biggest military crisis since the second world war. In today’s Full Story Guardian reporter Shaun Walker, in Kyiv, tells Michael Safi that, on the face of it, much of the city is continuing life as normal. But how likely is the full-scale military assault being warned of by western intelligence agencies? And is there a diplomatic solution that could be sold to Vladimir Putin that would satisfy the Ukrainian government? Full Story is Guardian Australia’s daily news podcast. Subscribe for free on Apple Podcasts, Spotify or any other podcasting app. Sport Novak Djokovic says he would rather miss out on grand slams than be vaccinated against Covid. He told the BBC on Tuesday he was not anti-vaccination in general but believed people had the right to choose. “The principles of decision-making on my body are more important than any title or anything else,” Djokovic said. The 15-year-old Russian ice skater at the centre of a doping scandal, Kamila Valieva, is in the gold medal position for the individual event at the Winter Olympics. Many are still questioning whether she should still be in Beijing at all. But her legal team has claimed that her positive drug test may have come from a glass of water that contained traces of her grandfather’s heart medication. Media roundup Western Australian MP Sophia Moermond has been suspended from the state’s parliament after she refused to provide her Covid vaccination status or a medical exemption, reports WA Today. The Age says an interest rate rise is expected in June, which could add hundreds of dollars to home-owners’ mortgage repayments. Coming up Federal parliament sits and estimates hearing are ongoing. Simon Holmes à Court will address the National Press Club. Sign up If you would like to receive the Guardian Australia morning mail to your email inbox every weekday, sign up here. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com. Discover Australian Weekend Every Saturday from 6am, enjoy early access to the best journalism planned for the weekend in one elegant app, plus a curated selection of the week’s news and analysis from Australia and the world.It was a simple photograph, taken late in the evening on 10 March 2001, that came to symbolize Virginia Giuffre’s case against Prince Andrew. The one with the duke’s arm around the 17-year-old’s waist, with Ghislaine Maxwell beaming to one side, and the man behind the camera clicking the shutter but hidden by the flash’s reflection in the window being Jeffrey Epstein, the disgraced late financier and sex trafficker. That picture – the one that Andrew claimed on BBC’s Newsnight might have been doctored, since he had “no recollection” of then or ever meeting Giuffre at Tramp nightclub in London – will likely serve as both a prequel and postscript of the saga. It has been reproduced in countless newspaper articles about the scandal. The picture’s symbolism was not lost on Wendy Murphy, a former sex crimes prosecutor. She said: “If this were not a member of the royal family with a person from a very different social class, the picture would tell you nothing, because it’s not a picture of sexual assault. In an ordinary case, the defense would just say it only proves they were at a party together.” The problem, Murphy said, is that Maxwell is in the background and it is a picture that “has no innocent explanation, because there is no innocent reason for him to be hugging her, even in a social situation”. The settlement, which the duke’s lawyers said includes a “substantial donation to Ms Giuffre’s charity in support of victims’ rights”, marks the end of Giuffre’s long journey from life as a south Florida teenager drawn into the Epstein-Maxwell sex trafficking conspiracy to prominent campaigner against the sexual abuse of minors. Giuffre, then Virginia Roberts, spent four years as Epstein’s personal masseuse, during which she alleges she was trafficked to the financier’s friends and clients. She now lives in Australia. In a 2009 civil lawsuit against Epstein, under the pseudonym “Jane Doe 102”, she alleged that her duties included being “sexually exploited by Epstein’s adult male peers, including royalty”. Giuffre reached a $500,000 settlement with Epstein in that case before it went to trial. She also sued and settled for an undisclosed sum with Maxwell in a 2015 defamation suit. Giuffre filed the current civil lawsuit against the duke for sexual abuse, battery, and intentional infliction of emotional distress just five days short of the closing of a window in statute of limitations in New York’s Child’s Sex Act. The original image showing Giuffre, the duke and Maxwell together at Maxwell’s home, before, her lawyers claim, she was sexually abused by the duke, is reportedly lost. Ahead of the settlement, the duke’s lawyers asked Giuffre to hand over the original, anticipating arguing that it was fake. But according to the Daily Beast, nobody on Giuffre’s legal team knows where it is, or has ever seen the original photograph. The picture, taken on Giuffre’s own camera, had allegedly been packed into a box and shipped from Colorado to Sydney sometime between between 2011 and 2016, when Giuffre emigrated to Australia. It remained unseen, at least by the public, until the Mail on Sunday asked for evidence to Giuffre’s claim that she had been trafficked by Epstein and Maxwell – who is now awaiting sentencing after being convicted of sex trafficking in December – to support her claims that she had been forced to have sex with a number of prominent figures. It later emerged, during a 2016 deposition as part of a defamation suit Giuffre filed against Maxwell, that the Mail on Sunday paid her $140,000 to publish it, as well as $20,000 for two interviews. During that deposition, Giuffre said she had lent the picture to the FBI in 2011 but had last seen it before she packed up her home to emigrate. It might, she said, be in her home, in storage at her in-laws’ or with “seven boxes full of Nerf guns, my kids’ toys, photos”. In November 2019, Andrew was asked about the photograph in an interview with Newsnight. “I don’t remember that photograph ever being taken. I don’t remember going upstairs in the house,” he said. The photograph is now perhaps one of the most infamous images of him. For Giuffre, the settlement has been described as a victory. “She has accomplished what no one else could: getting Prince Andrew to stop his nonsense and side with sexual abuse victims,” said Lisa Bloom, a US lawyer who acted for eight Epstein victims. “We salute Virginia’s stunning courage.” Of the others involved in the picture, Epstein killed himself in a Manhattan jail cell in 2019 while awaiting trial on sex trafficking charges. Maxwell faces spending the rest of her life behind bars. In a recent interview after Maxwell’s conviction, Giuffre said: “It takes time to heal, and this justice is part of the process. Now I can start really working past Maxwell and thinking about the others who need to be held accountable.” She added: “No matter how rich or how connected you are.”An Athens court has handed two prominent human rights defenders prison sentences, suspended for three years, after finding the pair guilty of “falsely accusing” a Greek Orthodox bishop of racist hate speech. The three-member tribunal sentenced the activists to 12-month jail terms after acquitting the bishop, Seraphim, the Metropolitan of Piraeus, of antisemitic rhetoric. “Today’s outrageous verdict is representative of the institutionalised antisemitism that exists in Greece,” said Andrea Gilbert, one of the accused who works at the Greek Helsinki Monitor rights group. “We have immediately appealed and will fight it all the way.” Tuesday’s trial had been closely watched by human rights groups. Calling the conviction “alarming”, Amnesty International tweeted: “The ruling poses a direct threat to the right to freedom of expression and has a chilling effect on human rights defenders advocating against racism and hate speech.” Before the hearing, Human Rights Watch had described the charges against the activists as being part of a troubling trend in Greece of the criminal justice system being employed by the state against civil society. The activists, who also include the Greek Helsinki Monitor’s spokesperson, Panayote Dimitras, had brought the complaint against Seraphim in April 2017. In it, they accused the bishop of public incitement to violence and hatred as well as abuse of ecclesiastical office for issuing a statement described by the country’s Central Board of Jewish Communities, KIS, as being replete with “well-known antisemitic stereotypes, conspiracy theories and traditional Jew-hating attitudes”. After a prosecutor dismissed the complaint more than two years later – arguing the statement should be seen in the context of the doctrine of the Christian Orthodox church – the bishop responded by filing his own complaint against the activists for allegedly making false statements against him. A prosecutor referred the case to trial upon formally charging the pair in November. This is not the first time the religious leader has caused an uproar with his statements. In 2015, he attributed new legislation giving same-sex couples expanded civil rights to the “international Zionist monster” controlling the leftist government then in power. Five years earlier, he told a local TV station that Jews had orchestrated the Holocaust and were to blame for Greece’s debilitating debt crisis – comments he subsequently said were his own opinions and not those of the church. Although Athens has recently forged excellent working relations with Israel, antisemitic attitudes are not uncommon in a society where the vandalism of Jewish memorials is also regularly reported. The criminal charges against the activists had been condemned by an array of rights groups before the trial with many highlighting the increasingly difficult circumstances in which NGOs work. “Human rights defenders [in Greece] are consistently targeted for their legitimate work,” said the international secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture calling the situation for activists in the country critical. “[They] face different types of attacks, including surveillance, judicial harassment, arbitrary arrests, detentions, ill-treatment, entry bans and expulsions.”A distinguished British diplomat killed himself after suffering “extreme stress” while he worked long hours with little time off on the Covid crisis, a coroner has concluded. Richard Morris, the former ambassador to Nepal, feared that he would lose his upcoming post as high commissioner of Fiji if he could not prove his “resilience”, senior coroner Chris Wilkinson said. After returning from Nepal, Morris, 52, worked on the case of Harry Dunn, the teenage motorcyclist killed in a crash that sparked diplomatic tension between the UK and the US after the suspect, an American citizen, flew home. He then began working 15-hour shifts six or seven days a week for the Foreign Office’s Covid taskforce and suffered from night sweats, worrying that he was going to make a mistake that could land him in prison, the hearing in Winchester heard. Morris vanished from the family home in May 2020 and his body was not found until 31 August in woodland only 2.5 miles away. The coroner said: “The volume of work was intense and we now know Richard was suffering. Richard suffered an element of a breakdown.” Wilkinson said the pandemic “weighed heavily” on Morris. “In essence from the end of January he had very little – if any – downtime. When he did it was interrupted by his thoughts about work and anxieties or interrupted by calls for help. “I fear that he was very much caught in his own thought process, his diligence and his desire that everything was done correctly and desire to not let the team down, whether that was the team, the government or the country. “Resilience was a significant factor for Richard. His view was that he needed to do the best that he could, that his resilience would put his service at risk and his position in Fiji at risk.” Julia Longbottom, Morris’s boss in the Covid taskforce who is now the British ambassador to Japan, told the inquest she believed he was willingly “going the extra mile”. She said: “There wasn’t anything in his behaviour that indicated a significant change in the way he was or the way he was functioning or the way he was acting towards colleagues. “What I noticed was a slightly more extreme or exaggerated Richard than I had worked with previously, who was somewhat prone to double checking things or question whether he was getting things right or how he was doing. “My focus was reassuring him that he was doing a good job and the team were able to do things.” In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or by emailing jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at befrienders.org.A sheriff’s department in southern California is encouraging law enforcement officers who oppose vaccine mandates to “take back [their] freedom” and apply for jobs with the department. The Kern county sheriff’s office released a video last week inviting applications from deputies within Los Angeles county, where officials passed an order that could lead to the termination of thousands of county workers who haven’t received the Covid-19 vaccine or provided a religious or medical exemption. “Drive north, we have a place for you … Kern county is a community that backs the blue,” the minute-long ad says as country singer George Strait sings The Weight of the Badge, a song paying tribute to police. Covid-19 vaccination rates inside the LA sheriff’s department have lagged far below that of the public with just 54% of workers fully vaccinated, despite a vaccination mandate for county employees. Last week the county board of supervisors moved to shift vaccine mandate enforcement power away from LA county Sheriff Alex Villanueva. Villanueva, who has criticized mask orders and said he will not fire workers who refuse the vaccine, said such an act could lead to more than 4,000 unvaccinated deputies losing their jobs. The sheriff’s office in Kern county, a deeply conservative expanse located immediately to the north of Los Angeles, responded with its video the next day. “So take back your freedom, and APPLY today to work at the Kern county sheriff’s office. You deserve a job that welcomes you and your values, with open arms.” The battle over vaccine mandates for law enforcement in southern California highlights the divide over Covid health rules across the state. Vaccination rates continue to lag in more rural and conservative regions of California, where 70% of all residents are vaccinated. Outrage over Covid-19 restrictions led to the ouster of a Republican county supervisor in Shasta county, handing control of the board of supervisors to a militia-supported group. Kern county doesn’t require vaccinations for its workers. Its sheriff, Donny Youngblood, said in a press conference on Friday that he doesn’t know how many of his department’s deputies are vaccinated. Just 52% of Kern county residents are vaccinated, compared to 70% of LA county residents, according to the New York Times. “There’s a substantial number of deputies that already work here that aren’t vaccinated,” he said. “I have no idea [how many] and don’t care,” Youngblood said at the press conference. Though vaccination rates among law enforcement across the state have trailed behind the statewide rate, Youngblood said Kern county specifically wanted to target LA deputies. “The reason we reached out specifically to LA is there will be 4,000 deputy sheriffs if this were to happen that have real families have real children have real bills that could be unemployed because they refuse to take the vaccination.” Youngblood, who falsely claimed the vaccine doesn’t help or stop the spread of Covid, added that his department has 125 deputy positions it is struggling to fill. “Our substations are about half-staffed. And it really boils down to this: when you call 911 and it’s an emergency and you really want a deputy there, are you gonna ask him if he’s vaccinated or not?” Kern county law enforcement has received scrutiny in the past. In 2015, the Guardian found that law enforcement in Kern county killed more people relative to its population than in any other county in the US. Covid-19 was the leading cause of death for law enforcement killed in the line of duty in 2021 across the US, which saw the highest number of line-of-duty officer deaths since 1930. According to a report from the National Law Enforcement Memorial and Museum, preliminary data shows Covid killed 301 of 458 active federal, state, tribal and local law enforcement officers who died last year. • The subheading of this article was amended on 16 February 2022 because an earlier version said only 54% of LA county employees are vaccinated. To clarify: the figure of 54% relates to those vaccinated in the LA sheriff’s department.US attorneys representing victims of Jeffrey Epstein have hailed Tuesday’s settlement between Prince Andrew and Virginia Giuffre as a “victory” for survivors, with one claiming the royal’s “arrogance” stood in the way of settling sooner. Giuffre filed a civil lawsuit against the Duke of York in New York last year, accusing the prince of sexually abusing her when she was 17. The move represents a remarkable turnaround for the duke, who has always denied having a sexual relationship with Giuffre and had vowed to clear his name in court. In the settlement, the prince said he regretted his association with Epstein, who killed himself in prison in 2019 while facing trial for sex crimes. “It’s another banner day for the survivors,” Robert Lewis, a New York-based lawyer for Sarah Ransome, who was abused at the age of 22 and settled a lawsuit with Epstein and Ghislaine Maxwell in 2018, told the Guardian. He said he felt the victims had “been heard, and were no longer silenced” after Maxwell, the disgraced British socialite, was convicted in December on charges of recruiting and grooming teenage girls for sexual encounters with Epstein between 1994 and 2004, but he said Tuesday’s developments would further empower them. “They understand the pain and suffering that other survivors have gone through and they’re happy to see other survivors get some vindication, whether it’s the money paid or even more importantly just an acknowledgement that their claims are legitimate, that they’ve been wronged and that the truth is out.” Lisa Bloom, attorney for several of Epstein’s victims, said in a tweet that Giuffre had achieved “what no one else could: getting Prince Andrew to stop his nonsense and side with sexual abuse victims”. “My clients and I see this as a monumental victory for Virginia and are just in awe of her courage,” Bloom told the Guardian. “She stood up … she did it not only for herself but for other victims. It’s really an inspiration.” Bloom said cases such as these where “everyday people can stand up and get justice” provided hope to other victims. “Every time there’s a victory for somebody like this it goes a long way toward inspiring victims to stand up and stick with the fight,” she added. Settlement money, which Bloom said surely amounted to millions of dollars, would go toward Guiffre’s charity and support victims who haven’t received news coverage and don’t have a celebrity name attached to their cases, she said. However, Lewis said he was surprised the prince had not settled the case sooner. Asked if there had been “any element of arrogance” in the prince’s delay in settling, Lewis said: “That’s absolutely the case.” “It’s true for Epstein, it’s true for Maxwell, it’s true for the Catholic church, it’s true for the prince … they think the law on some level applies only to everybody else. “The settlement does not surprise me. What does surprise me is that he and his advisers and lawyers didn’t see this earlier and come to terms with it much earlier.” The court document that revealed news of the settlement on Tuesday said: “Prince Andrew has never intended to malign Ms Giuffre’s character, and he accepts that she has suffered both as an established victim of abuse and as a result of unfair public attacks.” However, Lewis said he believes the royal’s previous conduct, from his claim of not remembering meeting Giuffre to denouncing her allegations as “baseless” has been questionable. “What I observed, and what the world observed, was that for the last however many years he’s been dodging the whole matter. He sat for that terrible [Newsnight] interview in 2019, that didn’t come off well at all. Then they fought jurisdiction in New York and lost, and moved to dismiss, and lost. “So he was a couple of weeks from being deposed and having to answer questions under oath to lawyers, who had a lot more information about the situation than journalists did. “Given that, and the further diminution in his public standing, which is obviously important to him, it was a good time for him to settle.” Bloom said the settlement means the royal would not “malign [Giuffre] any more”. “Folks need to understand how extraordinarily difficult and painful it is to litigate a sexual abuse case, and Virginia has shown more courage in one day than most of us show in an entire lifetime, by not only going after Jeffrey Epstein and Ghislaine Maxwell, but now Prince Andrew, and standing up to him,” Bloom saidin an interview with Talk Radio. “Part of this settlement is acknowledging her pain and what she has gone through, and that he did not intend to malign her character. He’s not going to malign her any more. “He states publicly that he regrets his association with Jeffrey Epstein, which frankly, he should have said a long time ago. These are good accomplishments. It would have been nice for all of us to see this trial … but at the end of the day Virginia gets to decide what’s best for her. She does not have to carry the weight of the world’s interest.”Scientists appear to have cured a third person, and the first woman, of HIV using a novel stem cell transplant method, American researchers in Denver, Colorado, said on Tuesday. The patient, a woman of mixed race, was treated using a new method that involved umbilical cord blood, which is more readily available than the adult stem cells which are often used in bone marrow transplants, according to the New York Times. Umbilical cord stem cells also do not need to be matched as closely to the recipient as bone marrow cells do. “We estimate that there are approximately 50 patients per year in the US who could benefit from this procedure,” said Dr Koen van Besien, one of the doctors involved in the treatment. “The ability to use partially matched umbilical cord blood grafts greatly increases the likelihood of finding suitable donors for such patients.” The group of researchers revealed some of the case details at the Conference on Retroviruses and Opportunistic Infections in Denver. The woman is being called the “New York patient” by scientists, because she received the treatment at the New York-Presbyterian Weill Cornell Medical Center. In 2013, she was diagnosed with HIV. Four years later, she was diagnosed with leukemia. In a procedure known as a haplo-cord transplant, she was given cord blood from a partially matched donor to treat her cancer. A close relative also provided her with blood to boost her immune system as she underwent the transplant. After patients receive an umbilical cord blood transplant, they are then given additional adult stem cells. The stem cells grow quickly but are eventually replaced by cord blood cells. Although cord blood is more adaptable than adult stem cells, it does not yield enough to serve as effective treatments of cancer in adults. As a result, in haplo-cord transplants, the additional transplant of stem cells helps make up for the scarcity of cord blood cells. “The role of the adult donor cells is to hasten the early engraftment process and render the transplant easier and safer,” said Van Besien. Since the woman’s transplant in August 2017, she has been in remission from her leukemia for more than four years. Three years after the transplant, she and her doctors discontinued her HIV treatment. Fourteen months since, she has yet to experience any resurgent virus. According to the scientists, the majority of donors in registries are of Caucasian descent. As a result, allowing for only partial matches can open up the potential to treat patients who have both HIV and cancer, and also those who come from more diverse racial backgrounds. “The fact that she’s mixed race, and that she’s a woman, that is really important scientifically and really important in terms of the community impact,” Dr Steven Deeks, an Aids expert at the University of California, told the Times. Even though more than half of the world’s 35m HIV cases are found in women, women only make up 11% of participants in cure trials. Although Deeks was not involved in the case, he acknowledged that “these are stories of providing inspiration to the field and perhaps the road map. “Umbilical stem cells are attractive,” he added. “There’s something magical about these cells and something magical perhaps about the cord blood in general that provides an extra benefit.”The weakness of Prince Andrew’s legal position and fears over his own performance in the witness stand left his legal team with few options other than reaching a settlement with Virginia Giuffre that is likely to cost him $10m (£7m) or more, according to several international lawyers. Ann Olivarius, the senior partner of the McAllister Olivarius law firm who has acted in cases on both sides of the Atlantic, said she expected Prince Andrew’s settlement to be worth at least £10m ($13m), based on previous cases settled with wealthy individuals. “The size of the compensation is probably massive by any British standards, and it’s probably very substantial by American standards – and American standards are very high,” Olivarius said. “You can anticipate this would be probably in excess of £10m, even £20m perhaps. I don’t know what it is for a fact but as someone who does these agreements all the time it could easily be up there. And frankly it could be far higher.” Mark Stephens, an international lawyer at Howard Kennedy and expert in reputation management, said he expected Prince Andrew’s settlement to reach around $10m after paying for his own legal fees, using the proceeds from the prince’s recent sale of a Swiss chalet, initially valued at $25m but which Stephens believes was sold for a “fire sale” $18m. Olivarius said that Prince Andrew’s position was undermined by his previous statements that provoked ridicule, such as his claim that he was unable to sweat, and others that appeared implausible, such as his claim that he had no recollection of meeting Giuffre despite a photograph of him with his arm around her. The prince’s Newsnight interview with Emily Maitlis also pointed to how he would struggle to cope with probing and detailed questions during his deposition. Under cross examination, the prince would have been quizzed about what he saw or experienced during his friendship with the convicted sex offender Jeffrey Epstein. None of which would have been easy for him – or for the royal family. Stephens said that within the “careful diplomatic language” in the settlement document, Andrew had managed to avoid confirming allegations that he was aware that Giuffre had been sexually trafficked, allowing him to avoid further disgrace during the Queen’s jubilee if proceedings had dragged on throughout the year before a possible court appearance in December. “Essentially he knows he’s being consigned to a metaphorical tower at Balmoral, but he’s avoided all the gory details coming out during the Queen’s jubilee year,” Stephens said. Nick Goldstone, head of dispute resolution at Ince Gordon Dadds, agreed the settlement could “quite easily” run into many millions of dollars on top of Giuffre’s legal costs. “The damages and the “substantial” charitable donation should surely be in the millions of dollars on their own. The Prince’s legal costs will be enormous too,” Goldstone said. He thought the result would come as a “huge relief” for the royal family as an institution. “In terms of “the court of public opinion” this looks like an admission of bad conduct on the part of Andrew and I suspect he will remain ‘off-stage’ from the royal family for the rest of his life,” said Goldstone. “Perhaps he intends to rehabilitate himself by supporting the fight against the evils of sex trafficking and supporting its victims over the years. What appears to have truly motivated him has been his loss of honorary titles and royal associations.” Olivarius said that it made sense for all the parties to settle, and that Giuffre had got everything she said she had wanted from the proceedings. The prince has insisted he had never met Guiffre, and his lawyers had suggested the claim she had brought was “baseless” and was designed to win her a “payday.” Yet the agreed statement between the parties published on Tuesday included this key passage. “Prince Andrew has never intended to malign Ms Giuffre’s character, and he accepts that she has suffered both as an established victim of abuse and as a result of unfair public attacks.” Olivarius said: “She said she wanted an apology, she wanted an amount of money and she wanted him to acknowledge what he’s done. It seems to me that she has gotten those things. “She got an apology because he has now praised her for being courageous. She’s gotten money for a charity in trafficking, and she got him to settle which is an admission, clearly, that he is frightened to go forward, he has got too much exposure, he cannot afford on a risk management basis to go forward. “She had leverage, she used it and she triumphed. I say this is good news all round, and it’s good news for him because we know he couldn’t have handled this deposition, it was going to be a disaster,” Olivarius said.• Teachers’ terms and conditions are not “negotiated across England and Wales”, as an article said. For Wales, the matter has been devolved since 2018 (Wales ready to celebrate St David, 22 January, p9). • Artworks sold to fund the renovation of West Horsley Place, Surrey, included a study for Frederic (later Lord) Leighton’s Flaming June rather than the painting itself (Bamber Gascoigne obituary, 9 February, Journal, p6). • Other recently amended articles include: Covid ‘onslaught’ has overwhelmed Hong Kong’s capacity, leader says ‘I’ve lived through hunger and war’: tiny Italian town sets record as 10th resident turns 100 Inventing Anna: does Netflix’s new true-crime drama glamorise scammers? Editorial complaints and correction requests can be sent to: guardian.readers@theguardian.com. You can also write to: Readers’ editor, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU, or leave a voicemail on +44 (0) 20 3353 4736.Former Honduran president Juan Orlando Hernández has been arrested, a day after the US Department of Justice requested his extradition over drug trafficking and weapons charges, culminating a spectacular fall from grace for a man who was once considered one of Washington’s top allies in Central America. On Tuesday afternoon Hernández left his home in a wealthy neighborhood in the country’s capital, Tegucigalpa, where he was cuffed at the hands and feet and provided a bullet-proof vest before being taken away in a police caravan to a special forces base. He will appear before a judge for his first hearing within 24 hours. According to the extradition request submitted to Honduras, Hernández was part of a “violent drug-trafficking” conspiracy that trafficked roughly 500,000 kilos of cocaine since 2004. The long-rumored indictment comes just over two weeks after Hernández, 53, left office and strikes a critical blow to the reputation of a former president who had been praised early in his presidency by the US Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) for his government’s efforts to extradite drug traffickers. About 100 police officers had surrounded Hernández’s home late on Monday, pending the decision by the supreme court to issue an arrest warrant. Hernández has previously described the allegations against him as lies made up by violent drug traffickers who are seeking revenge and to reduce their sentences. “They found the magic key to go unpunished, surrender and negotiate and accuse the institutions for putting them behind bars,” said Hernández in a February 2021 address. He has also pointed to a constitutional reform allowing Hondurans to be extradited to the US – passed while president of Congress in 2012 – as evidence of his innocence. “A person who has colluded with drug traffickers would never approve extradition,” he said. But evidence presented by US prosecutors in recent trials of Honduran drug traffickers suggests that Hernández believed he could control who was extradited –and therefore avoid repercussions for him and close allies. Formal accusations of Hernández’s alleged involvement in drug trafficking first came to light in August 2019 when he was named in a court filing as a co-conspirator of his brother Juan Antonio “Tony” Hernández, who was arrested while visiting the United States. During the subsequent trial, prosecutors accused the brothers of overseeing a scheme that they described as “state-sponsored drug trafficking”. Tony Hernández was convicted on drug trafficking conspiracy and related weapons charges. He was sentenced last year to life in prison. In April 2020, Hernández was named again as a co-conspirator when US prosecutors indicted former national police chief Juan Carlos “El Tigre” Bonilla Valladares with drug trafficking and related weapons charges. According to the indictment, Hernández entrusted Bonilla “with special assignments, including murder”. In a third case less than a year later, a court heard that Hernández had allegedly plotted with another Honduran drug trafficker, Geovanny Fuentes, to “shove the drugs right up the noses of the gringos”. Fuentes was convicted of drug trafficking conspiracy and related weapons charges. His sentencing is scheduled for February. Bucking tradition, Hernández did not attend the inauguration of his successor, Xiomara Castro, on 27 January – the same day that an arrest warrant was issued in the United States. Hernández began his political career in 1998 when he won a seat in congress to represent his home department of Lempira – located within a key drug trafficking corridor in western Honduras. In 2010, he became president of congress and then four years later, president of the republic. According to prosecutors, his rise in politics is owed in part to millions in bribes from drug traffickers. The drug trafficking conspiracy charge carries a sentence of 10 years to life.The House select committee investigating the Capitol attack issued subpoenas on Tuesday to top Trump campaign and Republican officials involved in the scheme to send false electors for Donald Trump in states won by Joe Biden, as it examines the coordination behind the effort. The panel sent subpoenas to six individuals who were involved in a brazen attempt to meet and submit fake electoral college certificates that formed the backbone of a Trump-connected scheme to have Congress return the former president to office. Congressman Bennie Thompson, the chairman of the select committee, suggested in a statement that the subpoenas aimed to compel cooperation from the key actors about whether the Trump White House oversaw the effort to have so-called alternate electors participate in the scheme. “We’re seeking records and testimony from former campaign officials and other individuals in various states who we believe have relevant information about the planning and implementation of those plans,” Thompson said. The second set of subpoenas to people involved in the scheme comes weeks after the deputy attorney general, Lisa Monaco, confirmed that the justice department had opened its own investigation into the matter, raising the stakes for the fake electors and the Trump White House. The select committee subpoenaed two senior Trump campaign officials: Michael Roman and Gary Michael Brown, who served, respectively, as the director and deputy director for election day operations for the Trump 2020 re-election campaign. Both Trump campaign officials – Roman and Brown – participated in efforts to promote allegations of fraud in the November 2020 election and encourage state legislators to appoint false “alternate” slates of electors, Thompson said. In separate subpoena letters, Thompson said the panel had communications showing the pair coordinated a pressure campaign urging Republican members of state legislatures to send Trump slates, and oversaw Trump campaign staffers involved in the effort. The select committee also targeted four state Republican allies of Trump: the chair of the Arizona Republican party Kelli Ward, former Michigan Republican party chair Laura Cox, Pennsylvania state senator Douglas Mastriano, and Arizona house member Mark Finchem. Ward signed a fake election certificate, Cox was a witness to the Trump attorney Rudy Giuliani pressuring states to disregard Biden’s win in Michigan, Mastriano had knowledge of the fake electors scheme, and Finchem communicated with organizers of the Save America rally on 6 January, Thompson said. Trump’s plan to return himself to office rested on two elements: the existence, or possible existence, of alternate slates, that then-vice president Mike Pence could use to declare that “dueling slates” meant he was unable to certify those states in favor of Biden. The effort to subvert the results of the 2020 election at the joint session of Congress on 6 January fell apart after Pence refused to abuse his ceremonial role to certify the results, and it was clear the “alternate slates” were not legitimate certificates. The panel is seeking to examine whether the effort was coordinated by the Trump White House and whether it amounted to a crime, according to a source close to the investigation. The subpoenas compel the production of documents and testimony through March.The conservative writer and humorist PJ O’Rourke, whose acerbic wit and writings often won admiration on both sides of America’s political divide, has died, media reports and colleagues said. He was 74 years old. Peter Sagal, O’Rourke’s colleague and host of the NPR radio show Wait Wait… Don’t Tell Me!, said on Twitter: “I’m afraid it’s true. Our panelist and my dear friend PJ O’Rourke has passed away.” The CNN host Jake Tapper reported that O’Rourke had died of cancer. “Our dear friend and cherished Grove Atlantic author P.J O’Rourke passed away this morning from complications of lung cancer,” Tapper quoted O’Rourke’s publisher as saying. O’Rourke was one of the most quoted writers in America, dissecting US politics and culture with a withering disdain and a powerful line in put-downs – often laced with a warm, self-deprecating humanity. He held a variety of roles that showcased his writing, commentary and reportage – and most importantly his humor. They included stints as editor in chief of National Lampoon and Rolling Stone’s foreign affairs desk chief. His targets featured government and politicians in works like Parliament of Whores and Don’t Vote: It Just Encourages the Bastards but also ranged towards foreign reporting such as his war correspondent book Holidays in Hell. Nearly all his work was laced with tales from his own life and joy of hard partying, at least in his early writing. Though he was notably – and briefly – a hippy in the late 196os and early 1970s O’Rourke found his home on the right of the political spectrum, though far from the conservative social values that many in the Republican party embraced. One of his best-known works was titled Republican Party Reptile: The Confessions, Adventures, Essays and Outrages of PJ O’Rourke. Though O’Rourke often reserved his sharpest barbs for the left and Democrats, he admitted that in 2016’s election he would be supporting Hillary Clinton over the Republican nominee, Donald Trump. “She’s wrong about absolutely everything, but she’s wrong within normal parameters,” he said. O’Rourke was from Toledo, Ohio, born the son of a car salesman. He went to university in Ohio and, later, Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, Maryland. He was married twice, latterly moving to New Hampshire with his second spouse, Tina Mallon, with whom he had three children. Numerous friends and former colleagues paid tribute to him. “PJ was special. When he came by the office, the fun and wit went up a notch, sparks were in the air, and we all felt a certain joie de vivre. I cherish the memories,” wrote the conservative writer Bill Kristol of a shared time at the rightwing the Weekly Standard. “PJ O’Rourke was one of the nicest writers I ever had the pleasure of meeting and drinking and (very rarely) corresponding with. No reason whatsoever for him to be decent to some junior editor at one of the many outlets he wrote for, and yet. What a loss,” posted Sunny Bunch, culture editor at the Bulwark.All young people leaving care in Wales at the age of 18 are to be offered the chance to take part in a basic income pilot scheme under which they will receive £1,600 a month for up to two years. The money will be given unconditionally and participants will be able to earn from paid jobs on top of the basic income with ministers hoping it will help give some of the most vulnerable in society a better chance of thriving. Officials, who investigated basic income schemes from California to Finland before designing the Welsh pilot, will study whether those who take part do better in the long term, financially, physically and emotionally, than young people who do not. The scheme, set to launch in the summer, is believed to be one of the most generous of its kind in the world and will cost the Welsh government £20m over three years. Those taking part will be taxed and will not be able to claim all benefits they would be entitled to if they were not given the money after the UK government refused to allow this. Benefits are not a devolved area. The move was welcomed by UBI Lab Wales, which campaigns on the concept of universal basic income, under which every citizen, regardless of their means, receives regular sums of money for life to cover the basic cost of living. Lowri Walters, of UBI Lab Wales, said: “While this proposal is not for a location-based basic income pilot with a wide range of participants, it represents a huge step forward for the UBI movement and a first for the UK. This will be a sizeable basic income for young people who need financial support at an uncertain and difficult point in their lives, and we’re confident that, if done properly, this pilot will demonstrate that a basic income can transform the lives of care leavers as well as citizens across Wales.” Welsh parliament member Jack Sargeant who led the Senedd’s first debate on UBI, said: “This is an incredibly bold move from a Welsh government that is leading the world in this area. We now need to ensure that we learn all we can from this trial. This is a real opportunity to show things can be different.” The Welsh minister for social justice, Jane Hutt, said the Labour-led government was committed to supporting the most vulnerable and tackling the “scourge of poverty.”. She said: “Too many young people leaving care continue to face significant barriers to achieving a successful transition into adulthood. Our basic income pilot is an exciting project to deliver financial stability for a generation of young people that need it most. Support will also be offered that is designed to build up their confidence to negotiate the world outside of care. This extra support will include, for instance, financial wellbeing training and signposting to all available support.” All young people leaving care who turn 18 during a 12 month period, across every local authority area in Wales, will be offered the chance to take part in the pilot. The pilot will run for a minimum of three years with each person receiving a basic income payment of £1600 a month for a duration of 24 months from the month after their 18th birthday. Almost half of the Welsh parliament signed a pledge calling for UBI to be trialled in the run up to last year’s elections.This Manchester City demolition of Sporting was akin to a heavyweight bullying a featherweight. A fair question was to wonder how these opponents shared the same pitch, so dominant were England’s champions. At the break Pep Guardiola’s men were four goals up, by the final whistle it was 5-0, and at the close of the tie they may go close to Bayern Munich’s 12-1 evisceration of Sporting at the same stage in 2008-09. That was the Portuguese club’s only previous last-16 experience and this lack of knowhow was written all over how City toyed with them and landed killer blows at will. A prime factor is, of course, the riches the side fuelled by Abu Dhabi’s petro‑dollars enjoy: that should allow them to beat a significantly lower‑budget operation such as Sporting but so immaculately are they drilled by their manager, who might stop the City juggernaut finally claiming the Champions League this term is a puzzle. At kick-off the Estádio José Alvalade glittered from phone torches that lit up the Lisbon night and what followed was a perfect City start. Aymeric Laporte found the excellent Bernardo Silva and, when Phil Foden’s shot was subsequently saved, Kevin De Bruyne passed to Riyad Mahrez and the Algerian scored. City seemed to think De Bruyne was offside but VAR ruled Gonçalo Inácio played the Belgian on, so Mahrez had a 10th goal in his past 11 Champions League appearances. Sporting and their support were stunned. The Portuguese champions’ last outing, a 2-2 draw with Porto on Friday, ended in a mass brawl and three of their men sent off. In Rúben Amorim they have a 37-year-old manager who cost the club €10m to prise from Braga and whose repayment was a cup-and-championship double, the latter a first title in 19 years. Amorim now, somehow, had to rally his men but instead City struck again. This time a Mahrez corner was weakly cleared and Silva pounced, rifling a superb half-volley past Antonio Adán for a 2-0 lead 17 minutes in. Guardiola’s XI featured four old boys of Sporting’s crosstown rivals Benfica – João Cancelo, Rúben Dias, Silva and Ederson were booed initially whenever they took a touch before the home support switched focus to their own team. For a while Sporting showed in flashes. A Ricardo Esgaio raid along the left had City back-pedalling. Then, Pablo Sarabia looked to do the same but the No 17 ran infield and John Stones ended the threat. In between, Pedro Gonçalves, the scorer of four goals in the group stage, let fly twice. Guardiola, on the prowl in the technical area, was conscious of Sporting’s threat – a volley he gave Dias for not passing diagonally indicative of his concern. The Catalan was about to applaud his team, though. At first Dias, Rodri and Stones played keep-ball in their half. Then suddenly De Bruyne was marauding towards goal, feeding Mahrez who pirouetted and crossed for Foden to finish – Sebastián Coates, the nearest defender, making it too simple for the forward. Three-nil up so soon pointed to the serious mismatch occurring. City were illustrating precisely why they are the competition favourites and Sporting were showing how Ajax put five past them here in September. The rest of the period had City in a quasi-exhibition mode. Passes were interchanged, positions shifted, differing zones occupied. And, then, a fourth was secured: this time Silva’s strike was from close range, Raheem Sterling teeing him up. City’s travelling contingent ended the first half regaling their team. The second half, now, seemed a matter of how many more they might register. Sporting fans, to their credit, kept singing and would do so until the end. The way Cancelo, De Bruyne and Rodri harried their men showed City were targeting the jugular still. On the touchline Guardiola next threw up his hands in dismay at an errant Dias chip forward, then had a prolonged chat with the fourth official, his gestures suggesting unhappiness with the refereeing of Srdjan Jovanovic. More pleasing for the 51-year-old was how a rare Sporting attack was broken up and City, in their slick fashion, moved upfield via Rodri, De Bruyne and Cancelo. And, even better was the team’s fifth finish. Here, Sterling was ruthless, the No 7’s long-range effort sailing into the top corner and moving him to 10th on the club’s all-time list of scorers. This had entered embarrassing territory for Sporting. Portugal’s domestic champions were being made to appear a part-time outfit. There were no more goals – but only because City were content with their night’s work. Guardiola found fault with the “loss of balls” as he is a perfectionist. But, he did also call it, correctly, the “dream result”. Silva, the clear man-of-the-match, said: “It was nice to start the last 16 with a 5-0 win. There is still a job to do in Manchester. We cannot relax.” They most certainly can.The situation in Ukraine continues to unfold: please continue to follow our live blog for updates. Senate Republicans refused to attend a banking committee meeting to advance Federal Reserve nominees because they object to one nominee, Sarah Bloom Raskin. Sarah Palin lost her libel lawsuit against the New York Times after a jury rejected her claim that the newspaper maliciously damaged her reputation by erroneously linking her campaign rhetoric to a mass shooting. The US Senate narrowly confirmed Robert Califf as the new head of the Food and Drug Administration. White House press secretary Jen Psaki had strong words for the Senate Republicans who refused to attend a banking committee meeting regarding Federal Reserve nominations because they had issue with one nominee in particular, Sarah Bloom Raskin, the wife of a Democratic congressman. “This is a very extreme step that is totally irresponsible in our view,” Psaki said. “It’s never been more important to have confirmed leadership at the Fed, to help continue our recovery and fight inflation and obviously they have a unique role, a vital role to play as it relates to inflation. Democrats and Republicans have agreed on that for decades. Psaki continued: “Republicans are out there saying inflation’s a problem, it’s a huge issue. We agree. But then they’re not even showing up to vote against these nominees for the Federal Reserve. What kind of message is that sending to the American public?” Psaki stood by the administration’s nomination of Raskin, calling her “one of the most qualified individuals to ever be nominated to the Federal Reserve”. Psaki said Raskin not only has been continuously making disclosures to the banking committee as part of the vetting process, but every allegation against her that has been raised in particular by Pat Toomey, the ranking Republican on the committee, has been shot down and discredited. White House press secretary Jen Psaki said the administration was hopeful that Congress will be able to pass a stopgap funding bill by Friday’s deadline, despite objections from lawmakers such as Marsha Blackburn, the Republican senator from Tennessee who is holding out on the bill because she wrongly believes that the administration is trying to set aside money to hand out crack pipes. “We are engaged with a range of Democrats and Republicans and we are hopeful that we will be able to sign this,” Psaki said. Psaki continued: “I would note that one of senator Blackburn’s primary concerns is in relation to the funding of crack pipes, which is not an issue. So what is happening here is the potential to hold up the funding of the government and important programs around an issue that is not an issue. We have been clear that we are not funding crack pipes.” White House press secretary Jen Psaki commented on Congress and lawmakers’ failed efforts to come to an agreement on an economics sanctions bill for Russia. “Our view remains that a bipartisan effort would be the best effort moving forward,” Psaki said. “Our view continues to be that the crippling sanctions package that we designed is meant to be the deterrent.” White House press secretary Jen Psaki has taken to the podium for the press briefing to field questions on Ukraine. Follow along on our live blog here for more updates. Psaki began the briefing by announcing that the FCC has voted to crackdown on exclusivity agreements between landlords and internet providers known as sweetheart deals that locks tenants and office buildings into just one internet option, which possibly traps tenants into paying more for lower quality service. In the middle of Joe Biden and his remarks on Ukraine, media tents outside the White House experienced a massive power outage: Meanwhile, over at Capitol Hill, lawmakers have failed to reach consensus on a bill on economic sanctions against Russia. Joe Biden is addressing the nation now about Ukraine and the threat of a Russian invasion. Follow our live blog for more updates: Senate minority leader Mitch McConnell has sounded off on the impending government funding deadline: Meanwhile, Senate Republicans have come through on their threat to not show up to the banking committee meeting on the Federal Reserve confirmations: Former Alaska governor Sarah Palin has lost her libel lawsuit against the New York Times when a jury rejected today her claim that the newspaper maliciously damaged her reputation by erroneously linking her campaign rhetoric to a 2011 mass shooting in Arizona that left six dead and former congresswoman Gabby Giffords severely wounded, the Associated Press is reporting. A judge had ruled yesterday that if the jury sided with Palin, he would set aside its verdict. In an editorial about gun control, the Times blamed overheated political rhetoric after a man opened fire on a Congressional baseball team practice in Washington, wounding congressman Steve Scalise, a Republican from Louisiana. The shooter had a history of anti-GOP activity. The editorial likened the shooting to the 2011 shooting in Arizona that left six dead and Giffords severely wounded, and said Palin’s political action committee had contributed to an atmosphere of violence at the time by circulating a map of electoral districts that put Giffords and 19 other Democrats under stylized crosshairs. In a correction, the Times said it had “incorrectly stated that a link existed between political rhetoric and the 2011 shooting” and that it had “incorrectly described” the map; a tweet read, “We got an important fact wrong.” Joe Biden is expected to make some comments in about an hour on the situation in Ukraine, and the threat of a Russian invasion. Make sure to follow along on our live blog dedicated to the unfolding situation for live updates: In his address to the National Association of Counties, Joe Biden talked about Build Back Better, the rising costs of healthcare and prescription drugs, as well as his Moonshot Initiative to reduce the death rate by cancer by 50 percent in the next 25 years. “We’re on the verge of some significant breakthroughs in healthcare,” he said. “But should it be based upon what you can afford to pay? If Congress acts we can take care of things with the stroke of a pen tomorrow.” Elizabeth Warren, the progressive Democratic senator from Massachusetts, has issued a statement about her vote to confirm Robert Califf as the new head of the Food and Drug Administration: Her counterpart Ed Markey, the other Democratic senator from Massachusetts, voted against the confirmation. Joe Biden delivered some remarks to the National Association of Counties just now, touting the American Rescue Plan and the bipartisan infrastructure law to local officials from across the country - the National Association of Counties represents county governments in the US. “Not only has infrastructure week finally arrived, you can look forward to infrastructure decade,” he said. “Just 92 days after I signed the law, it’s already making a tangible difference. We announced billions in funding allocations to put people to work in good-paying jobs, cleaning up rivers in Ohio, chemical plants in Florida and dozens of other sites, bolstering the energy grid with stronger transmission lines and towers and modernizing bridges.” Biden continued: “This is only the beginning: hundreds of billions in new investments are on their way. Now it’s time for the counties to get ready.” Robert Califf’s appointment as the new head of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) was confirmed today, but the process was not as straightforward as the Biden administration first thought. Senator Joe Manchin, a Virginia Democrat, urged senators to oppose Califf’s appointment earlier this week, saying he bears “a great deal of responsibility” for many of the US opioid overdose deaths in the years since Califf’s first stint as FDA commissioner under the Obama administration. The Associated Press reports that at that time, Califf “added new warning labels to opioids and commissioned outside recommendations on how to tighten regulation of the drugs. But he was replaced by President Donald Trump before implementing any major changes.” Califf has promised to launch a review of opioids as one of his first actions in his new role. The US senate has narrowly confirmed Joe Biden’s pick to lead the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), the powerful regulator that hasn’t had a permanent leader in more than a year. The 50-46 vote means Dr Robert Califf, a cardiologist, will helm the agency, which regulates billion-dollar industries including prescription and over-the-counter drugs, as well as most foods on sale in the US. Califf previously held the job for 11 months in the final years of Obama administration after securing overwhelming support in the senate - a contrast to Tuesday’s tight result. The FDA has played a key role in the US response to the Covid-19 pandemic, including reviewing and approving vaccines against a backdrop of deep political polarization over public health measures. Senate Republicans are so strongly opposed to the nominees for the Federal Reserve that some are threatening to boycott the afternoon committee vote. Sarah Raskin is the wife of Jamie Raskin, a Democratic congressman from Maryland. The Senate majority leader, Chuck Schumer, is trying to bring the postal service reform bill to the Senate floor this week following a technical error blocking its way: House clerks mistakenly enrolled the wrong version of the bill, meaning that Schumer filed cloture on the wrong version. Schumer has issued a unanimous consent request to file cloture on the correct bill, but as the name implies, it requires unanimous consent – and Rick Scott, the Republican senator from Florida, is standing in the way because he doesn’t like the legislation. It’s not the end of the world – this just means that the bill will be delayed a few weeks – but it’s frustrating development for postal reform advocates, nonetheless. Kathleen Rice, a Democratic congresswoman from New York, has announced that she is not running for re-election. She becomes the 30th Democrat in the House who is not running for reelection, putting their 222 to 212 majority at risk. The Senate majority leader, Chuck Schumer, had sounded off on the funding issue: Remington, the manufacturer of an assault rifle used to kill 20 schoolchildren and six adults in the 2012 massacre at Sandy Hook elementary school in Connecticut, has agreed to settle liability claims for the families of nine of the victims. This will be the first time a gunmaker is held responsible for a mass shooting in the US, and comes one day after the four-year anniversary of the mass shooting at Marjory Stoneman Douglas high school in Parkland, Florida, when Joe Biden called for such accountability to take place. “Congress must do much more – beginning with requiring background checks on all gun sales, banning assault weapons and high-capacity magazines, and eliminating immunity for gun manufacturers,” Biden said. Details of the settlement are still unclear, but in July, Remington offered $33m, which was substantially less than what the victims’ families were seeking. In a February court filing, their attorneys estimated the wrongful death claims likely totalled in excess of $225m, rising above $1bn with punitive damages. The federal government runs out of money at the end of the week, but the usual tense will-they, won’t-they drama of a government shutdown has been muted with by the situation in Ukraine. Punchbowl News is reporting that the senate is currently stuck on two unrelated government funding snafus. One of the two snafus stems from Marsha Blackburn, the Republican senator from Tennessee, who is holding out on a three-week stopgap funding bill because she believes that the Biden administration is trying to set aside money to hand out crack pipes. Though the White House has denied this, Blackburn is allegedly waiting on the Biden administration to formally respond to her concerns before she allows the bill to go through. The last tussle comes from several Republican senators, led by Mike Lee of Utah, who are demanding a vote on the amendment to ban the federal government from funding a vaccine mandate for federal workers, contractors and the military. However, Punchbowl News noted that these last-minute disputes have become standard for the senate ahead of funding talks, and will likely be resolved - there likely won’t be a shutdown. Yesterday we reported on how Mazars, the longtime accountancy firm for the Trump Organization, had cut ties with Donald Trump after admitting in a court filing that nearly a decade’s worth of Trump’s filings should “no longer be relied upon”. The Guardian’s Dominic Rushe has more details here: Ahoy there, live blog readers. Happy the Valentine Candy is on Sale Day. As it has been in recent weeks, much of the focus in Washington has been on Ukraine, and the imminent threat of a Russian invasion. Make sure to check out our live blog here for live updates as the situation unfolds. Meanwhile, in the US, progressive congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez has been making waves as she campaigns for progressive candidates in Texas and talks about turning the once staunchly red state blue. Today, her New Yorker interview raised more eyebrows when she said there was a “very real risk” that democracy would not exist in the US 10 years from now. Read more about her comments here:Suddenly there was Kylian Mbappé once again. With 45 seconds left, just when it looked as if victory had evaded a Paris Saint-Germain side that could have won this match a lot earlier and three times over, he delivered the solution that they had sought all night. Dashing between Lucas Vázquez and Éder Militão, leaning one way and then the other, as smooth as he was swift, Mbappé dropped the shoulder and slotted through Thibaut Courtois’ legs. The release was immense at the Parc des Princes, where they could have been forgiven for becoming resigned to this moment never arriving, denied despite their dominance until that last magical moment. It took 22 shots, including a penalty that Lionel Messi had seen saved by Courtois, but at last the hosts had done it. It had been worth the wait and it had to be him: not just the man Real Madrid hope to sign but a footballer of rare gifts and the outstanding player here. Alongside Courtois, that is. Madrid’s goalkeeper had held PSG at bay somehow. The continent’s most successful club are also its great survivors and, although the knife was eventually slipped in, they may reflect it is only one goal and there is a second leg to come, life to cling on to. They will have to play it without Casemiro and Ferland Mendy, both of whom were booked, but it could have been much worse. The surprise really was that it took so long for defeat to be inflicted upon them. The first glimpse of Mbappé came with an elegant, fast turn away from Casemiro inside the opening minute that set the tone; the last came 93 minutes later. In between those moments he had constantly run at a Madrid side who were often overwhelmed and may be accused of playing fearfully, but who held on. Nor was Mbappé alone as PSG took control. Messi dropped deep, as willing to play the first pass as the last; Marco Verratti and Leandro Paredes kept the ball moving; Ángel Di María was all over the place. Mbappé prowled the left side, where Dani Carvajal was isolated and from where PSG created the chance that should have given them the lead, Di María shooting high over the bar from six yards out. Madrid could find no way out. One run forward just before the half-hour was the first time they got into PSG’s half, a release of pressure as much as an actual attack, and their first effort on goal was the last touch of the opening 45 minutes, Militão heading wide. The good news for Carlo Ancelotti’s team was that, while Mbappé scared them, the threat palpable every time he had the ball, there were few clear chances. PSGs possession was up at 70% on 30 minutes but declined. The best opportunity came from a wonderful pass that Messi dropped behind the Madrid defence. With the ball sitting up and Carvajal pushing him in the back, Mbappé could not get a clean contact and Courtois made the save. From the corner he dived to repel the ball again. By the break Casemiro’s yellow card was the extent of the damage. Courtois ensured there was no further harm when he produced another of his now statutory miracles, diving low to keep out Mbappé as PSG began the second half accelerating again. Next Militão charged down a shot by Mbappé. Even if efforts from Mbappé and Messi were simpler saves, PSG were pushing. Madrid were forced back into their area, from where Militão blocked Messi before Mbappé was taken out by Carvajal for a penalty. The defender’s clumsy dive was a reflection of the threat Mbappé poses and how powerless Carvajal felt. His goalkeeper’s dive was superb, Courtois flying left to save Messi’s weak spot-kick. Still the ball would not go in, a flash of desperation when Messi took a shot off Paredes’s foot a moment later. Something had to change and so on came Neymar, immediately dribbling round the referee and then winning a free-kick before combining with Messi, whose clipped ball just evaded Mbappé. Then Mbappé curled past the far post. The Parc de Princes rose again when Messi dribbled through with five minutes left and slipped the ball into Neymar only for a clip over Courtois to float beyond everyone. And when Mbappé somehow escaped on the right and got all the way to the byline in the 90th minute no one was there to finish it. It seemed that PSG’s moment had gone. Somehow Madrid were still standing until, in the 94th minute, Neymar’s backheel gave Mbappé one more go at bringing the house down.Sid Lowe was at the Parc des Princes tonight ... and his report has landed. Off you click for the good doctor’s assessment. Thanks for reading this MBM. Nighty night! Real keeper Thibaut Courtois, surely the man of the match despite Kylian Mbappe’s late goal, talks to BT Sport. “It was almost a very good night. Obviously Messi shoots a lot of penalties so it’s hard to guess right, but he’s missed a few on this side, so I went left and had a good save. The goal was a bit annoying. We lost the ball in midfield, then Mbappe goes away easily from two players. You have to close the angle so I went down as fast as I could to block, but the ball went in just the right space under my body. It’s a bit hard to take after such a game, but nothing is lost with 1-0, even with a draw we would have had to win at home. Now we just have to do it in 90 minutes! At home it will have to be better. We believe and we are sure we can win.” The mood at the Parc des Princes changes in an instant, as PSG, heads collectively hanging low before Mbappe’s moment, run in unison to celebrate with their fans. It took a dramatic late, late intervention from a couple of superstars. Neymar with the defence-splitting backheel, Mbappe with the slippery run and composed finish. On balance, though Real were staunch, PSG deserved their win. They’ll take a slender advantage to the Bernabeu in three weeks’ time. That’s pretty much the last kick of the game! Mbappe’s wasn’t the last touch, mind, the ball taking the gentlest of flicks off Valverde en route to the goal, further foxing poor Courtois, whose fine night has turned sour at the very end! Courtois had no chance with this, though! Neymar finds Mbappe on the left touchline with a cute backheel. Mbappe takes a touch to enter the box, slips between Militao and Vasquez, and slots a low shot through the keeper’s legs and in! 90 min +3: Gueye finds a little pocket of space on the edge of the Real D. He scuffs his shot straight at Courtois, who has been Real’s best player tonight. 90 min +1: The first of four added minutes sees Paredes go into the book for a late clip on Kroos. 90 min: More groaning as Mbappe skitters down the right at speed. He reaches the byline but can’t find Neymar in the six-yard box with his pullback. 89 min: Mbappe tries a backheeled pass that doesn’t come off. The home fans groan. 88 min: Both teams make a change, Gueye coming on for Danilo, Benzema making way for Bale. 87 min: Some noise now, though, as Messi dribbles down the inside-right channel and releases Neymar into the box. Courtois comes out to tighten the angle, and Neymar can only dink a chip across the face of goal and away. For a second, a late winner seemed on the cards. But what fine on-point keeping by Courtois, who made things as difficult as possible for Neymar. 86 min: Real stroke it around the back comfortably. The away fans are the only ones to be heard in an otherwise silent and sullen Parc des Princes. 85 min: Real are very close to a valuable draw now. PSG look to be running out of ideas as the clock ticks on. “Justice done with the penalty save, I thought,” writes Justin Kavanagh. “Mbappe was on his way down half an hour before Carvajal’s tackle came in.” Oh he was looking for it all right. But I guess you do what you have to do. 83 min: Kroos limps into the mixer. Verratti and Alaba collide at the far post. Free kick for Real. Momentarily, things threaten to escalate between Kimpembe and Rodrygo, the latter refusing to give the ball back so PSG can restart the game quickly. Kimpembe gives the cheeky scamp an irritated shove, and both players go in the book. 82 min: Paredes slides in hysterically on Vinicius, who was making good down the left. Before the free kick can be taken, Vinicius and an unhappy Modric are replaced by Hazard and Valverde. 80 min: Mbappe wins a corner down the right. Neymar takes. Militao clears. Real counter, Rodrygo swivelling and taking a snapshot on the edge of the PSG box. Marquinhos blocks. PSG have had 19 attempts at goal, Real now just the three. But look at the score, and the clock. 78 min: Vinicius briefly threatens to break into the PSG box after taking a long pass down with one sweet touch. But he over-elaborates and can’t get past the resilient duo of Hakimi and Marquinhos. He falls over, looking for a free kick he’s never going to get. PSG clear their lines. 77 min: Messi embarks on a baroque ramble down the left, entering the box and curling across the face of goal. Mbappe hangs out a leg but can’t connect. Any sort of connection would have been a goal. Instead it’s just a corner. The ball’s worked long to Mbappe, just inside the box on the left. Mbappe curls towards the bottom right, the ball flying inches wide for a goal kick. So close x2! 75 min: Messi pulls rank to take the free kick. He whips it over the wall well enough, but having set it out wide left, doesn’t get enough curl on it coming back. Courtois waves it past. 74 min: Neymar is immediately in the thick of it, one-twoing with Mbappe down the middle before being clipped by Alaba, just outside the D. Danger here! 73 min: PSG respond by replacing Di Maria with Neymar. The Parc erupts. 72 min: Real make a double change. Vazquez and Rodrygo come on for Carvajal and Asensio. 71 min: PSG pass and probe, but can’t find any way through the Real back line. 69 min: Not a great deal happens at the free kick. Messi eventually handles and the pressure is off Real. In the dugouts, Neymar starts stripping for action. 68 min: Alaba brings down Paredes from behind. He’s fortunate not to go into the book. A free kick 30 yards out, just to the left of centre. Everyone gets busy in the box. 66 min: Militao accidentally whacks a sliding Verratti on the bottom of his boot. A sore one for the PSG man, who requires a minute or two to get back up. But get back up he does. 64 min: The referee tells Ancelotti to pipe down, the Real boss having taken umbrage at his decision not to book Di Maria for a late clip on Vinicius Junior. 63 min: Danilo is booked for a cynical tug on Vinicius Junior’s shirt. The denizens of the Parc des Princes are stunned, reeling. 62 min: Messi sends a powerful sidefoot towards the bottom right. Courtois guesses correctly and turns it around the post! Not the greatest penalty, but not the worst either. Stunning save! 61 min: Mbappe takes matters into his own hands by turning on the burners and entering the box down the inside-left channel. He draws a clumsy challenge from Carvajal, and it’s a no-brainer of a decision. The referee points to the spot. 60 min: A long-distance Messi shot deflects left to Mendes, whose low cross is blocked and cleared. This is getting a little scrappy again. 58 min: That was a sore one for Danilo, and it takes a while to get him back up and running. But eventually he’s good to go. 57 min: Mendy will also miss the second leg for Real. He picks up a booking for a late clip on Danilo’s shin. 56 min: A bit of space and time for Mbappe out on the left. He sends a fierce curler towards the top right. Easy enough for Courtois. “What’s with Mbappe?” wonders Peter Oh. “He’s playing like he’s auditioning for a job or something.” 54 min: Kroos has a batter from the best part of 30 yards. The ball’s always rising over the bar. Donnarumma waves at the ball as it passes. 53 min: A busy minute for Courtois. He slides out to deny Mbappe with a fine sliding smother. The ball’s returned by Mendes. Courtois claims despite having been on walkabout. He then throws out dangerously, the ball intercepted and eventually being teed up for Mbappe, whose shot from the edge of the box is blocked. Real living a charmed life there. 52 min: Militao is booked for a clip on Mbappe. 51 min: Di Maria batters a speculative shot over the crossbar from an ambitious distance out on the left. 50 min: Messi, Verratti and Hakimi paint a few triangles across the face of the Real box. Suddenly the ball breaks to Mbappe, just inside the area in a central position. He lashes a shot towards the bottom left. Courtois sticks out a strong arm to save spectacularly. Messi swivels and fires the rebound miles over the bar. As close as PSG have come! 48 min: A bit of space down the left for Mendes ... but his cross is way too long. “The removal of away goal advantage has given a big advantage to the second game’s home team,” suggests Greg G. “First legs will now be more defensive for the away teams as they just need to get home and win there or at worst go to penalties.” 47 min: A reasonably scrappy start to the second half. Quality has been at a premium all evening, with only one shot on target so far. PSG get the ball rolling for the second half. Neither team has made a change during the half-time break. The rain is heavier, though, so that’s different. Half-time advertisement. Sign up now, for our free and funny daily email. Kroos whips to the near post. Casemiro flashes a header wide left. That’s the closest Real have got, and the last act of a first half that PSG dominated. Real edged their way back into the game during the final few minutes, though, and will gain succour from that. Was Yash Gupta (34 min) onto something? 45 min: Messi jigs across the face of the Real box, right to left, and thinks he’s worked space for a shot. He takes one, but the door’s quickly blocked by Casemiro. Real go up the other end, Vinicius winning their first corner of the evening down the left. 43 min: Mbappe races after a long pass down the left. He drops a shoulder to cut into the box, but immediately runs into trouble. The fans aren’t too happy with that, either, desperate to see the opening goal they had assumed was coming. 42 min: Real set up camp in the PSG half for the first time tonight. A lot of probing, this way and that. Carvajal is nearly released down the right by Modric’s cute pass. The combination doesn’t quite come off. But this is much better from Real, and the home fans are getting a little bit testy. 40 min: It’s one yellow each, as Verratti slides across Casemiro. That’s a very soft booking, with Veratti coming in from the side and making very little contact before Casemiro’s momentum took him over. 38 min: Casemiro sticks his knee into the back of Paredes, who isn’t happy and gets up in his opponent’s grille. Casemiro fends him off with a hand around the throat. The Real man is booked, and will miss the second leg at the Bernabeu. 36 min: Benzema’s hustle in the centre circle sets up a Real break. He slips a ball down the middle and is this close to releasing Asensio. Mendes spots the danger and comes across to intercept, just in time. But for a couple of seconds there, Real had some space to work in for the first time this evening. 34 min: Real are slowly working their way back into the game, spending a little more time in the PSG half. They’re not doing a great deal when they get there, but small acorns and all that. Yash Gupta thinks this could all be part of a classic Madrid grift: “With Ancelotti being the manager, all the very best to PSG to try and nick a goal. But then if they don’t do that, which is likely, all the very best to PSG for lifting everyone’s spirit by going into meltdown mode.” 32 min: Messi does what Messi does, dribbling past a couple of folk down the inside-right channel and bursting into the box. He drags his shot across Courtois and harmlessly wide left. A small flash of the old Messi genius there, just for a second or two. 30 min: Kroos hits an uncharacteristically witless free kick straight at first man Verratti. PSG clear their lines. 29 min: A rare sortie into PSG territory for Real. Vinicius Junior works his way down the left, and draws a foul from a clumsy Di Maria. A chance for Real to load the box. Kroos to whip one in. 28 min: Tell you what, though, poor Carvajal is being asked to earn every penny of his wages tonight. PSG are hammering at Real down this left flank. 26 min: Hakimi barges Mendy off the ball with absurd ease, then swings a cross in for Mbappe, who briefly considers lashing at a ball that sits up, Matthew Le Tissier style. But instead he slips wide left for Mendes, who diddles his way past Carvajal on the byline but can’t get a cross away. The ball breaks out for a goal kick. Real breathe another sigh of relief. 25 min: Can’t remember when Real last touched the ball in the PSG half. It’s been a while. 23 min: Mendes hits a shot-cum-cross from the left that Courtois does well to claim by the base of his near post. 22 min: Mbappe bursts into a bit of space down the left, then goes over under contact from Militao. He wants a free kick, just outside the Real box, but he’s not getting one. The referee is doing his best to let the game flow, but that took laissez-faire officiating to extremes. 20 min: Di Maria bustles down the right and wins PSG’s fourth corner of the evening. Not for the first time, the hosts over-elaborate and waste the corner. But Real surely can’t keep on like this. They’re creaking at the back, though they’ve not broken yet. 18 min: Mbappe has Carvajal’s number, though, and gets in ahead of him down the inside-left channel. He shoots towards the bottom left. Courtois turns out for another corner. Danilo wins a header that flashes off the unaware Militao’s chest and into the arms of Courtois. Real are hanging on a little bit here. 17 min: Mendes and Mbappe tear up the left wing in tandem. Exchanging a couple of passes at speed, they nearly open up the backtracking Real defence, but Carvajal, who had been left sliding around on the turf earlier in the move, gets back to block, just as it looked as though Mbappe would stride clear into the box. 15 min: Mendy’s poor backpass nearly lets Di Maria in. Courtois does very well to whip the ball towards the safety of the stand under intense pressure. The hosts are well on top at the minute. 14 min: Hakimi has suddenly come to life down the Paris right. A couple of swift dribbles that nearly open up the Real defence. The visitors are struggling to get out of their final third right now. 13 min: Carvajal slips while attempting to clear, allowing Mbappe to romp off down the left again. The Real right back does well to recover and limit the damage to a corner, from which nothing occurs. 11 min: A reminder that away goals are no longer special in the Champions League. It’ll be interesting to see how the abolition of the old rule changes everyone’s approach. 9 min: PSG play the corner back down the left flank for Mendes, who sends a long diagonal ball out of play, to the right of the goal. Nobody in PSG blue had made a run to the far post. 8 min: Messi is seeing quite a bit of the ball in these early exchanges, dropping deep and constantly looking up to see if Mbappe is in space on the left. There he is! He wins another corner. 6 min: Di Maria wins a corner down the right. PSG waste it. But this is a good start for the home side. 5 min: PSG take their turn to ping it around patiently. Suddenly they step on the pedal. Mbappe tears down the left, checks, then goes again to leave Carvajal in the dust. He reaches the byline and pulls back for Di Maria, who shins over from ten yards. A great chance and a wild finish, that. 3 min: Real pass it around the back awhile. It’s a period of sterile possession that encourages plenty of pantomime whistling from the home crowd. 1 min: The first roar of the evening as Mbappe turns gracefully into space and immediately sprays a pass wide right to Di Maria. The move fizzles out but what an early statement of intent by Mbappe. Real Madrid get the ball rolling. “A ma$$ive €hampion$ £eague ¢la$h, thi$,” writes Peter Oh, though I’m not 100 percent sure what he’s trying to say. The teams are out! PSG are in their dark-blue shirts with red trim, while Real Madrid sport first-choice meringue white. There was a lot of friendly chat between the two teams as the players waited in the tunnel. I do hope for the sake of his blood pressure that Roy Keane wasn’t watching that. Anyway, there’s a carnival European atmosphere in the Parc des Princes, despite the rain. We’ll be off in a minute. Another preview? Why not. A tale of two managers. Sid Lowe on the difference in tone between Carlo Ancelotti and Mauricio Pochettino. A reminder of how these two teams got here. PSG finished behind Manchester City in Group A ... ... while Real Madrid won Group D easily enough. Both teams have returning heroes to welcome back. Neymar could feature for PSG for the first time since November. He’s back from injury, taking up a place on the bench. Real Madrid have been goal shy of late, so they’ll be pleased to name Karim Benzema in their starting line-up again. Gareth Bale drops to the bench. Paris Saint-Germain: Donnarumma, Hakimi, Marquinhos, Kimpembe, Nuno Mendes, Danilo Pereira, Paredes, Verratti, Di Maria, Messi, Mbappe. Subs: Simons, Navas, Icardi, Neymar, Dagba, Wijnaldum, Kurzawa, Ander Herrera, Diallo, Draxler, Kehrer, Gueye. Real Madrid: Courtois, Carvajal, Eder Militao, Alaba, Mendy, Modric, Casemiro, Kroos, Asensio, Benzema, Vinicius Junior. Subs: Nacho, Hazard, Marcelo, Lunin, Valverde, Jovic, Lucas, Bale, Ceballos, Rodrygo, Isco, Camavinga. Referee: Daniele Orsato (Italy). Paris Saint-Germain and Real Madrid have met in knockout football on three previous occasions. They won the first couple: a spectacular comeback in the quarter-finals of the Uefa Cup in 1993 from 3-1 down to win 5-4 on aggregate, and a more serene aggregate victory of 2-1 at the same stage of the Cup Winners’ Cup 12 months later. But they took a proper thumping on the last one, a 5-2 aggregate victory for Real in the Champions League round of 16 in 2018. However, throw in a 3-0 home win in Paris the groups in 2019, plus a late two-goal comeback to force a 2-2 draw in the corresponding fixture at the Bernabeu, and on balance this is a rivalry that has historically favoured the French. Advantage Paris? Well, perhaps, but though they’re top of Ligue 1, the mood music isn’t perfect. They’ve recently been knocked out of the French Cup, Lionel Messi is in underwhelming form, and the futures of Kylian Mbappé and Mauricio Pochettino are up in the air. Whether Real can take advantage is another issue: they’re top of the league back home, too, but have only scored one goal in their last three games, and are desperate for the return of Karim Benzema, who may or may not return from injury tonight. All set up nicely, then. The glamour tie of the round kicks off at 9pm at the Parc des Princes, 8pm GMT. It’s on!After 588 minutes of football and 47 days, the great drought is over. Cristiano Ronaldo, the scorer of more goals than anyone in the history of football, scored a goal, his first of 2022 and his first as a 37‑year‑old. In the process a serial Champions League winner put Manchester United in the position to return to the European elite. Ronaldo had not gone seven games without a goal since 2008-09 and Brighton have never won at Old Trafford. The first half suggested history could be made but Albion ended up ruing a disastrous three-minute spell when Ronaldo struck and Lewis Dunk was sent off. And on a night when the other Manchester team vanquished Portuguese opponents, two Sporting alumni sent United up to fourth after Bruno Fernandes joined his compatriot on the scoresheet. Ralf Rangnick and Ronaldo can feel like United’s odd couple but each played his part in the first of twin turning points. The “godfather of gegenpressing” could savour the sight of his team belatedly benefiting from hassling and harrying high up the pitch in his favourite fashion. Closing down changed the game. Scott McTominay picked the pocket of Yves Bissouma, dispossessing him and finding Ronaldo. His barren spell was ended with a trademark strike, Ronaldo requiring little backlift to whip in a shot from 20 yards. “We get punished by a world-class finish from a world-class player,” the Brighton manager, Graham Potter, lamented. “An amazing goal,” Rangnick said. It was just Ronaldo’s second in open play under him and, as the other was a tap-in, perhaps a first glimpse of Ronaldo at his best under the new regime. Arguably, however, that came earlier when Adam Webster’s stray touch released Ronaldo, who had been lurking offside, and he sent Jadon Sancho through on goal with a cute backheel, though Robert Sánchez saved his shot. “In the last weeks, definitely the best performance from him,” Rangnick said. “Energetically he was always trying to help teammates.” Belying his age, Ronaldo was relentless and rampant. He ought to have doubled the lead with a header, as should Fernandes with a shot, each when supplied by the other. Sánchez saved on both occasions. When Fernandes belatedly did add the second, only his fourth goal in 28 league games, it came courtesy of positive thinking from the substitute Paul Pogba. Rather than waste stoppage-time seconds, he took a quick free-kick in his own half to send Fernandes streaking clear. Pogba had an assist. So, in a way, did Rangnick. “In the second half we were more aggressive, we were primed to intercept and attack them in higher positions,” he said. He had instructed his wingers to press Brighton’s centre-backs. Anthony Elanga duly did and robbed Dunk. The Brighton captain hauled the 19-year-old down and, while Peter Bankes settled for a yellow card, United protested vociferously – earning Fernandes a booking of his own – before the VAR, Jarred Gillet, sent Bankes to the monitor. A pitchside review later, the card was upgraded to red. It was a familiar feeling for Dunk – no player has more Premier League red cards since 2017 – but irritating for Brighton. “It was a yellow card live, Webster was there on the cover,” Potter said. “It is not clear and obvious. I don’t understand the intervention.” Proud but frustrated, he deemed this a missed opportunity. Potter’s 100th Premier League game threatened to be a landmark occasion. Brighton out-passed and out-thought United in a first half when they had 59% of possession and eight shots, and Potter’s decisions to switch to a midfield diamond and install the outstanding Jakub Moder as his No 10 looked catalytic choices. Rangnick had changed formation himself within 25 minutes, but to try to halt Brighton’s domination. David de Gea was twice required to deny the elusive Moder, first from a shot from an acute angle, then a towering header, while the Poland midfielder picked out Bissouma, who surged forward from the base of the diamond to blaze over. If the sports psychologist Sascha Lense’s work to address United’s damaging habit of losing first-half leads felt redundant when they limped in level at the interval, they responded. “First half was Mr Hyde, second half Dr Jekyll,” Rangnick said. The enduring concern is that a schizophrenic side cannot put together a 90-minute performance but at least the Theatre of Dreams is not becoming the Theatre of Draws. “After three draws, two of them at home, this was a very important win,” Rangnick said. This time United could enjoy the rarities of scoring a second goal in a game under him and holding on to an advantage. Not without nervy moments, however, as Moder curled a long-range shot against the bar and the former United striker Danny Welbeck headed over. “We should have killed the game off much earlier,” Rangnick said. For once it did not cost them.Elon Musk’s brain chip company Neuralink is defending itself against claims that its researchers abused monkeys in the testing of its products. Neuralink – which hopes to create a revolutionary interface that would allow humans to control devices with their brains – said in a statement on Monday that its research animals were “respected and honored by our team”. The company was responding to allegations that the animals were tortured and left to die in horrific experiments at its facilities. In a lengthy complaint filed with the US Department of Agriculture (USDA), Physicians Committee for Responsible Medicine (PCRM) said the research caused “extreme suffering” in its test subjects, who “had their brains mutilated in shoddy experiments and were left to suffer and die”. PCRM is a non-profit advocacy organization that promotes a plant-based diet and alternatives to animal testing. The complaint targets a partnership between Neuralink and the University of California, Davis that was carried out between 2017 and 2020, in which researchers implanted a device “approximately the size of a quarter” into the skull of macaque monkey test subjects. PCRM obtained hundreds of pages of health records, necropsy reports and other documents related to the $1.4m partnership through California’s open records laws. It said the documents reveal the monkeys suffered “extreme psychological distress” from the “crude surgeries”. In the complaint, PCRM said Neuralink used a substance known as “BioGlue” that destroyed parts of the monkeys’ brains. It described animals exhibiting substantial psychological effects from the experiments, including anxiety, vomiting, poor appetite, hair loss and self-mutilating behavior including removing their own fingers. Neuralink called the data cited in the complaint “misleading”, saying in a blogpost it “did and continues to meet federally mandated standards”. After the UC Davis partnership came to an end, Neuralink moved its work to an in-house facility. It responded directly to allegations that more than a dozen monkeys died after Neuralink procedures, stating that some of these were “terminal procedures” – where live test subjects are euthanized “humanely” following surgery. Musk has previously stated that Neuralink’s brain chip technology could have major implications for people with disabilities, tweeting it would “let a paralyzed person tweet faster than a person using their thumbs on a smartphone”, for example. Neuralink in 2021 published a video of a monkey appearing to control a computer with its mind. The release sparked controversy, with many noting that typically such videos are published in scientific journals and subject to peer review, allowing for more oversight and accountability. PCRM said in its complaint that Neuralink has violated Animal Welfare Act regulations and has requested both UC Davis and Neuralink be given the “maximum civil penalty available per violation”. The USDA did not immediately respond to request for comment.A patient in the UK who died last week from Lassa fever, an acute viral infection endemic in parts of Africa, was a newborn baby, according to reports. The child, who died at the Luton and Dunstable hospital last week, was one of three confirmed cases of the disease all within the same family, the BBC reported. The UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) said on Friday that an individual with the disease, which is similar to Ebola, had died in Bedfordshire and two other people had been infected. All three cases were linked to recent travel in west Africa. NHS East of England declared a “regional major incident” last week after news emerged of the infections, the first cases of the disease in the UK since 2009. Staff at Luton and Dunstable hospital and at Addenbrooke’s hospital in Cambridge have reportedly been identified as potential contacts. NHS England and the UK Health and Security Agency (UKHSA) have not commented on the death but confirmed contact tracing was under way. In an email to staff seen by the BBC, Cambridge University hospitals NHS Trust, which runs Addenbrooke’s, said: “Colleagues identified through our staff contact tracing exercise have been required to undertake a precautionary isolation period of 14 days, and not have patient contact for 21 days. “As expected, this is impacting on our staffing levels and has required the temporary closure of a substantial portion of our critical care capacity – with impact on our clinical services. “We want to assure you all that cases of Lassa fever are rare in the UK and it does not spread easily between people. The overall risk to healthcare staff and other patients is very low.” The UKHSA has assured the public that the risk of further infections in the UK remains “very low”. Prior to the three recent infections, eight cases had been identified in the UK since 1980. Luton and Dunstable hospital and Addenbrooke’s hospital were both contacted for comment.Escape from the City may seem like a benign lifestyle show, but no other program is more frustrating in its ability to create tension while failing to provide release. There’s rarely an episode where I haven’t felt compelled to throw something at the screen by the end. But yet – I keep coming back for more. There are 60 episodes of this ABC property program (some are available on iView), all shot and produced between 2017 and 2020 in a variety of regional towns across Australia. Each episode follows an urban family or individual wanting to make a sea or tree change to “escape from the city”. The episodes follow a strict formula (borrowed from the UK’s Escape to the Country), where one of the show’s five presenters introduces the guests to four houses (including one mystery house, designed to surprise). The suspense builds for an hour – until the end of the episode when the buyer then decides which house they want. It’s all very watchable (particularly when your own area is featured). The only problem is that barely any of the buyers actually buy the houses on offer, thus robbing the viewer of the sense of a satisfying ending. It’s like watching a whole season of The Bachelorette, where the star meets a bunch of interesting and attractive candidates, and of course you, as a viewer, have your favourites, and you are watching closely to see how the Bachelorette reacts to each of them – then suddenly the show ends with a flash of text that reads, “The Bachelorette has decided to return to Melbourne and be single for a while longer until she meets someone more suitable.” Come to think of it, that’s what happened in the sixth season of The Bachelor, where Nick Cummins AKA Honey Badger left without picking anyone, and there was a national uproar. That’s what it was like every week watching Escape from the City. And I don’t understand it. Each week, at least two of the four houses are usually great. The buyers have ample time to inspect the properties and get private tours with an attentive host. I think of my own house. It was only the second home I had inspected, in a town I had been in for 15 minutes of my entire life, and I had to be quick about putting an offer in because someone else was interested. (So they said.) I’ve spent more time deciding what shoes to buy. My childhood home was purchased in a similar fashion: my dad and I did a quick walkthrough on auction day with heaps of other people, he started bidding and looked extremely shocked when he succeeded. Or the countless buyers who didn’t even see the houses they were purchasing during the pandemic. They do a virtual tour and like the rest of us, hope for the best. And then you see these absolute luvvies on EFTC who have all the time in the world, four houses to choose from, and private tours, who still umm and ah and say they need more time. As we now know, time is money when it comes to Australia’s hot property market; the failure to jump on something immediately means that next week or next month, that house suddenly becomes unaffordable or unavailable. The hosts’ seeming inability to close the deal means that none of them – Jane Hall, Simon Marnie, Bryce Holdaway, Del Irani and Dean Ipaviz – would last a month in a commercial real estate agency. But it’s not their fault, and they come across as personable, warm and hardworking, and they genuinely seem to care about the buyers. Sign up for the fun stuff with our rundown of must-reads, pop culture and tips for the weekend, every Saturday morning My frustration with the guests is even more acute now, rewatching episodes on iView, knowing that property prices in the regions have gone so crazy since it first aired. The couple who moved back to Brunswick and were going to drag out their search missed out on a stunning house in Terrigal with its own rainforest. The freshly renovated three-bedroom house was priced at $780,000 and only minutes from Terrigal beach. That was less than four years ago – it would be worth $1m-plus now. Ditto a couple who passed on a gorgeous, $1.6m place in central Berry, which had an incredible garden, a pool, and four bedrooms – that would now be worth at least $3m. Both of these couples ended their episodes not buying any of the properties, all of which would have doubled in value during the pandemic. Perhaps the frustration with Escape from the City is not so much the lack of a satisfying ending, but watching the 2018 property market with 2022 eyes. If only we could go back in time. Escape from the City is available to stream on iView nowNew Zealand has banned conversion practices, with near unanimity, after all but eight National party members voted in favour of the law. Conversion “therapy” refers to the practice, often by religious groups, of trying to “cure” people of their sexuality, gender expression or LGBTQI identity. The legislation, which was passed on Tuesday evening, makes it an offence to perform conversion practices on anyone aged under 18, or with impaired decision-making capacity, with a sentence of up to three years’ imprisonment. It also makes it an offence to perform conversion practices that cause “serious harm”, irrespective of age. That carries a sentence of up to five years’ imprisonment. The justice select committee received nearly 107,000 public submissions on the law – the highest number of public submissions received on a piece of legislation in New Zealand. Speaking to the house, the deputy prime minister, Grant Robertson, said the law would right some of the wrongs caused by conversion practices. “I grew up in a religious churchgoing household in the era of homosexual law reform,” he said. “When I finally gathered the courage to come out to my parents, I was met with love … but not everyone is or was so lucky. “To all those who have been affected by conversion practices or attempts at them, we want to say, this legislation is for you. We cannot bring you back, we cannot undo all of the hurt, but we can make sure that for the generations to come, we provide the support and love you did not get and protect you from the harm of those who seek to try to stop you from being who you are.” Posting to Facebook, the minister Kiri Allan shared her own experience of conversion practices as a 16-year-old. “I went through conversion therapy (it wasn’t called that, but that’s what it was) through my church. I desperately tried to ‘pray the gay’ away – to be accepted by my family, community and church. “My ‘illness’ &amp; ‘weakness’ to temptation was etched as sin into my skin. It took a long time to shake that shame and trauma. Tonight our Parliament will ensure this practice is banned in our country for good. For our next generation of babies, I am so incredibly relieved. Thank you to everyone that championed this change.” The founder of the Conversion Therapy Action Group, Shaneel Lal, said: “The ban on conversion therapy is a win for humanity, not just the queer community. Queer rights are human rights. Queer people do not need to be tolerated or accepted, we need to be liberated.” The UN independent expert on protection against violence and discrimination based on sexual orientation and gender identity found conversion practices caused “significant loss of self-esteem, anxiety, depressive syndrome, social isolation, intimacy difficulty, self-hatred, shame and guilt, sexual dysfunction, suicidal ideation and suicide attempts and symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder”. New Zealand has the highest youth suicide rate in the OECD, and that rate is higher among LGBTQI+ youth. Research from 2019 found 79% of trans and non-binary New Zealanders had seriously contemplated suicide and two-fifths had self-harmed in the past 12 months.