Primary school-aged children produce about four times fewer aerosol particles when breathing, speaking or singing compared with adults, which could help explain why they seem to be at lower risk of spreading Covid. Various studies have suggested that young children are about half as susceptible to catching Covid as adults, and, despite carrying a similar amount of virus in their noses and throats, appear to pass it to fewer people if they do become infected. One possibility is that the size and shape of their lungs and respiratory tracts means they emit fewer tiny airborne droplets called aerosols as they breathe and speak. These particles can linger in the air, particularly in enclosed space such as classrooms, so fewer aerosols could mean other people are less likely to be infected if they also occupy those spaces. To investigate, Dr Mario Fleischer at Charité University Medicine Berlin, and colleagues recruited 16 healthy children aged eight to 10 and used a laser particle counter to measure how many aerosol-sized particles they emitted when breathing at rest, and during speaking, singing and shouting. The results, published in the Journal of the Royal Society Interface, suggested that shouting produced the most particles, followed by singing, speaking and then breathing. However, particle emission rates and volumes for singing, speaking and breathing were around four times lower for children, compared with measurements taken from 15 adults. “More precisely, children emitted [particle rates and emissions] during speaking of the same order of magnitude as adults breathing, and while singing, they emitted similar [particle rates and volumes] to the adults while speaking,” Fleischer said. The amount of aerosols produced during shouting was more similar between adults and children, however. The authors also cautioned that there was considerable variation between individuals, and their results didn’t suggest attending schools or after-school clubs was without risk. “Especially in constellations with high vocal loudness, which are common in the everyday life of children and adolescents, the aerosol emission could be similar for different age groups, as the measurements for the shouting condition show,” said Fleischer. “On the other hand, singing and talking at volumes typical for children might be less restricted if the time frame is limited, like in common school and extracurricular settings.” He added that other factors, such as the number of children and the design of indoor ventilation, also mattered, and that further research was needed to inform any recommendations made to schools.Fraud and error are likely to have cost the UK government as much as £16bn across the Covid-19 emergency loan schemes, according to parliament’s spending watchdog, which described the losses as “unacceptable”. A report from the public accounts committee published on Wednesday said the Treasury should by the end of the year come up with estimates of fraud and error losses across the individual schemes and how much it intends to recover. The government guaranteed or gave out loans worth £129bn to people and companies during the coronavirus pandemic to support them financially through lockdown restrictions. However, ministers were warned from the start that the speed of the schemes would open them up to fraud. Since then government agencies have found large-scale frauds across several parts of the system, ranging from the coronavirus job retention scheme (CJRS) for furloughed workers, the bounce back loan scheme (BBLS) for small companies, and the coronavirus business interruption loan scheme (CBILS) for mid-sized businesses. Reports from crime and bankruptcy agencies have shown some loans were used to fund gambling, luxuries and home improvements. Theodore Agnew dramatically quit his role as a Treasury minister in a speech in the House of Lords last month after criticising the lack of action to recover stolen money. Data from government departments’ annual reports suggested fraud and error losses of between £12.4bn and £20.1bn, with a central estimate of £15.7bn, the report said. The furlough scheme is estimated to have suffered the largest fraud and error losses of £5.3bn, followed by the BBLS where £4.9bn is thought to have been lost. The government has funded a “taxpayer protection taskforce” to chase fraud in the schemes including furlough run by HM Revenue and Customs, but anti-corruption experts are concerned that funding is inadequate to fight fraud in bounce back loans. The government will also have to write off £21bn in loans to people or businesses who will be unable to pay them back. Dame Meg Hillier, the Labour MP who chairs the public accounts committee, said the loans fraud was part of a pattern of repeated failings by the government. “Lack of preparedness and planning, combined with weaknesses in existing systems across government, have led to an unacceptable level of mistakes, waste, loss and openings for fraudsters which will all end up robbing current and future taxpayers of billions of pounds,” she said. Hillier added that the Treasury should continue to account specifically for Covid-19-related spending measures throughout their lives, rather than allowing the spending to be absorbed into individual budgets. All of the UK’s Covid-19 responses are expected to cost £370bn over as long as 20 years in the case of the cultural recovery fund, according to National Audit Office data. Some £260bn had been spent by September 2021. “Government must be held accountable in this way to all the future taxpayers who will be paying for this response,” Hillier said. “Crucially this must ensure lessons are learned for when the next big crisis hits – be it climate, health or financial.” A Treasury spokesperson said: “We reject the claims made in this report. No fraudulent payments have been written off and the taxpayer protection taskforce is expected to recover up to £1bn from fraudulent or incorrect payments. “Thanks to the speed and scale of our intervention, the economy is back to pre-pandemic levels and growing at the fastest rate in the G7. The cost of inaction could have had a catastrophic impact on jobs and livelihoods.”Some of the world’s greatest directors launched their careers with an idea, a few thousand pounds and some friends with spare time on their hands. Those same friends would often go on to make up the bulk of the audience. But Netflix is giving Britain’s next big thing a chance to show their debut feature to the single biggest viewership the world has ever amassed – and is giving them a seven-figure sum to make it. An unknown director, producer or writer will be given £1.5m and a global launch on the streaming service, in an effort to discover a future generation of “bold, distinctive” UK storytellers. The scheme, to be announced on Wednesday, will allow the directors to make anything from crime thrillers and sci-fi to romance and comedy, driven by the principle that “daring” film-making can “drive commercial as well as critical success and can emerge from all backgrounds”. At least one project will be picked from six shortlisted film-makers, who will each have received £30,000 to develop their projects over a year, with intensive training from industry mentors. Netflix will accept applications from across the creative spectrum – theatre, TV, video gaming, online content, commercials, graphic novels, music promos and short films. The programme, titled Breakout, will be open to film-makers who have not yet made a feature but whose work has already attracted industry or public attention. One of the biggest challenges for any film-maker, particularly a first-time one, is raising money for their film. Hannah Perks, Netflix’s manager of UK films, said the £1.5m budget would allow them to focus on the creative side. “They’re not going to have to think about putting that financing together – and their film will be shown on Netflix globally. It’s every film-maker’s dream to have a global release.” Breakout will proactively encourage submissions from underrepresented groups to reflect the full range of voices in modern Britain. Perks singled out for praise productions such as His House, an acclaimed horror film about the plight of Sudanese refugees in a spooky council house, a debut feature by the British writer-director Remi Weekes, who had previously made shorts and commercials. She said: “Although it’s about new talent, it’s about people who are film creatives, but who might also have worked in advertising, music videos or photography, and who haven’t had a chance to make a feature film but who have ideas. It’s about giving them a really healthy budget to make something that can be on Netflix and hopefully kickstart their career as film-makers – especially British film-makers, making commercial films our audiences love. “We haven’t got as many British films as we’d like on the service. That’s a key reason why we’re doing this. We want to get more British film-makers, up-and-coming film-makers.” The programme is a collaboration with Creative UK, which supports the creative industries. Paul Ashton, its head of film and television, said: “Talent is everywhere but opportunity is not, and from our very first conversation it was clear that Netflix shared our desire to offer career-changing opportunities to film talent in the UK.” Netflix, which is streaming in more than 30 languages and 190 countries, is the UK’s the most popular streaming service, with an estimated 14 million subscribers at the end of last year. Last September it announced it would provide training opportunities on its UK-based productions, including Sex Education, The Witcher and Top Boy.Numerologists will be fascinated that Joe Biden began his Ukraine speech on Tuesday at 2.22pm on 22.2.22. The US president, however, was more concerned with his own calculation of the economic and political costs of overreacting – or underreacting – to Russia’s provocations. Biden thought he would be remembered as the pandemic president, but finds himself commanding the arsenal of democracy in what could become the biggest military assault in Europe since the second world war. The crisis escalated on Monday after Vladimir Putin recognised two breakaway territories in eastern Ukraine as independent entities, an apparent pretext for invasion. “Who in the Lord’s name does Putin think gives him the right to declare new so-called countries on territory that belonged to his neighbours?” Biden demanded in the east room of the White House. “This is a flagrant violation of international law, and it demands a firm response from the international community.” But the response he delivered did not go as far as some in Washington would have liked, receiving a cautious welcome from Democrats and failing to satisfy Republicans who accuse Biden of appeasement. It was a shot across Putin’s bows but also the work of an administration keeping some of its powder dry. Biden announced sanctions that target VEB (Russia’s state development bank) and the Russian military bank, as well as the country’s sovereign debt and five Russian elites and their families. On the last point, the elites “share the corrupt gains of the Kremlin policies and should share in the pain as well”, Biden said. These oligarchs, who live the high life in London and elsewhere, represent a potential Achilles’ heel for Putin. Sheldon Whitehouse, a Democratic senator, told the Guardian last week: “I think he depends on having good relations with the big thieving oligarchs because if they all conspired to defeat him, he’d have to do a lot of oligarch killing and they’d see that coming. His whole world gets pretty well rocked hard. That’s his point of weakness: pressure on the oligarchs.” For now, Biden threatened tougher steps if Russia “continues its aggression” and warned: “We’ll continue to escalate sanctions if Russia escalates.” The logic here is that sanctions lose their potency as a deterrent if they are imposed too quickly: if somebody has been punished for something they haven’t yet done, they might as well do it anyway. But with the window for diplomacy rapidly closing, it may soon be too late for deterrence to mean anything. Washington’s response did not have as much bite as the European Union’s . It did not grab attention like Germany’s steps to halt the process of certifying the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline from Russia – a lucrative deal long sought by Moscow. The US has not severed Russia from the Swift banking system, used to move money around the globe, nor has it imposed export controls, which would have cut Russian firms off from key high-tech equipment and software. Bob Menendez, a Democrat who is chairman of the Senate foreign relations committee, told the MSNBC network that it is “a good first tranche of sanctions but cannot be the end of it”. Republicans, who have been less opportunistic than usual in dinging Biden over Ukraine – perhaps sensing that the issue does not animate their base – may now be running out of patience with his determination to avoid too much too soon. Kevin McCarthy and other Republican leaders in the House of Representatives issued a joint statement earlier on Tuesday that said: “Sadly, President Biden consistently chose appeasement and his tough talk on Russia was never followed by strong action. Lethal aid was slow-walked, anti-air and anti-ship capabilities were never directly provided, pre-invasion sanctions proportionate to the aggression Putin had already committed were never imposed, and sanctions on Nord Stream 2 were waived.” And Mitch McConnell, the Republican minority leader in the Senate, revived a Republican talking point about the chaotic withdrawal from Afghanistan. He was quoted by Punchbowl News as saying: “I don’t believe Vladimir Putin would have a couple of hundred thousand troops on the border of Ukraine had we not precipitously withdrawn from Afghanistan last August, but that’s where we are. Looking for signs of weakness.” The Afghanistan debacle precipitated a decline in Biden’s approval rating from which he has not yet recovered. But he does appear to have learned lessons from that failure with a policy of radical transparency about intelligence, close coordination with allies and warnings to Americans that there will be no rescue operation in Ukraine. All this has enabled him to play the role of global statesman and seasoned foreign policy hand. It has offered an unexpected boost to Biden’s promise to reunify Nato after the doubts and disarray of the Donald Trump years. But he may yet take further hits domestically if the crises forced gas prices even higher. “Defending freedom will have costs for us as well, here at home,” Biden said. “We need to be honest about that.” Honesty, however, may not be enough to win over a distracted and divided electorate.Standing before the studio audience the slim older man holds a microphone in front of his blue polo shirt, buttoned to the neck. Wang Qingming seems a little nervous as he faces his prospective date, a formidable looking woman with long black hair piled in a loose bun, her name tag obscured. “What bad habits do you have?” he asks. “I’m hungry,” she replies to laughter. “But no mahjong, no smoking, no drinking.” Asked about her health the woman says her physical condition is good, “but I can’t get pregnant now”, again prompting laughs. He boasts he hasn’t taken medication in a year, she proudly retorts that for her it’s been two. For her turn, she grills him about chores and finances, securing the offer of an allowance, and eventually the two hold hands as they walk to the back of the stage. The scene is one of countless clips taken from China’s prolific TV dating shows, shared hundreds of thousands of times across social media and written about across the local press. But rather than the usual young and idealistic contestants looking for some sort of romance, those going viral are all in their 50s, 60s and 70s and know exactly what they’re after. The “aunts and uncles” are direct, frank, and authentic, challenging romantic idealism as well as social taboos about older people and sex. They prioritise practical matters like housing, wages, social security, pensions, bride dowries and health. There are more than 260 million people aged over 65 in China – about 18% of the population – and about 25% of them are single, widowed or divorced. The older age group is growing, as China struggles to fend off the demographic crisis of an ageing population brought about by decades of government control on family building. Dr Pan Wang, Senior Lecturer in Chinese/Asian studies at the University of New South Wales, said negative attitudes toward elderly people were omnipresent, often seeing them as inactive, limited in mobility, dependent and frail, underrepresented or excluded from media entirely. “The shows give elder people agency and provide them a voice to portray their own narratives and an opportunity to look for love and remarriage,” Wang said. Challenging prejudice, debunking stereotypes A recurring theme in the clips are headstrong women. In one episode of The Choice of Love a group of women ruthlessly cut into the ego of a man in his 70s looking only for a young and beautiful girlfriend. Some women push back on suggestions they should take on a traditional caretaker role again, while others prioritise financial security, which Wang said reflected concern over the rising costs of living and the struggling social welfare system. “Aunts basically have no house, no labour insurance and no pension,” said one commenter on Weibo. “Therefore, the needs are similar: money, housing and betrothal gifts. But for men, it’s all about looking at the appearance of the woman first, and then negotiating the conditions … to cook at home, do the laundry, and do housework.” The shows are also normalising the discussion of intimacy among older generations for a young audience which, according to a 2018 survey, overwhelmingly and mistakenly believes their own parents don’t have sex. Shared clips show older women joking about their sexual abilities or the bragging of men, or elderly men frankly discussing the importance of finding a sexual partner. “To an extent, these shows debunk the stereotypes and prejudice around the older population, they show that they are active, socially engaging and romantic despite many were born and grew up in the Maoist era, when romantic love was rare and discouraged and dating hardly existed,” said Wang. “It’s also evident from the shows that some women in their 60s or above are actively engaged in this gender economy just as the young girls do – i.e. wearing heavy makeup, modern clothing and performing their sexual attractiveness on stage, they are no longer seen as just house wives who are supposed to stay in the domestic realm, doing household chores or taking care of their husbands.” The decisiveness among the older contestants has won young fans and got them thinking about their own relationship goals. “I think there is nothing wrong with it. Even young people may choose a more open way of getting along … the essence of human-to-human interaction is value exchange” said one. “Talk openly and honestly, get along with each other in a down-to-earth way, and you can go as far as you can. May all lovers in the world be together.”The Coalition has re-announced almost $20m for fracking company Empire Energy, a firm with links to the Liberal party, just two months after a court ruled a previous issue of the grants was invalid. The resources minister, Keith Pitt, announced on Wednesday that three grants worth $19.4m would be given to Empire Energy to incentivise exploratory drilling in the Northern Territory’s Beetaloo Basin, a region the Morrison government wants to open up as part of its gas-led recovery. The decision has prompted anger among environmentalists and Indigenous groups, who have said fracking the Beetaloo Basin would drive up Australia’s emissions by 13%. “This is a carbon bomb of extraordinary proportions that will scupper any chance of meeting the Paris targets,” Environment Centre NT co-director Dr Kirsty Howey told the Guardian. “It’s completely unreasonable for the minister to be approving these grants.” Pitt’s announcement follows a federal court ruling in December that previous grants given to Empire worth $21m – almost half the available funding from the $50m Beetaloo Cooperative Drilling Program – were invalid. The court slammed the government for signing the final agreements while a legal challenge brought by the Environment Centre NT was under way, ruling the actions rendered the grants invalid. But the court dismissed the Environment Centre NT’s main argument that the minister should have considered the fracking plan’s impact on global heating before announcing the grants, leaving it open for the government to reissue the grants. During the case, lawyers for the Environment Centre presented modelling evidence that fracking in the Beetaloo Basin could drive up Australia’s emissions by 13%, using up the rest of Australia’s carbon budget under the Paris Agreement. The court’s decision paved the way for the money to be re-announced on Wednesday. Pitt said the government was “committed to a gas-led recovery” and opening up the Beetaloo. “These grants will assist in that important process,” he said. “Australian gas is in high demand domestically and internationally and it’s important that we work to get new gas production online.” A Senate inquiry has previously probed Empire Energy’s links to the Liberal party. The inquiry has heard Empire has donated to the NT’s Country Liberal party and flew a Liberal party fundraising chair to inspect its operations. Empire is chaired by Paul Espie, a frequent Liberal donor and director of the Menzies Research Centre, the inquiry has heard. The company told the inquiry the links played “no role whatsoever” in its applications for the grants and that it followed “due and proper process at all times”. Johnny Wilson, who chairs the Nurrdalinji Native Title Aboriginal Corporation, lives in Lightning Ridge, not far from Empire’s proposed wells. He said in a statement that the $19.4m would be far better spent on “essential services our communities need, like housing, education, health and roads”. “The government is doing the wrong thing backing fracking on our country, it is poisoning our water, our animals and upsetting the songlines that run across our land,” he said. Pitt said activists opposed to fracking in the region “threaten future energy security both here in Australia and in countries around the world that rely on our LNG exports”. “The Beetaloo sub-basin has the potential to be a world-class gas resource that could create thousands of jobs and bolster domestic and international gas supply,” he said. “The taxes and royalties that are generated from the resources sector allow state and federal governments to provide the health, education and other essential services all Australians rely on.” Pitt was the headline speaker at an Energy Club NT event on Tuesday evening, which cost almost $1,000 per table to attend. A positive Covid diagnosis forced him to give the speech remotely. Activists, including those from the Protect Country Alliance, rallied outside the event. Protect Country Alliance spokesperson Graeme Sawyer said the fracking plan would only benefit a “minuscule” number of people, saying the majority of the gas would be exported. “Ninety-nine point nine per cent of Territorians won’t benefit from this industry - instead we will suffer as fracking pollutes our rivers and groundwater, and drives dangerous climate change that is already leading to never before seen heat records in the Top End,” he said.In an increasingly heated political debate in the lead-up to Australia’s election, claims of appeasing China and even labels of “Manchurian candidates” have flown thick and fast. The truth is both major parties have been recalibrating their China policy over the past decade in response to what they see as a more assertive nation under Xi Jinping. How closely have you been following the debate? Take our quiz to find out – you might be surprised at who said what along the way.How did we get here from there? The Who’s Tommy, like its central character, has taken possibly the most circuitous route in the history of musical theatre to arrive at St Kilda’s Palais Theatre, in an Australian premiere production by Victorian Opera. It started life in 1968 as a concept album, and arguably became the defining example of rock opera. Over the years, it would transmogrify into an increasingly baroque series of symphonic concerts and then a 1975 film directed by the king of excess, Ken Russell. It wasn’t until 1992 that the Who’s Pete Townshend adapted it into a Broadway musical, for better and for worse. Tommy is the story of a “deaf, dumb and blind kid” who, traumatised by an act of violence as a child, suffers from a kind of locked-in syndrome that is never adequately explained. He rises to fame as a pinball wizard and eventually becomes a cult leader, a position he finally rejects. It’s heavily influenced by the teachings of Indian spiritualist Meher Baba and, depending on your taste, is either the final word on countercultural self-actualisation or a pretentious pseudo-religious dirge. Sign up for the fun stuff with our rundown of must-reads, pop culture and tips for the weekend, every Saturday morning Townshend, in adapting the material into a musical, has clarified the dramatic action but also somewhat neutered its central theme; the satirical edges of the story have been blunted, the provocations that made it seem so radical at the time sanitised beyond recognition. Russell pushed the work into garishly surreal territory, and Townshend seems to have brought it back not so much to its original state, but to a kind of anodyne halfway house. It isn’t disastrous, but it makes for a far safer night in the theatre. Tommy retreats into semiconsciousness because he witnesses his second world war fighter pilot dad kill his mother’s new boyfriend. (In Russell’s film, it’s the boyfriend who kills the dad, a Freudian renting of more significance.) Emotional and sexual abuse follow, but in this stage version those darker aspects of the story are so toned down they barely register. The extremity of Tommy’s suffering is supposed to mirror the passion of Christ, and without it this messianic quality is lost. In this iteration, Tommy’s journey to selfhood is less a sacred and more a purely psychological one. Fortunately, there are compensations aplenty. It isn’t surprising that Victorian Opera’s commitment to the quality of the music is at the forefront; what is extraordinary is how expertly the sound design (Peter Grubb) merges with some truly superb singing to create a wondrous polyphony. Mat Verevis is magnificent as Tommy, his rock inflections effortless and his pure tenor beautifully soulful. Amy Lehpamer and Matt Hetherington are strong as mum and dad, although Lehpamer is criminally underused in the first act and neither of them get to display the depravity Ann-Margret and Oliver Reed relished in the film. Kanen Breen is suitably icky as Uncle Ernie, and Vincent Hooper makes for a repugnant Cousin Kevin – Tommy intriguingly turns these two tormentors into his management and security at the height of his pinball fame – and Paul Capsis uses that outrageous falsetto to lift the roof as the Acid Queen (a role that in the film was offered to Mick Jagger and eventually played by Tina Turner). The rest of the ensemble are terrific, harmonious and vivid throughout. Director Roger Hodgman, perennially under-appreciated in this country, does a superb job of coordinating the action, shaping the tonal shifts and pressing the emotional registers. If the early scenes have an episodic quality to them, a sense of props and sets being wheeled needlessly on and off, the flow improves as the show progresses, until the finale achieves an expansiveness that borders on the transcendent. Matt Scott’s lighting is somehow both subdued and maximalist, and Isaac Lummis’s costumes are beautifully judged. The Who’s Tommy is something of an oddity in the annals of musical theatre, partway between conventional narrative and rock oratorio. Musically, it is incredibly rich and varied – Jack Earle’s musical direction brilliantly illuminates the score’s breadth and melodic force – even if it makes little dramatic sense. The Who were a band desperate to define their era, its tilt towards youth idolisation and generational rebellion, and there is something uneasy about the way their material is cramped into the musical theatre form and then viewed from the distance of time. The Who’s Tommy feels disconnected to its source, and lacks the freewheeling perversity of the original. And yet, it still has a strange potency to it, an allegorical heft that echoes down the decades. Tommy might not be able to heal us, but in this admirable production we certainly see, hear and feel him. The Who’s Tommy is staged by Victorian Opera at Palais Theatre, Melbourne until 1 March.Australia’s market concentration made the Covid-related shortages worse and will hamper the economy’s recovery and future growth unless addressed, Rod Sims, outgoing chair of the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission, said. In a wide-ranging National Press Club speech on Wednesday, Sims described the market-based economy as “fragile”, blasted governments for focussing on how much infrastructure can be sold for, and described electricity and gas markets as a “mess”, in part because carbon emissions do not carry a price. “In my view, and the view of many others, the Australian economy suffers from high levels of market concentration to the detriment of consumers and productivity,” Sims said, according to a copy of his speech. “The most important tool to prevent this is our merger laws and they are not up to the task.” Australia was currently facing supply and logistic challenges because of Covid, he said: “I think these are made worse by our market concentration in so many areas and infrastructure bottlenecks. We need to address this through competition law, to tackle anti-competitive abuses of market power, and through general infrastructure reform.” Sims has run the ACCC for 11 years but will make way for Gina Cass-Gottlieb who formally takes over next month. He made it clear, though, that he was not retiring, and would continue to push for competition reform. On the current takeover bid for AGL Energy by Canada’s Brookfield and Australian billionaire Mike Cannon-Brookes, Sims said it was at a very early stage. But he noted market regulations didn’t allow a company to own both generation and transmission assets. Brookfield’s $18bn acquisition of Victoria’s transmission firm, AusNet, would be looked at closely, Sims said. “It’s a very complex issue and we haven’t started to look at it.” On the issue of rising petrol prices and tension over Russia’s aggression towards Ukraine, Sims said there was little the competition regulator could do as Opec and Russia operated as a cartel. Australia’s petrol excise at 55 cents a litre was the fourth lowest such taxation and “I certainly wouldn’t be recommending the government step in and do anything about that”, he said. Sims was also critical of gas producers misleading governments by telling them the development of three $20bn LNG export plants in Queensland at the same time – when there was only enough gas for two – wouldn’t affect domestic prices. “That didn’t make any sense at the time, and it’s proved very wrong,” he said. “So they did tell governments something that turned out not to be true. I can’t believe they did not know that.” More generally, Sims said people must recognise that a market-based economy is fragile as its organising principle relies on companies and business people pursuing their own self-interest”. “For this to work to the benefit of all Australians requires at a minimum strong competition between firms and strong enforcement of the [Competition and Consumer Act].” The ACCC now has 11 competition cases currently in court, and “some important competition cases which will unfold very soon,” he said. Among law changes needed, he said, many people would be surprised to know that many activities such as selling unsafe goods, not honouring consumer guarantees, and large companies abusing their position of strength by treating customers unfairly, were not generally unlawful. “There is a school of thought that commerce in a market economy is a no-holds-barred robust business, and that competition law should only rarely interfere in this,” Sims said, adding that anti-competitive activity was “by far” a larger problem than taking up enforcement cases that failed to find wrongdoing by businesses. In addition, Australia was “almost unique in not having a formal merger approval system”, with the ACCC having to prove in court that future negative consequences would occur from a corporate combination. Similarly, the country “almost uniquely” seemed to focus “on how much we can sell infrastructure assets for, rather than having our infrastructure benefit our wider economy,” Sims said. “Such behaviour can dramatically affect existing users and could be considered a continuing tax on the community.” Sims also indicated the Abbott government’s scrapping of a price on greenhouse gas emissions had contributed to poor market outcomes in energy. “Our electricity and gas markets are in a mess for a wide range of reasons,” Sims said. “Most of the world has accepted that there is a negative externality associated with carbon,” he said. “With Australia having decided not to deal with this issue via a market-based mechanism, we are left with a challenge of how we achieve affordability, sustainability and reliability, without seriously trading off one of these objectives to achieve another.” Among the ACCC’s achievements during his decade-plus chairmanship, Sims highlighted successes in extracting $200m annually from technology giants for their use of Australian content, and court wins against companies such as Trivago and Google. The commission also secured recent penalties of $50m against Telstra, $125m against Volkswagen and $153m against education provider AIPE. “I assure you all I am not retiring,” Sims said in concluding his speech. “I will have positions that will see me continue to advocate on many issues, both in Australia and internationally.” In September, Sims was appointed vice-chair for digital coordination and Asia-Pacific liaison at the International Competition Network.Australia’s membership of a global, US-based anti-corruption alliance is under threat after years of inaction and missed deadlines prompted a formal warning that the Morrison government was acting “contrary” to the body’s requirements. The Australian government signed up to the Open Government Partnership in 2015, a 78-country multilateral initiative designed to promote open government, fight corruption and empower citizen participation in policymaking. But Australia’s efforts since have frustrated the group. It has failed to act on prior promises – including to improve donations transparency and strengthen the nation’s anti-corruption framework – and has missed the deadline to file its latest two-year action plan for 2021-23, which was due in December. That prompted the OGP chief executive, Sanjay Pradhan, to write to the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet last week, warning that if it failed to meet the next deadline, its membership status would be reviewed. “This letter is to inform you that as of the deadline of 31 December 2021, the Support Unit has not received Australia’s 2021-23 Action Plan, and therefore has acted contrary to the OGP process,” Pradhan said. “Governments that act contrary to process for two consecutive cycles are placed under review by the OGP Steering Committee, which involves enhanced support to resolve the issues that led to being placed in that status. Guidance materials for the new standards will be available soon.” Freedom of information expert Peter Timmins, who led efforts for Australia to join the OGP in 2015, said the latest failure showed Australia was now under serious scrutiny from the OGP. “Regrettably it comes as no surprise to anyone familiar with the government’s record,” he told the Guardian. “Those not suffering fatigue from trying to get government to take meaningful steps to improve how our democracy can work better are ready, willing and able to put scepticism to one side. “And we await with interest to see what those running for office have to put on the table.” Prior commitments made through the OGP process have never come to fruition, including a 2016 pledge to ensure “Australia’s information access laws policies and practices are fit for the 21st century”. The Morrison government’s official website on the OGP lists several of Australia’s prior commitments as “delayed”, including commitments to “enhance the transparency of political donations and funding” and “strengthen the national anti-corruption framework”. Australia has submitted two separate action plans to the OGP, the first from 2016-18, and the second spanning 2018-20. The second plan largely repeated commitments made in the first plan. In September, the OGP published an independent assessment of Australia’s efforts in 2018-20. The report found progress had been slow on donations and corruption issues and that progress on the second action plan was now treated as “old news”. “Commitments on strengthening the national anticorruption framework and enhancing transparency of political donations made little or slow progress over this period,” the assessment said. The assessment suggested Australia has been working on a third action plan. But the OGP has received no such document from the responsible minister, Ben Morton. The report also noted that Covid had disrupted some of the government’s OGP work. A spokesperson for the department of prime minister and cabinet said Australia remained committed to the OGP and delivering on its national action plans. “Significant accomplishments have been made since Australia joined in 2015,” the spokesperson said. “However, the response to the Covid-19 pandemic has been the government’s priority over the last two years.”There are certain football phrases that instantly set off alarm bells. “As an industry” is one. “Get around him” is another. “AFL led delegation” is particularly problematic at this time of year. Whenever anyone vaguely connected with Australian Rules Football attends the Super Bowl, silly things are invariably said. Most of the time, they scam their way into the VIP area, photobomb some bewildered old line-backer, and get absolutely trolleyed. But those a little bit higher on footy’s totem pole often come back brimming with ideas. Why, they ask on their panel shows and their radio slots, can’t our players and our ‘product’ be a bit more American? Why can’t we jazz up our match-day experience? Why can’t footballers wear $15,000 suits to games? Before long, they want a local version of US College drafting system. They want a translucent canopy draped across the MCG. Eddie McGuire was part of a delegation at last week’s Super Bowl. Like anyone who has been to SoFi Stadium, he was blown away. It is the most expensive stadium ever built. It has a glass roof. It has a floating, 80 million-pixelated, elliptical video screen beaming stats, replays and advertisements. Next year, it will host the 39th Wrestlemania. “It looks like an alien edifice dreamed up for a Star Trek movie,” Sports Illustrated wrote. For Eddie, the possibilities were dancing in his eyes. “A sensory overload,” he called it. When he gets on a roll – when he is bubbling ideas and unveiling five-year plans, he can be a strangely compelling and convincing figure. By the time he has drawn breath, you can find yourself pumping your first and screaming at your startled partner: “Oath we need a roof on the MCG. Damn straight we need underground pathways linking Bay 13, Richmond station, and our own version of Silicon Valley in the Jolimont railyards.” This is not an Eddie-bashing column. For all his trespasses, he has an excellent sense of sporting history, and of Melbourne. The city, and the sport it obsesses over, pulses through him. In this country right now, we are not very good at addressing the future. For the last two years, most of us barely cast our minds more than 24 hours ahead. Eddie himself did not have the best pandemic. But nothing is impossible for him. His mind and mouth drift 20 years back and rocket 50 years forward, sometimes within the space of a single sentence. A lot of his frustration seems to stem from the fact that most people do not look at the world the same way. Red tape, budgets, prevailing public opinion – they are for clerks. We need people like him – thinking big, throwing flames, crashing through – but they need reining in. It is obvious that the MCG’s Great Southern Stand is due for an upgrade. When it was constructed in the early 1990s, Victoria was just emerging from a crippling recession. Jeff Kennett was about to blaze in and change everything. Eddie was breaking every story and propping up every bar in Melbourne. At the stand’s unveiling, Wasim Akram tore through the Englishmen in the World Cup Final. Ian Botham copped a howler of a decision, and embarked on one of the all-time great benders. We were genuinely proud of it. And we still are. “The MCG is a shrine, a citadel, a landmark, a totem,” the Age’s Greg Baum once wrote. “It is to this city what the Opera House is to Sydney, the Eiffel Tower to Paris and the Statue of Liberty to New York.” The world, this city, and the way we watch sport has completely changed since Baum wrote that. Forty years on, the MCG is in danger of being shown up by Perth’s Optus Stadium, and the Adelaide Oval. Eddie wants to tear down the Great Southern Stand and start again. Others are urging restraint. For many, it is an opportune time to reflect on what we actually want as spectators. Are we fans, or are we consumers? Do we simply want to watch sport, or are we seeking an experience? And do we want a fading citadel, or a shiny sports and entertainment precinct? “Why would you willingly sit in the rain in 2022?” SEN owner Craig Hutchison asked on his podcast this week? Hutchy knows his American Football. Like Eddie, he is a big picture man. Unlike Eddie, he is no footy romantic. He thinks Australian sports fans worry too much about what they don’t want and are blind to what is possible. Perhaps he is right. What I don’t want at the MCG could fill a column. I don’t want a sensory overload. I don’t want Guy Grossi dishing up Duck Surprise at quarter time. I don’t want fun facilitators perforating my eardrums. I don’t want T-shirts being fired into the crowd like mortar cannons. I don’t want the MCG, a ground I love, to be visible from outer space. Nick Hornby once wrote that English football was “prey to all sorts of people who weren’t, as it were, the people.” This is a good opportunity to actually listen to ordinary fans, not those with the loudest voices and the deepest pockets. If they stuffed it up, and if it ended up resembling a gargantuan version of – oh I don’t know – Docklands Stadium, it would be an act of vandalism. Baum himself recalls a conversation at the MCG on grand final day with former Brownlow Medallist, Neil Roberts. “Lucky bastards,” Roberts said, gazing at the vast, sunbathed crowd. “They could screw up everything and they would still have this.” We still have it. After two years, we are about to get it back at full capacity. And it should never be at the mercy of February thought bubbles and arms races.A North Carolina motorcyclist is suing Amazon for $100m after a collision with a delivery driver resulted in the amputation of his left leg. The man says Amazon’s pressure on its employees rendered the driver distracted and caused the crash. The accident happened in October when motorcyclist Justin Hartley was hit by a Hertz truck with an Amazon logo in Virginia Beach. According to the lawsuit, the driver, Christopher Gill, admitted after the crash that he had his eyes on directions on his GPS, provided by Amazon, the Virginian-Pilot reported. The accident left Hartley gravely injured: it fractured his left wrist and he had to have his left knee amputated. “The unrealistic expectations that are put on the drivers are fueling these negligence cases,” said Kevin Biniazan, the attorney representing Hartley. “The driver was so entranced in making his delivery that he did not see our client.” Biniazan said the accident was “preventable”, and the lawsuit places the blame on the Amazon itself, deepening allegations of harsh working conditions for Amazon workers that have dogged the company for years. Delivery drivers have shared horror stories, including working 14-hour shifts and having to urinate in plastic bottles instead of going to the bathroom due to the intense demands of the job. Recently, Amazon workers at an Alabama warehouse won the chance to vote for a union a second time, after Amazon was found guilty of violating labor law during the first election. According to Hartley’s lawsuit, drivers are made to use a “Flex”, app, which dictates which directions the drivers should take and when to take bathroom or lunch breaks. If the driver is running behind, they are given reminders that they are “behind the rabbit” and have to be “rescued”. If a driver is “behind the rabbit” or requires “rescue” often enough, it can negatively affect their pay. The nature of this app can create “foreseeable risk that Amazon drivers will be distracted while operating their vehicles, resulting in a hazardous condition,” the lawsuit claimed, according to the Virginian-Pilot. Amazon has denied all allegations, saying in a statement to the Associated Press that the lawsuit failed to “implicate a legal or contractual responsibility owed on behalf of Amazon”. The company also denied Gill had committed “any act of negligence”. Gill responded to the lawsuit by denying that he initially admitted to authorities that he had been looking at the GPS, according to the Virginian Pilot. The paper also reported his lawyers plan to argue that the accident was the result of Hartley being “contributorily negligent” and “assum[ing] the risk of his actions and fail[ing] to mitigate his damages”. Amazon did not immediately respond to a Guardian request for further. The Associated Press contributed reportingWorkers’ wages rose at the fastest annual pace in more than three years during the December quarter but the gain lagged the increase in consumer prices. In the final three months of 2021, the wage price index rose 0.7% in seasonally adjusted terms, the Australian Bureau of Statistics said. The quarterly increase was in line with economists’ estimates. On an annual basis, the index was up 2.3% on the previous December quarter, the fastest seasonally adjusted increase since the September quarter of 2018. Markets were expecting a 2.4% pace. On a quarterly basis, wages excluding bonuses increased at the quickest clip since March 2014, private economists said. The quarterly increase was enjoyed equally by private and public sector workers but on an annual basis those in private jobs picked up a 2.4% increase compared with 2.1% in public work, the ABS said. By contrast, consumer prices rose 3.5% in the December quarter from a year earlier, while the underlying rate was 2.6% when more volatile changes are removed. “Wage pressure continued to build over the December quarter for jobs with specific skills,” Michelle Marquardt, head of the ABS’s prices statistics unit, said. “The proportion of pay rises reported over the December quarter was higher than usually seen at this time of year,” she said. “The implementation of the last phases of award updates and state-based public sector enterprise agreements, on top of a rising number of wage and salary reviews, drove wages up 0.7% over the quarter.” Union leaders have warned they will step up industrial action to ensure that workers’ wages at least keep up with cost of living increases. NSW, for instance, has a 2.5% cap on annual wage increases that is being tested by health, rail and other unions. Academics have pointed out a slew of reasons why salary increases can be difficult to obtain even as the jobless rate drops to 13-year lows and is potentially heading to the lowest since the mid-70s if it falls below 4%. Among the different industries, retail trade recorded the largest quarterly rise of any sector, at 1.2% in the December quarter. It was the fastest pace of increase since the September quarter of 2015, the ANZ said. “Real wages are falling, and we expect this to continue for much of 2022, reducing household purchasing power,” ANZ’s senior economists,Catherine Birch and Adelaide Timbrell said. Still, the economists predict “wage growth to accelerate strongly through 2022 supported by sharply lower underemployment as well as unemployment, and as workers switch jobs and take advantage of greater bargaining power. The rise in inflation expectations is another signal for stronger wage growth in the near term.” At the other end of the spectrum, the education and training industry posted the slowest rate of quarterly wage growth, at 0.3%, with the ABS citing influences of the expiry of several key enterprise agreements. Over the year, the accommodation and food services industry recorded the highest rate of growth despite all the Covid-related disruptions to travel. The 3.5% increase reflected the Fair Work Commission annual wage decision during 2021. Those in the electricity, gas, water and waste services industries would have been disappointed with their wage increases, with those sectors up just 1.3% in the December quarter on an annual basis, to lag other fields, the ABS said. The data was a key figure for those speculating about whether the Reserve Bank will have to lift its official case rate from the record low 0.1% before too many months pass. ANZ said the wages annualised at a 2.6% rate when adjuted to the second decimal place and were “not strong enough to make a June rate hike more certain than not”. Prior to today’s data release, investors were tipping the first increase to come either in June or July, assuming the first rise by the RBA is to 0.25%. Sean Langcake, head of macroeconomic forecasting for BIS Oxford Economics, said wage increases in the private sector were again driven by individual arrangements. “These contracts are the most responsive to tightening labour market conditions, and strength in this component is a positive sign for broader wage growth in the near term,” Langcake said. “Wages including bonuses are growing faster than the measure that excludes bonuses,” he said. “This is a sign that employers are paying more to attract and retain staff, and could spill over into higher base payments.” Andrew McKellar, chief executive of the Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry, described the data as showing “a continued trend of moderate wages growth” that was “broadly consistent with underlying inflation”. “In the upcoming annual wage review, any push for unsustainable wages growth would likely risk the viability of businesses and the jobs they sustain and create,” McKellar said. “It’s critical that increased productivity drives wages growth in 2022.”The Vanuatu government has launched an inquiry into the country’s labour mobility programs, including the seasonal worker program in Australia, citing concerns around safety. The inquiry comes in the wake of testimony from Vanuatu seasonal workers in Australia to a parliamentary hearing earlier this month, in which they alleged they had experienced bullying, exploitative working conditions, poor housing arrangements and lack of support services while under the scheme. Australia’s Pacific labour mobility initiatives – the Seasonal Worker Programme (SWP) and Pacific Labour Scheme (PLS) – support Pacific and Timorese workers to take up jobs in rural and regional Australia, particularly in the agricultural sector. There are roughly 4,500 Vanuatu workers in Australia under the scheme based on the 2019 and 2020 numbers by the Vanuatu government. One Vanuatu citizen said that while working on the scheme he had received just $100 a week and had had $30 a week deducted from that amount, with no explanation of what the deductions were for, which led to the Australian senator Matt Canavan calling the scheme “tantamount to slavery”. Others, such as Stephen Howes, the director of the Development Policy Centre and a professor of economics at the Crawford School of Public Policy, have defended the scheme, saying that it provides huge economic benefit to individuals and communities in the Pacific, and that there are safeguards in place to protect workers from abuse, and that research shows there is less exploitation for workers in the Seasonal Worker Programme than for backpackers working in agricultural jobs under another scheme. After the testimony to the Australian Senate, Vanuatu’s opposition leader, Ralph Regenvanu, tweeted he had “urged our government to seek to revise the agreements between the Vanuatu and Australian governments” concerning the schemes. “Vanuatu Government has its duty to safeguard its citizens.” “There have been issues regarding the safety of our workers, and this is one of the issues that will be addressed in the inquiry,” said Jason Daniels, the secretary to the Vanuatu parliament’s committee on economics and foreign policy. Daniels said that the inquiry was not set up because of the testimony in Australian parliament about the program, but would consider that testimony, along with other submissions made to the committee. “One of the challenges that the committee is looking into is the cost of applying for the programme... We also want to understand the benefits to Australia and New Zealand compared to benefits to Vanuatu and how we can address this.” In addition to the call for submissions, the parliamentary committee will also visit the outer islands of Vanuatu to speak to families and individuals impacted by the scheme. Regenvanu said that many of the issues arising from the scheme could have been addressed if the 2019 Labour Mobility Policy for Vanuatu was implemented by the government. “The policy addressed issues dealing with superannuation …, better worker preparedness, enhancing MOU to ensure more protection for workers in Australia and New Zealand, social cohesion, family life in Vanuatu, upskilling of workforce and also better integration back into Vanuatu,” said Regenvanu, who introduced the policy as foreign minister. Pacific labour mobility researcher Tupai Fotuosamoa Jackson said reviewing the programme and examining its impact on society was important, but that participants in the programmes could be afraid to participate honestly in the review, for fear of losing their job. “For the worker, there is an obligation to remain on the programme and there is a fear that your opportunity to continue will be impacted.” Jackson, who has published research into the impact of the seasonal scheme on family life in the Pacific, said that each government needs to consider what their threshold is. “How many people will they permit to be part of the programme and what is the impact of their absence to those left behind?”Four people have died in the crash of a contractor’s helicopter on the Hawaii island of Kauai, the US navy said on Tuesday. The Pacific missile range facility said the aircraft crashed on the north side of the installation shortly after 10am. There were no survivors. The names of those killed were not yet available, it said. The helicopter was being flown by Croman Corporation in support of a training operation, the missile range facility said in a news release. The National Transportation Safety Board said in a tweet the agency is investigating the crash of the Sikorsky S-61N helicopter. The Sikorsky S-61N was built between 1959 and 1980 by Sikorsky Aircraft, which is now part of Lockheed Martin. It was designed to carry a substantial freight or up to 30 passengers, according to historical archives. The helicopters were optimized for use over water, for example, to support oil rig operations. Versions were also used by all branches of the US military. Licensees in the United Kingdom and other countries have also built the aircraft. A Kauai county spokesperson said county police and firefighters responded and were assisting the military. Kauai police were helping the navy with perimeter security and investigation support, said Coco Zickos, a county spokesperson. An investigation will be conducted to determine the cause of the crash, the missile range facility release said. The Pacific missile range facility is a navy base on the western edge of Kauai where the military tests missile defense technology and various units conduct exercises.Joe Biden’s warning that Russia is beginning to invade Ukraine, and the debate over the severity of the west’s sanctions on Moscow, grips today’s front pages. The Times says “West imposes sanctions as Biden warns of war” and carries an image of Russian troops and tanks in the Rostov region, close to the border with Ukraine. It reports the US president’s comment that Russia’s military is moving blood supplies to the border, and disquiet among some senior Tory figures over the extent of the UK sanctions. The Express takes a more critical stance of UK sanctions. The headline is: “Punish Putin harder now”. It says Boris Johnson has been urged to move swiftly to punish up to 150 oligarchs linked to Vladimir Putin or face a “global catastrophe”. The Mirror agrees, saying “Get dirty Russian money out of UK now”. It calls the UK sanctions “feeble” and says MPs and activists are urging more effort to halt Russian money laundering in the UK. Metro says “We’ll grab him by the roubles”, alongside cutout images of the prime minister and Putin. It carries a hint of discontent at the extent of the sanctions but is broadly positive about the “first barrage” of measures. The Guardian focuses on the latest developments abroad, with the headline: “Threat of war grows as Putin backs Ukraine proxy states” and a huge image of Russian tanks ploughing through the mud close to Ukraine’s border. It gives prominence to Biden’s comments and Germany’s decision to put the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline from Russia on hold. The Telegraph gives the US president the headline – “Putin is invading and will go much further, says Biden” – and Johnson the main image. It notes the potential for millions to suffer as a result of the invasion, Nord Stream 2 and Putin expanding Moscow’s claims beyond Russian-controlled territories in east Ukraine. The Mail takes a more visceral approach with “Twisted Putin is ready for bloodshed”. It notes Russian tank movements and says 100 Nato jets are on alert. The FT concentrates on the growing risk of war after Putin recognised expanded territorial claims beyond areas already under Russian control in Ukraine. The headline is: “Putin backs separatist claims to whole Donbas region of Ukraine”. “Putin takes Europe to brink of war”, says the i, with bullet points on the west’s sanctions packages and growing fears of a full-scale invasion. The Sun reports that the UK is posed to send more weapons to Ukraine and Johnson’s comments about Putin’s “illogical and irrational frame of mind”. The headline is: Boris: stop mad Vlad”.In the 1950s, the Soviets came to Antarctica. As part of its contribution to the International Geophysical Year of 1957-8, a global scientific jamboree, the Soviet Union began building research stations across the great southern land – largely in areas claimed by Australia. Amid heightened cold war tensions, Australian officials were not pleased. Government records from the time reveal fears the Soviets might install defence infrastructure in Antarctica; the then foreign minister, Richard Casey, warned of missiles being launched on Sydney or Melbourne. The Australian Antarctic Territory is vast: at approximately 6m square kilometres (just shy of half of the landmass), the territory is almost the size of continental Australia itself. Plenty of room for Soviet missiles. An article in an Australian periodical, Observer, headlined “We Warn the Tsar”, described the fate of Antarctica as “a matter of foreign policy par excellence”. Notwithstanding the hyperbole, this sentiment was largely echoed in other newspapers of the time. The Advertiser described the Soviet mission as “a potential threat to the security of Australia”, while the Sydney Morning Herald asked, suspiciously: “What are the Russians up to at Mirny [one of their bases]?” Even the head of Australia’s scientific program in Antarctica, after visiting Soviet peers, worried in his diary: “I wonder have they ideas of submarine bases?” I was reminded of these fears – which I had explored during archival research, subsequently published in History Australia journal in 2017 – after the announcement on Tuesday of new funding for Australia’s Antarctic program. Politics and science have always been uneasy bedfellows in Australia’s approach to Antarctica, and the announcement by Scott Morrison of almost a billion dollars in funding over the next decade represented continuity, rather than change. Ever since Australian explorers first traversed the icy landmass at the turn of the 20th century, a blend of sometimes contradictory strategic and scientific motivations have loomed large. The division of new funding between strategic capacity and scientific endeavour underscored this tension: almost $250m for enhanced capabilities – drones, autonomous vehicles, helicopters, mobile stations – and dollops of money for different scientific projects (including $7.4m to understand the impact of climate change on Antarctica – no small irony given this government’s climate policy). Of course these dual motivations are not neatly separable. The enhanced capabilities make more and better science possible. In Antarctic diplomacy, science is the major currency. But for a government that has slashed the university sector to the core during the pandemic, it is obvious that better science is not the sole motive for this funding boost. Strategic concerns are not far from the surface. While the federal government did not name China in the announcement, it is obvious that the regional adversary’s growing interest in Antarctica partially explains Australia’s reinvigorated Antarctic program. As much was made clear by the environment minister, Sussan Ley: “We need to ensure that the Antarctic remains a place of science and conservation, one that is free from conflict and which is protected from exploitation.” The coverage of Tuesday’s news said the quiet part of the government’s announcement out loud. The Australian Financial Review led with “PM pledges $804m to fight cold war in Antarctica”, noting that “the Chinese and Russians have an increasing interest in Antarctica”. The Guardian highlighted recent research from an Australian thinktank, the Lowy Institute, on Australia-China engagement over Antarctica. Chinese authorities are not blind to the strategic implications of this funding boost. Late on Tuesday, China’s state media outlet Global Times hit back: “Australia’s Antarctica plan stems from its hostility toward China”. It remains to be seen whether growing tensions over Antarctica will see a return to the fears of the 1950s. Out of those tensions came the Antarctic treaty, signed in 1959, which banned military activity on the continent and recognised “that it is in the interest of all mankind that Antarctica shall continue for ever to be used exclusively for peaceful purposes”. Significantly, the treaty froze territorial claims to Antarctica – including Australia’s – but without renouncing them. Australian efforts in Antarctica therefore always serve a dual purpose: promoting science and conservation while maintaining some degree of involvement across the Australian Antarctic Territory, lest the treaty system ever dissolve. In the Lowy Institute’s report, it was suggested that “China’s Antarctic stations and science seemed designed to position it for a territorial claim in the [Territory] if the Antarctic treaty were overturned”. Such is the lingering sensitivity to these issues that some old records on Australia’s involvement in Antarctica, dating back six or more decades, remain sealed. One file which I tried to access, unsuccessfully, at the National Archives, contained this explanation: “The information canvasses matters relating to Australian sovereignty … and some of these issues still have currency … [public disclosure] could encourage challenges to Australian sovereignty”. But for all that strategic aspirations may sit at odds with the spirit of international cooperation central to scientific collaboration, the experience of the 1950s – Australia’s red scare on ice – suggests that science ultimately transcends politics. Despite the political animosity between Australia and the Soviet Union during the International Geophysical Year, scientists from the two nations developed warm friendships. It probably did not hurt that there were always “a dozen vodkas” involved, too. “Scientists,” wrote one Australian Antarctic official after a visit to a Soviet base in 1958, “can usually get along with each other, whatever the accident of their nationality.” • Kieran Pender is a writer, lawyer and academicA young bull that was swept into a surging river during flooding on New Zealand’s West Coast has miraculously survived the ordeal, turning up unharmed a week later, 80 kilometres (49 miles) downstream, snuffling about in a blackberry bush. Deer and cattle farmer, Tony Peacock, said the 18-month-old bull was grazing with 37 others in a paddock in the Shenandoah area above the Maruia River, on 10 February, when torrential rain began falling. “It’s the highest I’ve ever seen on my farm. They forecast 60mm and I tipped out over 160mm from the rain gauge the next morning,” Peacock said. He had not had time to prepare for that amount of rain, and while he was able to save some from the rising waters, the young Hereford and two others were swept away. A week later, Peacock received a surprising phone call from stock-tracking and agricultural company Ospri. “They said a farmer in Westport had one of my bulls and gave me his [ear tag] number. “I rang him and he said he was getting his cows in in the morning when he heard a bit of rustling in the blackberry and a Hereford bull poked his head out.” The farmer told Peacock the bull looked like he needed a bit of “rest and relaxation”. Peacock believes the young bull survived a monumental trip - being swept into the Maruia River, over the 10m-high Maruia Falls, through the joining with the Buller River, under O’Sullivan’s Bridge, and a long winding journey through the Buller River’s rocky upper and lower reaches, and then finally, avoiding being swept out to sea. “It’s a fairly long trip and amazing he survived. I was quite happy when I got the call he was alive. I think he will get legend status now and be put in a paddock to retire with some cows.” He is now waiting on the animal to be put on a truck back home. Peacock said “with the amount of interest in him” the bull would have to get a special welcome home party – most likely, a nice paddock full of grass. The pressure is also building to give his new celebrity a name, but what exactly that would be, was “still under discussion.” The fame could also result in a blind-date for the youngster. “I’ve had a guy ring me today wanting to send a young heifer out to him, to try and get some good breeding stocks,” Peacock said. The bull is not the only ungulate to make headlines for getting themselves into deep water. In 2019, three cows were swept off an island during the raging storm of Hurricane Dorian and located on North Carolina’s Outer Banks, after apparently swimming four miles (6.4 kilometres) during the storm. New Zealand’s West Coast is prone to flooding. In 2021, 500 homes were flooded, with 100 of those deemed uninhabitable. The Buller District Council estimated the two back-to-back floods this month had caused between $21.5 - $43m worth of damage. Peacock’s neighbour lost 70 dairy cows in the flooding, and another neighbour lost 12. He said he was “counting his lucky stars” he lost just two in the end, adding that the community spent hours pulling dead cattle from the blackberry. “It’s pretty gut-wrenching for all concerned.”As the banks of the Parramatta River steadily rose and engulfed the Powerhouse Parramatta museum construction site on Tuesday afternoon, the state’s politicians in Macquarie Street were arguing about what constituted a one-in-100-year flood. Labor member of the legislative council, Walt Secord, grilled the new New South Wales arts minister, Ben Franklin, during question time. He attempted to table images and video from his phone to prove that the government’s controversial choice of site for the museum – one that will house many of the state’s most valuable and irreplaceable objects from 2025 onward – was misguided and foolhardy. Franklin, in response, said it was “patently absurd”, “far-fetched and utterly unreasonable” to suggest that the new museum, still in the very early stages of construction, would fail the City of Parramatta Council’s requirement to withstand a one‑in‑100‑year flood level, and that even in the case of a one-in-1,000 year flood, the ground floor of the museum would still remain half a metre above the flood waters. The man Franklin deposed, former arts minister Don Harwin, who drove the Powerhouse Parramatta project from its early days, told parliament he had viewed the same photos as Secord, and there was “a small amount of water over the grass at river level”. In images obtained by Guardian Australia, at least one flooded and abandoned car can be seen on what would normally be a road near the site on Tuesday, which saw 74mm of rain dumped on Parramatta in 24 hours, forcing the ferry jetty neighbouring the museum site to close. “The government, under the previous arts minister … said the museum was going to be built on a site with architectural changes that would mean it could withstand a one-in-1,000-year flood, but the opposition found that it has happened three times in three years,” Secord told parliament. “The minister has disputed that claim in the chamber, but I am relying on footage on the site posted by locals. Even as we were speaking, the entire area was completely inundated.” Local resident and freelance writer Alan Mascarenhas, who lives less than 500 metres from the museum site and captured images and video of the waterlogged site on Tuesday, said locals knew how prone the area was to regular flooding. “It only takes a couple of hours of sustained rain and the whole place is waterlogged,” he told Guardian Australia. “By yesterday afternoon the walkway down there was obliterated on all sides.” In February 2019, the NSW State Emergency Service’s senior manager for risk reduction and avoidance, George Jeoffreys, warned that Parramatta CBD residents could have as little as nine minutes warning of flash flooding from the river. Even in a best-case scenario, he said, the best warning the SES could give the public would be only two hours out from an event, making evacuation “difficult, if not impossible”. The $915m Powerhouse Parramatta project’s location on the banks of the flood-prone river has been an ongoing bone of contention between the state government, the opposition and a large group of local residents who are not opposed to a new major museum in the area, but are opposed to its current location. A month before the Parramatta River broke its banks and flooded the construction site in March last year, independent Parramatta-based flood management consultant Steven Molino told a state government inquiry the museum’s proposed one-in-1,000 year scenario meant that in the building’s predicted 100-year lifespan, there was a 10% chance that water was going to get into the building. “If it was an office building with just office furniture and carpets and everything, it wouldn’t matter – if it gets flooded you go down to Carpet Court and buy new carpet, you go down to Officeworks and buy new furniture – it’s all easily replaced,” he told the inquiry. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “But the information we have at present suggests that the electrical power supply will go out [during flooding] and the generators won’t operate the air conditioning system. So you’ll have a spike in humidity … and if you’ve got items in the collection made from paper, textiles, and even wood and some metals, [the museum’s] collection will deteriorate, be possibly irreparably damaged or even lost. “Now the decision might be made that the probability of this occurring is an acceptable risk, but no one has gone through that process.” On Wednesday Infrastructure NSW, the government body overseeing the museum’s construction, issued a statement, using an analysis of Tuesday’s flood data by engineering and flooding specialists Arup. The analysis concluded that “water from the heavy rain event on Tuesday 22 February would have peaked around 4 metres below the future Powerhouse Parramatta ground floor” and would have only entered the museum’s undercroft space, an area not used by the public. “Powerhouse Parramatta will be a very safe building for people to visit and for the collection to be exhibited,” the statement said. “The museum has been designed to withstand large and rare flood events.”A former police officer told Ben Roberts-Smith he was a “weak dog” and warned him “the cover-up is 10 times worse than the offence”, after the decorated veteran allegedly tried to conceal writing threatening letters to a serving SAS soldier, the federal court has heard. Roberts-Smith asked retired officer John McLeod to take responsibility for the letters, McLeod told the court during dramatic evidence on Wednesday. A former Queensland police officer turned private investigator and security consultant, McLeod appeared under force of subpoena in Roberts-Smith’s defamation action. Roberts-Smith is suing the Age, the Sydney Morning Herald and the Canberra Times over reports he alleges are defamatory and portray him as committing war crimes, including murder, as well as acts of bullying and domestic violence. The newspapers are pleading a defence of truth. Roberts-Smith denies any wrongdoing. McLeod, called as a witness by the newspapers, testified that Roberts-Smith had urged him to take responsibility for sending the letters during a clandestine meeting in Brisbane in 2018. “Just tell them you’re a supporter of mine, and you were sick of the way I was being treated,” Roberts-Smith said, according to McLeod. McLeod told the court he realised two sealed envelopes he’d previously been given by Roberts-Smith to post to an SAS soldier contained threats, but when discussing the letters, Roberts-Smith denied they were threats. “They’re not fucking threats, it’s just a touch-up,” Roberts-Smith allegedly told him. McLeod said he told Roberts-Smith: “If you’ve put me in the frame, if you’ve compromised me, you’d better get me a good lawyer.” McLeod said he urged Roberts-Smith to admit to sending the letters. “If you’ve done something stupid, put your hand up for it, because the cover-up is 10 times worse than the offence,” McLeod said he told Roberts-Smith. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Roberts-Smith again urged McLeod to say he’d sent the letters as a supporter of the Victoria Cross winner. “I said ‘fuck that you weak dog’, and I walked away,” McLeod said. He said he had not spoken to Roberts-Smith since. McLeod was asked about his employment by Roberts-Smith and his then wife, Emma, and the friendship he developed with the couple over a number of years from 2011. The court heard Roberts-Smith paid McLeod $1,500 in 2018 to surveil and film a woman with whom Roberts-Smith was having an affair when she visited a termination clinic. McLeod gave evidence Roberts-Smith also employed him as a “pretend barman” at a party to eavesdrop on employees of Channel Seven where Roberts-Smith was a regional manager. “He wanted to know what they thought of him,” McLeod told the court. In 2018, a serving member of the SAS, known in court documents as Person 18, received two letters warning him over evidence he had given as part of the Brereton inquiry into the potential commission of war crimes by Australian soldiers. “You and others have worked together to spread lies and rumours to the media and the inspector general’s inquiry,” the printed letters said, evidence before the court has shown. “You have one chance to save yourself. You must approach the inquiry and admit that you have colluded with others to spread lies. “We are very aware of your many murderous actions over many tours in Afghanistan, including specific dates … just like when you took part in the execution of two persons-under-control at Tizak. You know what you have done and so do we.” Person 18 is scheduled to give evidence, called by the newspapers, next week. Last week, Roberts-Smith’s ex-wife, Emma Roberts, told the court that when the letters were made public in June 2018, she confronted her husband. “What the fuck have you done?,” Roberts said she asked Roberts-Smith. “He told me he had written the letters, had printed them at the Seven office, had sealed them in the envelopes, addressed them, and had given them to [family friend and occasional employee] John McLeod to post.” Roberts told the court she had previously seen her husband walk into their house with paper, envelopes and gloves. She said Roberts-Smith had asked her about the PO Box for the SAS regiment in Perth, and whether there were security cameras on post boxes. In his evidence last year, Roberts-Smith denied any involvement in the letters and said the conversation with his wife never occurred. “That’s not true,” he told the court. He told the court during his evidence his ex-wife was “extremely bitter”. “She has done things along the way that have been detrimental to my family, and particularly to me, because she thinks it will hurt me.” On Wednesday, McLeod told the court he was given a blue envelope containing four letters by Roberts-Smith at a Brisbane Bunnings store in 2018. He was given scraps of paper with two names, and later given two PO Box addresses. McLeod posted two letters to Person 18 from a postbox in Tweed Heads, the court heard. He said he did not know their contents. The other two letters – for another soldier known as Person One – were to be thrown out, because Person One was overseas, McLeod said in evidence. He told the court he did not dispose of those letters, but gave them to his lawyer, who later gave them to the Australian federal police. McLeod told the court that the day the existence of the letters was reported publicly, Roberts-Smith summoned McLeod to a meeting in Milton in Brisbane. When McLeod arrived, Roberts-Smith warned him “no phones, no phones, no phones”. McLeod said he and Roberts-Smith discussed the letters, with Roberts-Smith urging McLeod to take responsibility for sending them. McLeod refused. Under cross-examination, McLeod was questioned about his friendship with, and employment by, Roberts-Smith and his wife. The court heard McLeod was employed to do “odd jobs” for the couple, from organising security, picking up dry cleaning, or transporting Roberts-Smith’s medals. McLeod even collected Roberts-Smith’s military uniform after it was thrown out into the rain during his marriage break-up. After severing contact with the former soldier, McLeod maintained contact with Emma Roberts through her best friend, Danielle Scott. Bruce McClintock, acting for Roberts-Smith, said McLeod was an “ally” of Scott and Roberts, following the marriage’s demise. He cited text messages to Scott where McLeod referred to Roberts-Smith as a “prick” and a “psycho”, as demonstration McLeod was hostile to Roberts-Smith. McLeod admitted: “There’s a degree of frustration and disappointment.” McLeod was asked whether he had ever spoken to journalists about Roberts-Smith or assisted with media reportage. “No,” he told the court. “I despise the media.” The court was shown an episode of 60 Minutes from 2021 that featured clandestine recordings of Roberts-Smith’s voice. McLeod was asked in cross-examination: “do you know how they got into the hands of Channel Nine?” “No. I have no idea,” he said. McLeod was cross-examined over extensive text message correspondence with Scott. In the aftermath of the 60 Minutes show being aired, McLeod texted to Scott: “I need to get out of town”. Asked why he felt he needed to leave, McLeod told the court he was worried he might be attacked by supporters of Roberts-Smith: “I was worried about ramifications, being shot in the head.” McClintock asked him: “Are you seriously suggesting that evidence is true.” “That I’d be shot in the head, yes.” McClintock: “It’s a wicked lie isn’t it?” McLeod: “No.” McClintock said McLeod “would do anything to destroy Roberts-Smith”, which is why he had come to court to give evidence against him. “No. I did not want to be here. I had no intention of being here. I was subpoenaed to be here.” The trial, before Justice Anthony Besanko, continues.This blog is now closed. You can follow all the developments in the crisis at our new blog here: Agence France-Presse has shared a video of empty streets across eastern Ukraine this morning. In the footage, loudspeakers announce the location of evacuation centres in the Ukrainian city of Khartsyzsk, after Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin, ordered troops into the self-proclaimed rebel republics of Donetsk and Luhansk. Russia’s ambassador to the United States has hit back at the imposition of sanctions imposed by US president Joe Biden, suggesting the move would hurt global financial and energy markets as well as ordinary citizens. According to a recent post on the Russian embassy Facebook page early Wednesday, ambassador Anatoly Antonov said: Sanctions will not solve anything regarding Russia. It’s hard to imagine that anyone in Washington is counting on Russia to review its foreign policy course under threat of restrictions. I don’t remember a single day when our country lived without any restrictions from the Western world. We learned how to work in such conditions. And not only survive, but also develop our state. There is no doubt that the sanctions imposed against us will hurt the global financial and energy markets. The United States will not be left out, where ordinary citizens will feel the full consequences of rising prices.” New Zealand has summoned Russian ambassador Georgii Zuev to meet on Wednesday with top diplomatic officials who are urging Russia to return to diplomatic negotiations over Ukraine, the Associated Press reports. Foreign affairs minister Nanaia Mahuta is currently out of the country but said in a statement that the ambassador was called in “to hear New Zealand’s strong opposition to the actions taken by Russia in recent days, and condemn what looks to be the beginning of a Russian invasion into Ukraine territory.” The Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade confirmed to the Associated Press that the meeting had taken place but declined to provide any further details. Canada has delivered a second aircraft filled with “lethal military aid” to Ukraine on Tuesday. National defence minister Anita Anand said: Today, our Canadian Armed Forces made a second delivery of lethal military aid to support our Ukrainian partners. Russia’s further invasion of a sovereign state is absolutely unacceptable, and we will continue to stand by Ukraine as the country defends its sovereignty and independence.” ‘Grab him by the roubles’: Here’s how the British papers covered the threat of war in Ukraine. The prospect of a full-blown invasion dominated the front pages, along with doubts as to the effectiveness of first tranche of sanctions on Moscow. Australia has confirmed it will hit Russia with a range of sanctions targeting transport energy, telecommunications, oil, gas and mineral reserves. Sanctions and travel bans will also target eight members of the Russian Federation’s security council, while existing sanctions in place over past Russian aggression will be expanded, prime minister Scott Morrison told reporters on Wednesday. Russian banks have also been targeted. Morrison said he expects further tranches of sanctions that will target more individuals after convening cabinet’s national security committee earlier in the day. Morrison told reporters from Canberra: The invasion of Ukraine has effectively already begun. Australians always stand up to bullies and we will be standing up to Russia along with all of our partners, and all those who believe that it is totally unacceptable that Russia could invade its neighbour. Morrison said the government will “immediately” begin placing sanctions on Russian individuals and will amend the Autonomous Sanctions regulation of 2011 to extend existing sanctions that apply to Crimea and Sevastopol to the regions of Donetsk and Luhansk. Oil prices dipped at the start of Wednesday’s trading session as the market judged that sanctions against Russia will not do much to disrupt supplies from the world’s third largest producer. Crude prices have surged in recent weeks to a seven-year high on alarm about the conflict in Ukraine possibly interrupting supplies from Russia, which accounts for about 11% of global supply. But Brent crude fell 13 cents, or 0.1%, to $96.71 a barrel at 0142 GMT, after soaring as high as $99.50 on Tuesday, the highest since September 2014 as it became clear the first wave of US and European sanctions on Russia for sending troops into eastern Ukraine would not disrupt oil supply. A potential return of more Iranian crude to the market, with Tehran and world powers close to reviving a nuclear agreement, also helped to push prices down. Asian stock markets were back in positive territory on Wednesday despite more losses on Wall Street on Tuesday. While we are in the Asia Pacifc region, Australia’s prime minister Scott Morrison is set to convene a cabinet national security committee as western nations begin to impose sanctions against Russia. The committee is expected to finalise what targeted sanctions and measures Australia will introduce. International security and intelligence professor John Blaxland said Australia would look to support European and Nato action “without overstepping the mark”. “I’m a little bit worried that this may once again become a political football and we need to be very, very cautious at this point,” he told the Nine Network. Australia has ruled out direct military assistance and is supporting Ukraine’s cyber-capability. It has left the door open for technical military support but the prime minister declined to elaborate on what the term meant. Home affairs minister Karen Andrews told radio 4BC: “We’ll be considering sanctions and the extent of those and in the days to follow.” Taiwan’s security and armed forces must increase their surveillance and alertness on military activities in the region, president Tsai Ing-wen said on Wednesday during a meeting to discuss the Ukraine crisis, Reuters reports. Taiwan and Ukraine are fundamentally different in terms of geostrategic, geographical environment and importance of international supply chains, but government units must tackle possible “cognitive warfare” and misinformation by foreign forces, Tsai’s office cited her as saying. US secretary of state Antony Blinken earlier said an invasion of Ukraine had been Russian President Vladimir Putin’s “plan all along”, calling the situation a “manufactured crisis”. In a joint press conference with Ukrainian foreign minister Dmytro Kuleba in Washington held on Tuesday evening local time, Blinken said: His plan all along has been to invade Ukraine; to control Ukraine and its people; to destroy Ukraine’s democracy, which offers a stark contrast to the autocracy that he leads; to reclaim Ukraine as a part of Russia. That’s why this is the greatest threat to security in Europe since world war two”. Another Ukrainian serviceman was wounded by shelling on Tuesday with five others also injured and in need of medical care, according to Ukraine’s joint forces operation situation recently published report. The report says Ukraine recorded a further 72 violations over the past 24 hours from Russia-backed forces, 53 of which were using weapons prohibited by the Minsk agreements. A pumping station was also damaged in the settlement of Zolote, leaving more than 3,000 civilians of the settlement of Popasna without drinking water, according to the latest briefing report published by Ukraine’s ministry of defence. A residential building in the village of Vodiane was destroyed, as was a farm building and agricultural property in the settlement of Verkhnotoretske. Some 42 families were evacuated from the village of Vrubivka, including 30 school-age children and 15 preschool children, the ministry added. We have some more detail surrounding the sanctions Japan has announced against Russia. Prime minister Fumio Kishida said Japan will prohibit the issuance of Russian bonds in Japan and freeze the assets of certain Russian individuals, Reuters reports. Kishida, who also called on Russia to return to diplomatic discussions, said he did not see a significant impact on energy supplies in the short term from the current situation and said further steps would be considered should the situation worsen. The Ukraine crisis, for now, revolves around the country’s eastern regions of Donetsk and Luhansk, now proclaimed independent states by Vladimir Putin. So it might be useful to use this map as a reference point. Ukrainian foreign minister Dmytro Kuleba wrapped up his interview with CNN’s Jake Tapper this evening by providing a list of reasons as to why the United States should be invested in the conflict in Ukraine. First, in 1994 Ukraine abandoned its nuclear arsenal which was the third in size in the world ... We abandoned it in return for security guarantees issued in particular by the United States. We were promised that if anyone attacks us, the United States would be among countries who will be helping us. Second, what is happening in Ukraine is not only about Ukraine. President Putin challenges Euro-Atlantic order. If the West fails in Ukraine, the next target of Putin will be one of the Nato members on its eastern flank. Third, if Putin succeeds in Ukraine, other players across the globe who want to change rules, who want to bypass the United States, they will see that this is possible, that the West is incapable of defending what it stands for. All in all ... Americans should be interested in keeping the world order as it stands and the future of this order is being decided right now in Ukraine.” Continuing to dissect Kuleba’s interview with CNN earlier, the foreign minister said that although he supports the recent US sanctions as an “important” message, he believes they are insufficient in dissuading a Russian attack. No sanctions will be enough until Russian boots withdraw from Ukrainian soil. This is [the] fundamental principle, that we have to keep putting pressure on Russia and we in Ukraine proceed from the fact that the sanctions announced today by President Biden is just the beginning of the process of deterring president Putin and making him withdraw.” Referring to any further sanctions, Kuleba suggested no single option or possibility should be left off the table. We want every instrument available to be used in order to stop Putin. If the price of saving a country is the most, harshest sanctions possible, then we should go for the harshest sanctions possible.” Ukrainian foreign minister Dmytro Kuleba says Russian president Vladimir Putin’s ultimate goal is to “destroy Ukraine” and “no sanctions will be enough” until Russian forces withdraw from Ukrainian soil. During an interview with CNN’s Jake Tapper, Kubela said: His ultimate goal is to destroy Ukraine. He’s not interested in parts of Ukraine. He is not interested in even keeping the entire country under his control. What I know for certain, and this was eloquently proved, regretfully, in his address yesterday, is that he hates [the] Ukrainian statehood, he believes that Ukraine has no right to exist. Putin “wants the idea of the Ukrainian statehood to fail. This is his objective,” Kubela added. Former US president Donald Trump has called Russian president Vladimir Putin a “genius” for his decision to recognise the two self-proclaimed republics in Luhansk and Donetsk of Ukraine and deploy troops into the Russian-controlled territory. In an interview with American conservative talk radio hosts on the Clay Travis and Buck Sexton Show, Trump said: This is genius Putin declares a big portion of the Ukraine — of Ukraine. Putin declares it as independent. Oh, that’s wonderful. So, Putin is now saying, ‘It’s independent,’ a large section of Ukraine. I said, ‘How smart is that?’ ... Here’s a guy who’s very savvy… I know him very well. Very, very well.” Trump accused Joe Biden of being “weak” in his response to Putin, adding that it “never would have happened” if he were still president. By the way, this never would have happened with us. Had I been in office, not even thinkable. This would never have happened.” Referring to Putin, Trump added: I think he sees this opportunity. I knew that he always wanted Ukraine. I used to talk to him about it. I said, ‘You can’t do it. You’re not gonna do it.’ But I could see that he wanted it. I used to ask him. We used to talk about it at length.” Japan’s prime minister Fumio Kishida has also followed in the footsteps of the United States by imposing sanctions on Russia, Reuters reports. We will have more on this story as it develops. Ukrainian foreign minister Dmytro Kuleba described US President Joe Biden’s move to impose a first tranche of sanctions against Russia as a strong “first move,” adding he also received a promise of more weapons from US officials. “The sanctions that President Biden announced today - they look strong if we consider them as a first move,” the Ukraine foreign minister said in an interview with Fox News on Tuesday. He added Ukraine was not seeking US troops on the ground to resolve the crisis. Western nations on Tuesday punished Russia with new sanctions for ordering troops into separatist regions of eastern Ukraine. The United Nations secretary general has said Russian troops on Ukraine border are “not peacekeepers”, while calling for an immediate ceasefire. António Guterres said he is “deeply troubled” by the latest developments. At this critical moment, I call for an immediate ceasefire and re-establishment of the rule of law. We need restraint &amp; reason. We need de-escalation now.” Earlier we reported US president Joe Biden’s announcement that the United States would be issuing sanctions against Russian banks, oligarchs and others, with plans to escalate sanctions if Russia advances its invasion. The decision comes as retaliation for Russia recognising two self-proclaimed republics, Donetsk and Luhansk, and sending troops there, adding to western efforts to stop what they fear is the beginning of a full-scale invasion. The measures target Russian banks and sovereign debt, among other steps. Watch the video of the key moments from Biden’s speech below. Satellite images show a new deployment of more than 100 military vehicles and dozens of troop tents in southern Belarus near the Ukraine border, a private US company said on Tuesday. The images reportedly show a new field hospital has been added to a military garrison in western Russia close to the border with Ukraine, according to a statement from Maxar Technologies, which has been tracking the buildup of Russian forces for weeks. The images could not be independently verified by Reuters however they have been widely shared by correspondents reporting from Ukraine. A large pro-Ukraine rally broke out earlier today in the south-eastern Ukrainian city of Mariupol in the Donetsk region. It is the same region that unilaterally declared its independence from Ukraine yesterday, with Putin recognising the expanded borders of Donetsk and Luhansk. Joyce Karam, senior correspondent for the National News, uploaded a video of the event with footage showing hundreds of people waving the Ukrainian flag and singing. Hello it’s Samantha Lock with you as my colleague Maanvi Singh signs off. As we reported earlier, Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy said that he will be introducing the conscription of thousands of reservists for military service as Russia moves its troops into east Ukraine. In a televised address which has since been published on the Ukraine ministry of defence website late on on Tuesday night, Zelenskiy said he was still pursuing diplomatic ways out of the crisis and would not cede any territory to Russia. Reuters cites the president: There is no need for general mobilisation today. We need to promptly replenish the Ukrainian army and other military formations. As the supreme commander-in-chief of the armed forces of Ukraine, I issued a decree on the conscription of reservists during a special period. We must increase the readiness of the Ukrainian army for all possible changes in the operational situation. Russia’s upper house unanimously voted to grant Vladimir Putin’s request to deploy troops outside Russia. The secretary general of Nato, Jens Stoltenberg, said: “Every indication is that Russia is continuing to plan for a full-scale attack of Ukraine,” adding that it was “never too late” for Russia not to attack. Putin said that Russia will support the territorial claims of its proxy states in east Ukraine, dramatically increasing the likelihood of a larger war in the near future. European Union foreign ministers voted to sanction Russian individuals and entities over Ukraine. US president Joe Biden said that “this is the beginning of a Russian invasion of Ukraine” during remarks today, imposing new sanctions on Russia but adding that diplomacy is still possible. US secretary of state Antony Blinken said that he will no longer be meeting with the Russian foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov: “Now that we see the invasion is beginning and Russia has made clear its wholesale rejection of diplomacy it does not make sense to go forward that meeting at this time.” The doors to the Russian embassy in Kyiv were shut on Tuesday. Seemingly nobody was at home. Outside on the street a small, noisy crowd of demonstrators waved blue and yellow Ukrainian flags. “We are not afraid of Vladimir Putin. Or his army,” said one activist, Roman Tyschenko. Behind him protesters banged kettle drums and broke into a rhythmic chant of “Putin huiylo”, to blaring music from a loudspeaker. “It means Putin is a motherfucker,” Tyschenko explained. “It’s our anthem. Football fans in Kharkiv invented the song in 2014, when Russia stole Crimea.” After a meeting with his security council on Monday in Moscow, Putin recognised the so-called breakaway territories of Donetsk and Luhansk as independent. In a long, and menacing speech he also asserted that Ukraine was not a state, but a historical mistake made by Lenin. “Putin is insane, crazy,” Tyschenko said. “Ukraine is both a country and a state. We have ancient traditions. Kyiv was founded before Moscow. We have a much longer record of nationhood.” The threat of war hangs over Kyiv, a city of 3 million people plus another million who commute daily from its suburbs. The US and UK governments believe Putin’s ambitions go beyond the Donbas region, whose separatist administrations Moscow has long armed and propped up. They believe that Russia’s president is poised to attack and encircle the Ukrainian capital, sending in tanks and troops currently parked two hours’ drive away, just across the border in Belarus. The talk among intelligence professionals is of Baghdad-style shock and awe. His goal: to subjugate Ukraine. And yet so far Kyiv residents have reacted to the situation with a collective weapon: carrying on as normal. Cafes and restaurants were open on Tuesday, mothers pushed their toddlers through parks bathed in spring sunshine, and cyclists bumped over cobbled streets. Read more: “There’s no such thing as a minor, middle or major invasion. Invasion is an invasion,” Ukrainian foreign minister Dmytro Kuleba said. Kuleba said that his country was “puzzled” by the US decision to sanction individuals in Ukraine’s breakaway territories because that did not punish Russia directly. But he said Ukraine was pleased with sanctions against Russian banks and oligarchs. His message: “Hit Russia’s economy now and hit it hard.” “The Ukrainian people will surely remember the United States standing with Ukraine at this decisive moment in history,” he said. US secretary of state Antony Blinken has called the Russia-Ukraine situation “the greatest threat to security in Europe since World War Two” during a joint press conference with Ukraine foreign minister Dmytro Kuleba. Blinken doubled down on remarks made by Joe Biden earlier about Russia’s intentions to invade Ukraine, saying that Putin’s intention all along has been to “invade Ukraine, to control Ukraine, its people, to destroy Ukraine’s democracy”. Blinken also added that he will no longer be meeting with the Russian foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov: “Now that we see the invasion is beginning and Russia has made clear its wholesale rejection of diplomacy it does not make sense to go forward that meeting at this time.” The US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, is currently holding a press conference with Ukraine foreign minister Dmytro Kuleba about developments in the Russia-Ukraine situation. The joint meeting follows Joe Biden’s announcement today about the first round of sanctions against Russian banks, oligarchs and others, with plans to escalate sanctions if Russia advances its invasion. Video of the press conference is also available here. Canada’s foreign affairs minister, Mélanie Joly, said today that Canada will be imposing sanctions on Russia, tweeting: I have directed my Deputy Minister to summon the Russia Ambassador to explain Russia’s continued aggression, violation of international law, and disregard for Ukrainian sovereignty. Canada stands with Ukraine. We will be imposing severe sanctions in response. During updates given today in Ukraine’s parliament, president Volodymyr Zelenskiy said that he will be calling on reservists for a special period, ruling out a general mobilisation as Russia moves its troops into east Ukraine, reported Reuters. Zelenskiy said that he is still pursuing diplomatic solutions with Russia and welcomed Turkey’s participation in talks between Russia and Ukraine, but noted again that Ukraine will not be ceding any territory to Russia. Zelenskiy also announced the beginning of a new “economic patriotism” programme that would incentivise local production and provide tax cuts on gasoline. Russia’s upper house unanimously voted to grant Vladimir Putin’s request to deploy troops outside Russia. The secretary general of Nato, Jens Stoltenberg, said: “Every indication is that Russia is continuing to plan for a full-scale attack of Ukraine,” adding that it was “never too late” for Russia not to attack. Putin said that Russia will support the territorial claims of its proxy states in east Ukraine, dramatically increasing the likelihood of a larger war in the near future. European Union foreign ministers voted to sanction Russian individuals and entities over Ukraine. US president Joe Biden said that “this is the beginning of a Russian invasion of Ukraine” during remarks today, imposing new sanctions on Russia but adding that diplomacy is still possible. Ukraine president Volodymyr Zelenskiy said today that there was no need for general mobilisation, noting that his priority was to preserve the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine, reported Reuters. As the situation between Russia and Ukraine escalates, reporter Pjotr Sauer wrote an article for the Guardian about how residents in Moscow feel amid an impending invasion: Like many of her friends, Tatyana, a barista at the fashionable Moscow coffee-shop chain Skuratov, was glued to the screen of her mobile phone as Vladimir Putin addressed the nation. “Usually, I don’t watch television, especially when our president speaks. But I felt like I had to tune in this time. I was witnessing history in the making,” she said, smoking an e-cigarette. “But I am not sure yet if history is going in the right direction.” The day after the Russian leader’s late-night speech, in which he recognised the independence of the self-proclaimed republics in Luhansk and Donetsk, Muscovites were digesting what Putin’s decision could mean for them and their futures. While he ended his address by “congratulating” fellow Russians on the recognition of the two territories, a celebratory mood was absent in the capital, with many fretting about the political and economic consequences his decision might have. “If the recognition brings peace to the region, fine, why not do it,” said Andrei, a regional director at a large logistics firm in Moscow. “But it is already costing me money. I have invested a lot of my savings in shares of Russian companies.” Read the full article here. Australia prime minister Scott Morrison will hold a meeting with the country’s National Security Committee to discuss next steps with regards to the Russia-Ukraine situation. Further sanctions will likely be imposed against Russia. During a speech today updating on the Russia-Ukraine situation, US president Joe Biden warned that “this is the beginning of a Russian invasion of Ukraine”, adding that he hopes diplomacy is still an option. In his remarks, the US president warned Putin has taken steps to invade Ukraine, adding that the Russian president “bizarrely” claimed two Ukrainian territories were no longer a part of Ukraine. Biden said: “Who in the Lord’s name does Putin think gives him the right to declare new so-called countries?” “To put it simply, Russia just announced that it is carving out a big chunk of Ukraine,” he said, adding that Putin’s actions are a “flagrant violation of international law”. But Biden said the US and its allies are still open to exploring a diplomatic option with Russia to avoid a “worst case scenario”: “The United States and our allies and partners remain open to diplomacy – if it’s serious.” Biden announced that further sanctions will be imposed on Russia, targeting Russian banks and debts, among other things. Biden also noted that such sanctions will go beyond those implemented in 2014 when Russia invaded Crimea. While Biden said his administration is working to reduce the financial burden such sanctions will have on American households, especially on the price of gas domestically, he said: “Defending freedom will have cost for us as well, here at home ... But as we do this, I’m going to take robust action to make sure the pain of our sanctions is targeted at the Russian economy, not ours.” The US president, Joe Biden, is currently giving remarks with updates on the Russia-Ukraine situation, including an announcement of sanctions being rolled out starting tomorrow. This story is developing – stay tuned. The Guardian US political blog is also reporting on Biden’s speech here. The US embassy in Kyiv tweeted support to the German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, about his decision to freeze Nord Stream 2, the controversial natural gas pipeline that would link Germany to Russia. From the US Embassy Kyiv Twitter account: We applaud German Chancellor Sholz’s decision to freeze NS2. Strong Allied unity in the face of Russian aggression. More will follow. A meeting between the Russian foreign minister, Sergey Lavrov, and his French counterpart, Jean-Yves Le Drian, has been cancelled. From the Wall Street Journal’s Vivian Salama: Poland is “quite well prepared to welcome a lot of Ukrainians” fleeing a Russian offensive in their country, the EU’s home affairs commissioner, Ylva Johansson, told AFP. Speaking after talks with Poland’s deputy interior minister, Bartosz Grodecki, on his country’s plans and preparations to handle various scenarios that might be thrown up by Moscow’s actions, she said: I must say that I’m quite convinced that Poland is quite well prepared to welcome a lot of Ukrainians if necessary. Johansson did not advance any estimate of how many Ukrainians might seek shelter in Poland from Russian military action, nor details of the plans drawn up by Warsaw. France has accused Vladimir Putin of failing to respect his country’s commitments to key international accords including the 2014 Minsk agreement, AFP reports. In a statement following the unanimous decision by the EU’s 27 member states to impose new sanctions on Russia, France’s foreign minister, Jean-Yves Le Drian, said the Russian president “no longer honours Russia’s signature”. Referring to the separatist-held areas of Donetsk and Lugansk in Ukraine, Le Drian said: President Putin doesn’t honour his own commitments, because he stated publicly that the idea of a vote by the Duma resulting in recognition of the two republics … was not on the agenda. The Minsk agreement was also Russia’s signature, Putin’s own, renewed at a meeting in Paris in December 2019. Asked if the French president, Emmanuel Macron, had been misled by Putin with false hopes of a breakthrough, Le Drian said the French leader “knows the methods, character and cynicism” of his Russian counterpart. The government in Kyiv is unlikely to accept any of Putin’s ultimatums, which would involve voluntarily handing over large swathes of its territory and endorsing the annexation of Crimea. Before Putin spoke, President Volodymyr Zelenskiy had addressed the country saying: We will give nothing away, we fear nothing and nobody. Even dropping the country’s bid for Nato membership would be political suicide, much less agreeing to the dismemberment of the country. The foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, responded indirectly to Putin’s evening speech, underlining Ukraine’s ties to the west by revealing that he had renewed requests to the European Union for a path to membership. At a memorial service for a soldier killed on the frontline, the minister of defence, Oleksii Reznikov, accused Putin of trying to rebuild the Soviet empire: The Kremlin has made yet another step towards resurrection of the Soviet Union, with a new Warsaw Pact and Berlin Wall. The only thing that stands in between is Ukraine and its army. Increasingly in Kyiv, there was a sense that Russia had decided to escalate military conflict with Ukraine, and the only remaining question was scale. Bohdan Yaremenko, MP and member of parliament’s foreign policy committee, said: Unfortunately, there are more and more confirmations that such a decision by Russia is a reality. As Russia abandons diplomacy as a tool for resolving the conflict, Ukraine has no choice but to prepare to defend its territory. We expect that … the democratic countries of the world, which respect international law and reject military force as a mechanism for establishing borders, will express their position by applying sanctions against the Russian Federation. Officials also called on western allies to come good on their promises of a strong response to Russian aggression, after criticism that some sanctions including those unveiled by the UK seemed limited in scope and target. This is a public ultimatum to Ukraine and the west, said Anton Gerashchenko, adviser to the ministry of interior. He said it left Ukrainians with no option “except to resist all the ways we have”. In Kyiv there was both gratitude for western responses and frustration that some did not seem to go very far. UK sanctions targeted only individuals and smaller banks. The unfolding crisis in Ukraine poses a diplomatic dilemma for China but also offers an opportunity for Beijing as Joe Biden’s administration is likely to continue to be distracted by Russia ahead of the US mid-term elections later this year. China’s position in this round of Russia v the west is under particularly heavy scrutiny following Xi Jinping’s pledge with his Russian counterpart, Vladimir Putin, on 4 February that there would be “no ‘forbidden’ areas of cooperation” in their bilateral relationship. In the last few days, as the crisis in Ukraine dominated international headlines, Chinese analysts have debated the country’s policy choice. While hardliners advocate a pro-Russia foreign policy, others think Beijing should seize on this crisis to protect ties with Washington. “China ultimately wants good relations with the US,” said Wang Huiyao, president of the Centre for China and Globalisation, a Beijing-based thinktank, who also advises the government. It is true that Beijing and Moscow have pledged closer cooperation, because both countries have similar concerns over external involvement in their own security issues, Wang said, adding that China sees some parallels in Nato’s eastward expansion with its own concerns relating to the South China Sea, which, he said “should all be resolved by the countries in the region without foreign interference”. Russia has said it will evacuate its diplomatic staff from Ukraine to “protect their lives and safety”. A statement from the foreign ministry said: Our first priority is to take care of Russian diplomats and employees of the embassy and consulates general. To protect their lives and safety, the Russian leadership decided to evacuate staff of Russian missions in Ukraine, which will be implemented in the very near future. A military convoy of more than 100 trucks with soldiers was seen heading in the direction of the Ukrainian border in Russia’s Belgorod region, according to a witness who spoke to Reuters. Vladimir Putin can still avoid a full-blown war of choice, the US defense secretary, Lloyd Austin, said at the start of talks at the Pentagon with Ukraine’s foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba. Austin condemned Russia’s “latest invasion” of Ukraine but said the United States is working with allies to prevent the conflict from growing. He said the US will continue to work closely with Kyiv and allies “in trying to find a way to avoid further conflict”, and praised Ukraine’s “measured response” in calling for a peaceful solution “in the face of Russia’s aggression, provocations and false accusations.” The US president, Joe Biden, is expected to deliver remarks on Ukraine and Russia in the next few minutes. For live updates from Biden’s speech, head over to our US politics live blog. I will continue here with our global coverage of the Ukraine crisis, and post the top lines that emerge from the White House. The European Commission president, Ursula von der Leyen, is talking in Brussels following the unveiling of EU sanctions. She says she welcomes the package of sanctions against Russia. Russia is not respecting its international obligations and it is violating core principle of international law. Russia has manufactured this crisis and is responsible for the current escalation. She says the decision by Germany to halt the Nord Stream 2 Baltic Sea gas pipeline project is “absolutely right”. Nord Stream 2 has to be assessed in light of the security of energy supply for the whole European Union. This crisis shows us that Europe is still too dependent on Russian gas. She adds that the European Union is “united and acting fast”: Our action today is in response to Russia’s aggressive behaviour. If Russia continues to escalate this crisis that it has created, we are ready to take further action in response. European Union foreign ministers agreed on Tuesday to sanction 27 Russians and entities, as well banks, the defence sector and limiting Russian access to European capital markets, Reuters reports. All members of Russia’s Duma, parliament’s lower house, will be hit with EU sanctions, which typically involve travel bans and asset freezes. The EU foreign policy chief, Josep Borrell, told a news conference alongside France’s foreign minister at a meeting in Paris: This package of sanctions that has been approved by unanimity by the member states will hurt Russia, and it will hurt a lot. We have been asking people living in Ukraine to share their reaction to the situation. Here are some views: ‘Staying means psychological pressure’ Roman, a 37-year-old software developer, based near Kyiv: Putin’s actions were predictable, Russia wouldn’t have attacked directly as it would mean immediate sanctions. But now they have greater leverage. I think there will be high tensions for a long time. If we stay here, we stay under psychological pressure. Last night I was discussing leaving with my wife and she was crying. We don’t want to leave here, it’s a very nice place to live. I have three children aged 10, eight and six-months. We also have a cat which makes it difficult to move abroad. It doesn’t feel good. We’ve been looking at immediate flights to Poland, Slovakia and the Czech Republic, but because of visa reasons we’d need to return fairly quickly. It’s expensive and only solves the immediate problem. We decided not to leave right now, but wait three to five weeks and try to move to western Ukraine, near the Slovakian border. ‘The level of anxiety is high but we’re not sitting back, I have shooting lessons this weekend’ Iryna, a 32-year-old thinktank co-founder in Kyiv: I don’t plan to go anywhere, this is our home and it’s the place we have to defend. With my friends we are going to a shooting lesson this weekend and we’re planning to receive permission to have guns at home, which takes between two weeks and one month for the papers. People with small children or elderly people are thinking about moving to western Ukraine, but others want to defend their home. No one else is going to help us. We’re not expecting a big war but we have to be ready. A lot of people are taking medical courses. Some of the sanctions have been disappointing. Germany cancelling the pipeline was good, and the UK’s actions were a strong move. We’re waiting to see what the US will do. The level of anxiety is high but you have to manage. There is no place for you to relax and be calm. We’re not going to just sit and wait. ‘I don’t think there will be a big war, but I keep the car tank refuelled just in case’ Maksym, a 24-year-old web developer in the city of Lviv, western Ukraine: I’m worrying about Donetsk and Luhansk and about if Ukraine starts a mobilisation. But I think this will be the end of the conflict, a big war will be really bad for Russia, it won’t be able to sell its gas. My friends think the same, and even if a big war does happen, they think it won’t impact western Ukraine as much. If it turns to active war I would leave the country – possibly to somewhere like Cyprus. But for now I’m just working, it just looks like a normal day here, everything is good for now. However, I keep the car tank refuelled and I plan to withdraw funds from bank accounts just in case. I have a friend from about 150 miles near Donetsk, and she’s worrying, she doesn’t know whether she needs to leave. If you’re in Ukraine and want to share views or experiences with us you can do that here. Russia’s recognition of two separatist regions of Ukraine and its decision to send troops are the start of a new invasion, the US deputy secretary of state, Wendy Sherman, said. In a statement to an extraordinary meeting of the OSCE, she said: Make no mistake: Yesterday’s actions are the beginning of the latest Russian invasion of Ukraine. She added: We are on the precipice of a dark and dangerous era. The UK prime minister, Boris Johnson, and the French president, Emmanuel Macron, have spoken about the “chilling developments in Ukraine”, a No 10 spokesperson said. A Downing Street spokesperson said: The prime minister updated President Macron on the new sanctions he unveiled against Russia today, and the leaders agreed they needed to continue to work in lockstep to target Russian individuals and entities bankrolling President Putin’s aggressive approach.” The prime minister said that President Putin’s actions were a gross violation of international law, and by sending forces into Eastern Ukraine he had ripped up the Budapest and Minsk agreements. The two leaders agreed that Russia’s actions “don’t just threaten Ukraine’s sovereignty, but are a blatant attack on freedom and democracy”, the spokesperson added. The pair reiterated that together, the UK and France were working to reinforce Europe’s borders and defend European security against increasing Russian aggression. More from Nato’s secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, speaking at a briefing in Brussels. He said Nato allies have more than 100 warplanes on high alert and more than 120 warships ready at sea from the Arctic Circle to the Mediterranean Sea. He said Nato response force remains on high readiness but is not yet being deployed, although some allies are moving troops, ships and planes into the Baltic states and near the Black Sea to defend other Nato members. Nato has to respond when we see aggressive actions by Russia, but we continue to strive for dialogue, for de-escalation and we believe it is important to talk. Vladimir Putin has said that Russia will support the territorial claims of its proxy states in east Ukraine, dramatically increasing the likelihood of a larger war in the near future. Putin confirmed that Russia had recognised the expanded borders of the two Russian-controlled territories in east Ukraine in remarks to the press. “We recognised the states,” he said. That means we recognised all of their fundamental documents, including the constitution, where it is written that their [borders] are the territories at the time the two regions were part of Ukraine. His dry explanation has explosive consequences: Russia could use the territorial claims as a cause to launch an invasion of more Ukrainian territory, saying it was defending the interests of its proxy states in Donetsk and Luhansk. Putin stopped short of saying that he was about to launch a further invasion. But we expect, and I want to underline this, that all the difficult questions will be solved during negotiations between the current Kyiv government and the leadership of this government. But Kyiv has always resisted negotiating directly with the governments of the Russian-controlled territories, saying it wants to speak with Moscow directly. Having recognised the territories and received authorisation to use military force abroad on Tuesday evening, it has become clear that Russia is building the framework for what could be a broader conflict in Ukraine. All three Baltic states called for tough economic sanctions to be levied now against Russia in the margins of the Joint Expeditionary Force meeting – and called for more British and other Nato troops to deploy in their countries and around eastern Europe. Artis Pabriks, Latvia’s defence minister, was the most outspoken, calling for tough sanctions to be introduced now. This should “include everything which is economically painful” including banking, energy and oligarchs “must be personally targeted” – while Britain should “certainly” clean up the flow of dirty money in London. A former soldier who served unwillingly, he said, in Soviet forces, he said Putin could not be appeased and was weighing up whether to invade Ukraine based, in part, on the strength of the West’s response. If we are mild today, then instead of spilling money, we will spill blood, because he [Putin] will not stop? Kalle Lannet, the defence minister of Estonia, said “we need to orient more of these sanctions towards oligarchs” while Margiris Abukevicius, the deputy defence minister of Lithuania, called for a “doubling of the number” of Nato forces in eastern Europe. Nato currently operates four battle groups of about 1,500 in Estonia – led by the UK – Latvia, Lithuania and Poland, with the creation of similar forces being considered for Romania and Bulgaria. Both the US and the UK have already sent additional forces to the region. Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin, describes an “armed to the teeth Ukraine” as “anti-Russia” and “unacceptable”. Speaking at a briefing in Moscow, Putin says Russia is “seriously concerned” about the threat of Ukraine developing nuclear weapons. He claims Ukraine’s president Volodymyr Zelenskiy’s recent remarks deploring Ukraine giving up its nuclear arsenal in 1994 were “targeted at Russia”, and says the only thing that Ukraine lacks in this regard is the systems to enrich uranium. Asked whether Russian troops will be deployed to the separatist-held republics or go beyond that, Putin does not give a straight answer. I didn’t say they will go there straight after our meeting. He adds that deployment of troops to Ukraine depends on the situation on the ground. In the wake of Russia’s recognition of the self-proclaimed republics in Luhansk and Donetsk, Ukrainians took to social media to pledge they would no longer speak Russian. Alex Cooper, a well known restaurateur, was one of them. I was born in Bessarabia, since childhood my friends and I spoke a mix of three or four languages. In my family, everyone spoke Ukrainian with Cherkasy touches, because my mother is from that region, and I always considered it my homeland. Then after 10 years in Odessa for school and higher education, I continued to think in Ukrainian, but I spoke Russian, because it was more convenient. But at the moment I see no option for myself other than to stay in Ukraine, work honestly, do my job even better, do new projects and speak Ukrainian. Another woman with family in Russia said: My name is Katya, I am 31 years old, I thought and spoke in Russian every day. My closest, most dearly loved people live in Russia – my mother, grandmother, sister and nephews. I love, adore and respect them infinitely. I am in excruciating pain for this language gap, but I am grown up and an independent person. And I don’t even want to be lexically involved in this madness. Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin, says the Minsk agreements “no longer exists”, Reuters reports. Addressing reporters at a second news conference in Moscow this afternoon, Putin says the “best decision that Ukraine could take would be to renounce its Nato membership ambitions”. He says Russia will provide military assistance to rebels in the eastern Ukrainian regions of Donetsk and Luhansk. If there is a conflict of course, if it is necessary, we will follow through on the obligations we took. We’re counting on resolution of all these differences. These differences will be sorted out between Kyiv, and Luhansk and Donetsk regions. But for the moment we understand that this is probably impossible in this current situation but we’re hoping for this in the future. Putin called for international recognition of Crimea as part of Russia, claiming Russia’s 2014 annexation of Ukraine’s Crimean Peninsula should be internationally recognized as a legitimate reflection of the local population’s choice. The White House has now said that the US president, Joe Biden, will deliver remarks on the Ukraine crisis at 6pm UK time (1pm EST). The address will provide “an update on Russia and Ukraine,” the White House said, bringing forward the scheduled time by one hour. Russia has not stopped planning for a full-scale invasion of Ukraine since recognising the independence of separatist enclaves, the Nato secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, said. “Every indication is that Russia is continuing to plan for a full-scale attack of Ukraine,” Stoltenberg tells reporters. We see the ongoing military build up... We see that more and more of the forces are moving out of the camps and are in combat formations and ready to strike. And we see the ongoing provocations in Donbas and the different false flag operations where they tried to create a pretext for an attack. And then of course we saw last night that further Russian troops moved into Donbas, into parts of Donetsk and Luhansk. And then we have the threatening rhetoric, which was actually confirmed in the speech of President Putin yesterday. Stoltenberg goes on to insist it’s “never too late” for Russia not to attack. We continue to call on Russia to step back, to de-escalate, and to engage in good faith in diplomatic efforts to find a political solution. Russia’s upper house of parliament has unanimously voted this afternoon in favour of giving Putin the authority to deploy Russia’s armed forces abroad for what it described as a “peacekeeping mission” in two breakaway regions of eastern Ukraine. The vote formally allows Putin to send troops into the Donbas region of Ukraine. The decision takes immediate effect, one of the lawmakers said as they discussed the motion. Nato secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, speaking at a news briefing in Brussels, continues: We commend Ukraine for its restraint in not responding to Russia’s repeated provocations. He insists that the military alliance will continue to provide Ukraine with “strong political support”. This is a crisis created by Russia alone. He commends Ukraine for its “restraint” in not responding to Russia’s “repeated provocations”, adding that Nato is “united in their full support of Ukraine’s sovereignty and territory integrity”. We will continue to provide Ukraine with strong political support and allies are providing equipment to help Ukraine defend itself as well as sustained financial support. Nato is “resolute and united in its determination to protect and defend all allies”, he adds. Nato secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, describes the Ukraine crisis as “the most dangerous moment for European security in a generation”. Stoltenberg is speaking at a news conference in Brussels: Moscow has moved from covert attempts to destabilise Ukraine to overt military action. He adds the move was a “serious escalation by Russia and a flagrant violation of international law”. Vladimir Putin has asked legislators for permission to use force outside Russia, which could pave the way for a broader attack on Ukraine, AP reports. The Russian president asked the upper house of parliament for permission to use Russia’s armed forces abroad after formally recognising two eastern Ukrainian regions, the chamber’s speaker said. Addressing the chamber during a part of an evening session that was broadcast on the chamber’s website, one of Russia’s deputy defence ministers said that Russia had been left with no choice, and asked to approve a deployment abroad. The US president, Joe Biden, will deliver remarks at 7pm UK time (2pm ET) to provide an update on the situation concerning Russia and Ukraine, the White House has said. From Lauren Gambino, our US political correspondent: Ukraine is cautiously optimistic that its allies are finally listening to Kyiv about the need to impose sanctions on Russia, the Ukrainian foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, said. Speaking at a briefing, Kuleba said he would have more talks with US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, and that separately he had contacted the UK and other countries with additional requests for weapons. Kuleba separately welcomed the move by Germany to put the certification of the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline on hold, tweeting that it was a “morally, politically and practically correct step”. Human Rights Watch has highlighted Russia’s track record for bombing civilian infrastructure in Syria’s conflict and voiced fear “war crimes strategy” could be repeated in Ukraine if the conflict escalates further, AFP reports. HRW chief, Kenneth Roth, warned the region could “be on the verge of a significant armed conflict” and that given Russia’s recent behaviour during Syria’s civil war, that was a deeply worrying prospect. Speaking to reporters during a video briefing, Roth said the Syrian government and its Russian ally “showed callous disregard” for civilian life in late 2020 as they strived to retake the Idlib province and surrounding areas in northwest Syria. The nearly year-long Idlib bombing campaign “gives us a sense of the way the Russian military has been fighting recently”, Roth said, adding that Russian bombers were “deliberately attacking civilian institutions to try to make life unlivable and make it easier for the Syrian military to roll in”. During this time, he said, Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin, “had command responsibility”, and had given top honours to the “commanders who were overseeing this war crimes strategy”. Roth said: We are deeply concerned that this war crimes strategy (could) be replicated in the case of Ukraine should armed conflict break out there. The Kremlin regrets Germany’s suspension of certification of the Nord Stream 2 Baltic Sea gas pipeline project, designed to double the flow of Russian gas direct to Germany, Interfax news agency reported, citing Kremlin spokesperson Dmitry Peskov. The Kremlin hopes the delay of Nord Stream 2 is temporary, Interfax quoted Peskov as saying on Tuesday. (Via Reuters) More from Shaun on that apparent decision from Turkish Airlines ... The White House has begun referring to Russian troop deployments in eastern Ukraine as an “invasion”, AP reports. Several European leaders said earlier in the day that Russian troops had moved into rebel-held areas in eastern Ukraine after Putin recognised their independence – but some indicated it was not yet the long-feared, full-fledged invasion. The White House, which had been reluctant to use the word “invasion”, signalled a shift in its own position on Tuesday. “We think this is, yes, the beginning of an invasion, Russia’s latest invasion into Ukraine,” said Jon Finer, principal deputy national security adviser. He said “latest” was important. “An invasion is an invasion and that is what is under way.” The White House decided to begin referring to Russia’s actions as an “invasion” because of the situation on the ground, according to a US official who spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss internal deliberations. The administration resisted initially calling the deployment of troops because the White House wanted to see what Russia was actually going to do. After assessing Russian troop movements, it became clear it was a new invasion, the official added. Ben Wallace, the UK defence secretary, wrapped up the Joint Expeditionary Force conference of 10 European defence ministers in Britain – mostly from the Baltic and Nordic countries – with a challenge to President Vladimir Putin’s view of history: If you want to know what his next intentions are, I recommend you listen to his latest speech that he made last night, full of huge inaccuracies, one of them is that Ukraine is not a proper state. I should remind people Ukraine has been separate to Russia as a nation longer than it’s been part of Russia. That’s a simple fact of history. You should look at the history books and not selectively pick dates that suit the narrative. The conference, held in Belvoir Castle, wrapped up a couple of hours earlier in response to the Ukraine crisis, with all 10 defence ministers “united in our condemnation” of Russia’s recognition of the self-proclaimed republics in Luhansk and Donetsk, “the buildup of Russian forces on the border with Ukraine, and further incursion in the Donbas region”. Navalny not holding back here, as Shaun points out. Jessica Elgot, the Guardian’s chief political correspondent, on the disappointment with which the UK government’s sanctions package has been met. The UN human rights chief has warned that a military escalation in Ukraine would significantly increase the risk of serious violations, AFP reports. Michelle Bachelet said in a statement that she was “deeply concerned” following Putin’s decision to recognise the independence of eastern Ukraine’s Donetsk and Luhansk separatist republics. “Any significant escalation in military action creates a heightened risk of serious human rights violations as well as violations of international humanitarian law,” Bachelet said. The UN high commissioner for human rights stressed that “at this critical juncture, the priority, above all, must be to prevent a further escalation, and to prevent civilian casualties, displacement and destruction of civilian infrastructure”. “I call on all sides to cease hostilities and to pave the way for dialogue instead of setting the stage for further violence,” she added. The UN rights agency, she said, would “continue to monitor the situation closely from our offices on both sides of the contact line in the east of the country”. Or, as Shaun Walker puts it … It appears the US embassy in Kyiv is engaging in some Moscow baiting … Vladimir Putin’s angry and rambling hour-long potted history of Ukraine’s failings on Monday night, culminating in a commitment to recognise the self-proclaimed republics in Donetsk and Luhansk, left western diplomats scratching their heads and wondering whether they had been made redundant. The European Union is set to activate an EU cyber response team to help Ukraine face Russian attacks, Lithuania’s deputy defence minister, Margiris Abukevicius, tweeted. On Monday, the Ukrainian foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, said Russia had been using hybrid tactics to “escalate the situation”. Russian-backed separatist leader Denis Pushilin said on Tuesday that Moscow formally recognised the breakaway region of Donetsk within the wider boundaries of eastern Ukraine’s Donetsk region, much of which is controlled by Ukrainian forces. Speaking on Russian state television, Pushilin said the matter of the territory not controlled by separatists would be resolved later. “The border issue is not simple, it will be resolved later,” he said. (Via Reuters) A little explanation from our central and eastern Europe correspondent, Shaun Walker, on what this matters: The territory currently controlled by the so-called people’s republics is less than half of the territory of Donetsk and Luhansk regions, but both entities claim sovereignty over the whole regions. In the summer of 2014, the Ukrainian army took back control over many towns that had initially been seized by Russia-backed separatists. If Russia recognises the territories in those borders, it raises the threat of a potential military campaign to retake them. Russia has announced recognition of two new republics inside Ukraine’s borders, but Putin’s spokesman won’t define how big they are. The UK has imposed sanctions on five Russian banks and three high net-worth individuals. Prime minister Boris Johnson is speaking to parliament now. He says this is just the “first tranche” and there will be more. More details from our Brussels bureau chief Daniel Boffey on possible EU sanctions: Ursula von der Leyen and Charles Michel, presidents of the European council and commission in Brussels, have issued a statement that for the first time sketches out the areas in which the EU wants to hit Russia with sanctions. The proposals will need to garner unanimous support from the member states whose foreign ministers are meeting this afternoon. The two EU institutional leaders suggest that the bloc is prepared to go further than expected, given that Josep Borrell, the EU high representative for foreign affairs, had earlier suggested the Russian move into the Donbas was not a “fully fledged invasion”. They say that the package contains the following proposals: to target those who were involved in the illegal decision. to target banks that are financing Russian military and other operations in those territories. to target the ability of the Russian state and government to access the EU’s capital and financial markets and services, to limit the financing of escalatory and aggressive policies. to target trade from the two Russian-controlled territories to and from the EU, to ensure that those responsible clearly feel the economic consequences of their illegal and aggressive actions. UK prime minister Boris Johnson will speak in parliament imminently. He is expected to announce the “first barrage of UK economic sanctions against Russia”. Readers: You can follow the speech on the Guardian’s UK politics live blog. We are not expecting to see Russia’s parliament act against Putin, but for completionist sake, the upper house of parliament just voted unanimously to approve friendship treaties with two self-proclaimed people’s republics in eastern Ukraine. Yesterday I interviewed Oleh Synehubov, the governor of the Ukrainian municipality of Kharkiv. We spoke in the Stalin-era regional administration building in the centre of the city. Kharkiv is a city of nearly 1.5 million people – mainly Russian-speaking – and sits just across the border from Russia. I asked him what the plans were in the event of a Russian invasion. He told me that at the first sign of “anomalous” activity at the border he would be called into the office and an operation would start to warn citizens of a Russian attack. He said: There is a clear plan of action. To start with there will be warning signals for all citizens. There will be television, radio and internet announcements, messages to mobile phones, sirens will sound, patrol cars and fire engines will go through the city with loudspeakers to tell people what to do. Special measures would be taken at military sites and other strategic locations, and special efforts would be made to evacuate places such as care homes and schools, he added. The exact plan – whether the orders to people were to find the nearest bomb shelter, or whether an evacuation would be instigated – would depend on the kind of invasion, he said. If it’s an artillery attack, then it’s clear everyone has to go to bomb shelters, if it’s a full-scale invasion then we are already in a zone of military action and there would be an evacuation. “I hope that we will not have to put this plan into action,” he told me, adding that the local parliament had a regular week of work, including reviewing the annual budget on Thursday. Here’s a quick recap of developments so far today: Germany’s chancellor says he won’t certify a key gas pipeline from Russia as the situation has “fundamentally changed” after Putin ordered troops over Ukraine’s border. The UK government believes the Russian invasion of Ukraine has already begun. The health minister, Sajid Javid, says it is clear Russian president Vladimir Putin has decided to attack the sovereignty of Ukraine. The west has struggled to maintain unity in response to the presence of Russian troops in Ukraine as the UK and the EU prepared to unveil the scale and scope of the sanctions to be imposed on the Kremlin. Moscow is sending mixed signals about whether it will seek to conquer more territory in east Ukraine. Donetsk and Luhansk claim they should have more territory – but so far it’s unclear whether Moscow is recognising the existing borders or the area they want to control. UK government reminding all Britons to leave Ukraine now ... The United Nations is relocating some of its non-essential staff and their family members in Ukraine, AFP reports. “We are committed to staying and to continue delivering in Ukraine, especially in eastern Ukraine,” UN spokeswoman Alessandra Vellucci told reporters in Geneva. We continue to be fully operational.” She acknowledged though that “as a result of the evolving situation on the ground, we have allowed for temporary relocation of some non-essential staff and some dependents”. The UN has 1,510 staff members in Ukraine, including 149 international staff, Vellucci said. In all, around 100 staff members are based in the self-proclaimed republics in Luhansk and Donetsk. There have been warnings that a scale-up in the conflict could displace millions of people and cause a humanitarian crisis. The UN refugee agency said on Tuesday that for now it was not seeing any increased movements outside the eastern regions. But “the situation does remain unpredictable,” spokeswoman Shabia Mantoo told reporters in Geneva. Meanwhile, the UN humanitarian agency OCHA warned that it was seeing reports of increased hostilities in the east of Ukraine, which has been wracked by conflict for eight years already. Spokesman Jens Laerke said the UN was continuing to follow a humanitarian response plan put in place before the latest escalation in tensions, including most recently sending an aid convoy into the non-government-controlled areas last Friday. He warned though that even that response lacks funding, stressing that the best preparation for what could possibly be a dramatic increase in needs was to finance the existing aid efforts on the ground. We stand united with Ukraine. We will not walk away. We will continue to support you in every possible way. I praise the Ukrainian leaders who, despite constant provocations, remain calm and express willingness to solve this conflict peacefully. Russia must end the intolerable provocations and stop fuelling the conflict, which has been ongoing for eight years. Moscow should immediately and unconditionally withdraw its forces from Ukraine’s territory and its immediate vicinity. We strongly condemn all military and hybrid actions against Ukraine. We regret that despite diplomatic efforts, there are no signs of willingness to de-escalate – quite the opposite, [with] the buildup of Russian forces continues, including in Belarus. I align myself with everyone who wishes we had a way to secure peace through the force of diplomacy and dialogue. Indeed, it is a decisive moment in European history. President Putin will answer to future generations for his violent actions. As European and western leaders, we also have the responsibility to step up to our values [and] our commitment to a Europe that is united and at peace. We regret every single life lost. It is our duty to protect our common values and the democracy we all helped to build. A threat to Ukraine is a threat to the security of Europe. The minimum we can do is to step up our practical support to Ukraine, which Estonia has done and will continue to do. In the EU, we will deliver on a massive package of sanctions and do so swiftly and decisively. But most importantly we must keep the door to EU and Nato open for Ukraine and we must have concrete next steps for further cooperation and integration. We know you will continue to value democracy and remain on the path of reforms. Eventually we will welcome you as the member of the European Union – you belong in Europe. We support Ukraine’s independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity. We remain fully committed to the policy of non-recognition of illegal annexation of Ukraine’s territories. Ukraine has a right to defend its borders and independence and we continue helping Ukraine to build its military capabilities to stand against the aggression. Greece, which has a large expatriate community in east Ukraine, says diplomats in the region have been placed on alert to help the 120,000-strong community following the latest developments. After an emergency meeting of the government’s foreign affairs and defence council (Kysea), Athens insisted that it was “completely synchronised” with its EU and Nato partners, calling Russia’s recognition of the self-proclaimed republics in Luhansk and Donetsk a “violation of Ukraine’s territorial integrity and of the fundamental principles of international law”. A reinforced consular team in Mariupol, the frontline city where ethnic Greeks are mostly based, was “in a constant state of readiness to provide whatever assistance may be necessary”, the council said in a statement. As tensions have escalated in eastern Ukraine, the plight of ethnic Greeks living there has been highlighted by Athens, with some analysts going so far as to say that Hellenic naval ships could be dispatched to evacuate community members in the event of a full-blown invasion. In 2014, Mariupol briefly came under the control of pro-Russian separatist forces in the Donetsk People’s Republic. Greece’s deputy foreign minister in charge of diaspora affairs, Andreas Katsaniotis, told state-run TV this morning that while Greek citizens, such as teachers, living in the region had returned to Athens, ethnic Greek Ukrainians with roots in the area had stayed put as “they have roots there that go back years”. “We are doing whatever we possibly can to assist them,” said Katsaniotis, adding that diplomats had also appealed to Greek media representatives dispatched to Ukraine to make contact with consular staff. Addressing a visiting delegation from Bulgaria following the Kysea meeting, the Greek prime minister, Kyriakos Mitsotakis, emphasised how important the community was for Athens. “Our country has an additional reason for concern when following developments,” he said, “The protection and support of ethnic Greeks in Ukraine and the very large community in Mariupol which has been present in the region for over 2,000 years.” Moscow is sending mixed signals about whether it will seek to conquer more territory in east Ukraine. The two Russian-controlled territories in east Ukraine claim that they should control more territory than they currently do. That includes the large city of Mariupol, which is on the government side of the front lines. If Moscow supports their claim, then Russia could launch an attack to capture that territory. So the key question in Moscow today is whether Russia is recognising the territories’ existing borders – or the territory they would like to control. Thus far, it’s not clear. A Russian deputy foreign minister gave a direct answer during a press conference that Russia recognises the borders in which those states “exercise their authority and jurisdiction”. That’s fairly straightforward – Russia supports the status quo. But then Vladimir Putin’s spokesman answered a similar question. Dmitry Peskov said that the borders are “those in which they exist and were proclaimed”. Those are different things. The proclaimed borders in 2014 include cities like Mariupol. The current borders do not. So what’s happening? The ambiguity may be intentional, allowing Vladimir Putin to make his decision on the basis of how the west responds to his formal occupation of Ukrainian territory. If he needs a new bargaining chip in his negotiations, he could threaten a new war to capture additional territory. On the other hand, it is possible that many of those speaking just don’t know the answer. Peskov, who was questioned at length by a BBC journalist, said he couldn’t add anything to his talking points. For their part, the authorities in the Russian-controlled territories have said that they continue to view their borders as the entirety of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions. If Moscow agrees, then a new war is a likely result. Germany has stopped the certification process for the controversial Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline in reaction to Russia’s recognition of the self-proclaimed republics in Luhansk and Donetsk in east Ukraine, chancellor Olaf Scholz has announced. On Tuesday morning, Germany’s energy minister, Robert Habeck, instructed the withdrawal of a positive assessment required to authorise the pipeline between Russia and Germany. “Without this certification Nord Stream 2 cannot go into operation,” Scholz said at a press conference in Berlin at midday. The German leader described Putin’s recognition of the Russian-controlled territories as a “grave breach” of international law that broke with decades of agreements between Russia and the west. “The situation today is fundamentally different.” Ambassadors for the 27 EU member states met this morning in Brussels to discuss the next steps with regard to sanctions against Russia. Concerning divisions have emerged, diplomatic sources tell me. The EU’s foreign affairs wing, the European external action service (EEAS), proposed sanctioning 27 persons and entities involved in the Kremlin’s decision to recognise the self-proclaimed republics in Luhansk and Donetsk; the 351 members of the Duma who voted in favour of it, and the 11 who proposed it, along with the commanders of the Russian military “peacekeeping” mission. Viktor Orbán’s government in Hungary has refused to support the move at this stage. “They stressed the importance of dialogue and wanted to reconvene with [Budapest]”, a diplomat said. “It was to be expected but Orbán has now really shown his true colours. Again, this begs the question where Orbán loyalty is: to Moscow or his European allies? And the question of how much more of this blocking behaviour other leaders can swallow.” A wider sanctions package is being worked on by the European Commission, mirroring the sanctions imposed at the time of the annexation of Crimea by Russia. This, it is said, will have a strong impact on imports and exports to Russia and Russian banks. Sources said there were also, however, “some worrying signals regarding the broader sanctions package”. According to one diplomat, Austria, Germany and Italy stressed the importance of incrementalism. The source said: “This fetish for incremental steps really raises questions on these countries’ willingness to approve the ‘big bang’ sanctions package when we need it.” It is expected that the EEAS proposal will be finalised or early tomorrow with the commission proposals due to take longer. Any sanctions package requires unanimity. Nord Stream 2, the 750-mile pipeline connecting Russia and Germany, has been completed but has not yet certified by Germany’s energy regulator. These words, via my colleague Philip Oltermann, suggest the German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, has decided to pull the plug on the pipeline because of the Ukraine crisis. Here’s Reuters with some more context on reports that Russia recognises the self-proclaimed republics in Luhansk and Donetsk within the borders they currently control. Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, on Tuesday questioned whether Ukraine had a right to sovereignty because he said the government in Kyiv did not represent the country’s constituent parts, the Interfax news agency reported. “If we talk about the principle of sovereignty and territorial integrity, one of the key documents … is the declaration on principles of international law concerning friendly relations among peoples,” he was quoted as saying. Lavrov accused Ukraine of being out of line with that since 2014 when a Moscow-backed president was overthrown in Kyiv and replaced by a pro-western leader, prompting Russia to annex Ukraine’s peninsula of Crimea and back an insurgency in its eastern regions. “I don’t think anyone can claim that the Ukrainian regime, since the 2014 coup d’état, represents all the people living on the territory of the Ukrainian state,” Lavrov was quoted as saying. RUSSIA’S FOREIGN MINISTRY SAYS RUSSIA RECOGNISES BREAKAWAY UKRAINIAN REPUBLICS WITHIN BORDERS THAT THEY CURRENTLY CONTROL - IFAX (Via Reuters) My colleague Paul Macinnes reports that Uefa is ready to drop St Petersburg as the venue for this year’s Champions League final as the military crisis in Ukraine deepens. As Andrew Roth points out (see here), the key question today is whether Russia recognises the Luhansk and Donetsk People’s republics in their existing borders - or claims their 2014 borders. This includes territory controlled by Ukraine. One possible precedent is Georgia, where Russia fought a five-day war in August 2008. There are ominous parallels. The Kremlin sent troops from breakaway South Ossetia into Georgia “proper”. Vladimir Putin did not ultimately seize the Georgian capital Tbilisi. But he did capture additional territory and restore the old Soviet border of South Ossetia. This included seizing the town of Akhalgori, where Georgian and South Ossetian residents had previously lived peacefully together under Georgian government control. The operation was simple. Russian troops blocked a mountain road with an armoured vehicle and stationed what it said were “peacekeepers” in Akhalgori’s main square. The town today is under separatist control. Analysts believe an attempt to repeat Georgia in 2022 would be much harder, and more bloody, and involve a full-scale war with the Ukrainian military. Reuters has this on Turkey’s president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, calling Russia’s recognition of Donetsk and Luhansk “unacceptable”. Nato member Turkey is a maritime neighbour with Ukraine and Russia in the Black Sea and has good ties with both. Erdoğan has offered to mediate in the conflict, warned Russia against invading Ukraine, and criticised the west’s handling of the crisis. Speaking to reporters on a flight over Africa, Erdoğan said: We see this decision by Russia as unacceptable. We repeat our call for common sense and respect for international law by all sides. Italy has condemned Russia’s decision to recognise Russian-controlled territory in Luhansk and Donetsk. “The decision of the Russian authorities to recognise the so-called separatist republics of Luhansk and Donetsk is to be condemned as a violation of the Minsk agreements,” Foreign Minister Luigi Di Maio said in a statement. Di Maio said the decision “represents a serious obstacle in the path towards a diplomatic solution of the Ukrainian crisis”. He added: “Italy is in constant contact with European and Atlantic partners to coordinate the response to the announcement by the President of the Russian Federation.” The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) in Donetsk is responding to severe water shortages caused after active hostilities put several water stations and pipelines out of order in eastern Ukraine. Today it will dispatch 3,000 litres of potable water to Dokuchaevsk hospital to keep services running, and send 7,000 litres of potable water to Donetsk municipality to distribute to essential facilities. The ICRC will also set up five 5,000-litre capacity water points in Olenovka. The ICRC says its engineers are in close contact with their counterparts at the Voda Donbasa water utility company to get specifications on the equipment needed to restore the activity of the 1st Lift Pumping Station. My colleague Shaun Walker on one of the Russian foreign ministry’s current lines ... China has urged all parties on the Ukraine issue to “remain calm, ease tensions and resolve differences through dialogue and negotiation”. The country’s foreign minister, Wang Yi, also told US secretary of state Anthony Blinken in a phone call today that “the legitimate security concerns of all countries must be respected”. China’s reaction to Russia’s move in Ukraine has been under heavy scrutiny in recent weeks. On 4 February, China’s leader, Xi Jinping, and Russia’s Vladimir Putin pledged “no ‘forbidden’ areas of cooperation” in the bilateral relationship. But Moscow’s manoeuvre in Ukraine clearly posed a headache for Beijing. On the one hand, like Russia, China is frustrated with its deteriorating relations with the US and its allies. On the other hand, however, it does not foresee much diplomatic gain by fully backing Russia on its action in Ukraine. “The sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of any country should be respected and safeguarded,” Wang told the Munich Security Conference by video link over the weekend. “Ukraine is no exception.” This from the US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, explains the measures the US is taking to protect its diplomatic staff in Ukraine. It also echoes calls for US citizens to get out of Ukraine immediately. For security reasons, Department of State personnel currently in Lviv will spend the night in Poland. Our personnel will regularly return to continue their diplomatic work in Ukraine and provide emergency consular services. They will continue to support the Ukrainian people and the Ukrainian government, coordinating on diplomatic efforts … The fact that we are taking prudent precautions for the sake of the safety of US government personnel and US citizens, as we do regularly worldwide, in no way undermines our support for, or our commitment to, Ukraine. Our commitment to Ukraine transcends any one location. We strongly reiterate our recommendation to US citizens to depart Ukraine immediately. The security situation in Ukraine continues to be unpredictable throughout the country and may deteriorate with little notice. Imposing sanctions against Russia is “a question of firmness and credibility”, France’s Europe minister, Clément Beaune, said as he condemned a “grave violation” of international law by Russia. Beaune, a close ally of French president Emmanuel Macron, is chairing a routine meeting of EU ministers in Brussels that is being overshadowed by the crisis in Ukraine. With EU foreign ministers holding a separate emergency meeting later on Tuesday, he declined to be drawn on the nature of the EU response, saying it was “necessary to respond with sanctions adapted to the situation”. Finland’s Europe minister, Tytti Tuppurainen, said Putin had made a historic mistake: “His actions are in clear violation of international law and sovereignty of Ukraine and its territorial integrity,” she said, vowing a strong and united response from the EU. The EU had prepared sanctions for every scenario, she said. “We have prepared massive sanctions and we are ready to create severe consequences [for] Russia and Putin.” As diplomats met in Brussels on Tuesday, it remained unclear whether Putin’s order to send troops into Ukraine is the trigger for the massive sanctions the EU has been threatening for weeks. In co-ordinated statements leaders of the EU institutions referred to “sanctions against those involved in this illegal act”, suggesting the first response to Russia’s actions might not be sweeping economic sanctions. Lithuania continues to urge the EU to move ahead with economic sanctions against Russia. “How we react as the European Union will define our character and indeed the future of Europe,” said Lithuania’s deputy Europe minister Arnoldas Pranckevičius. He called on Europe to move ahead with economic sanctions, double its support to Ukraine - including boosting the physical presence of political and diplomatic leaders in Kyiv - and to rethink its defence posture in the Baltic region. Pranckevičius said: The [EU sanctions] have to be serious, they have to be real, they should not be symbolic. If we want to deter further actions of President Putin, if we indeed want to stop the war from happening, we need to move ahead with serious measures. Martin Klus, Slovakia’s Europe minister, suggested the EU would start with sanctions against individuals, adding that his country was open to further sanctions against Russia. Ireland’s Europe minister Thomas Byrne said: We have got to ensure that whatever happens that Russia certainly feels the pain and that is going to happen. Today what has happened is a grotesque breach of international law, it’s a grotesque breach of the sovereignty of Ukraine. Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, has brushed off the threat of sanctions on Tuesday, describing the west’s actions as predictable. Our European, American, British colleagues will not stop and will not calm down until they have exhausted all their possibilities for the so-called ‘punishment of Russia’. They are already threatening us with all manner of sanctions or, as they say now, ‘the mother of all sanctions’. Well, we’re used to it. We know that sanctions will be imposed anyway, in any case. With or without reason. (Via Reuters) Russia’s decision to recognise two self-proclaimed regions in eastern Ukraine means the Kremlin has taken another step towards the revival of the Soviet Union, Ukraine’s defence minister, Oleksii Reznikov, said on Tuesday: The Kremlin has taken another step towards the revival of the Soviet Union. With the new Warsaw Pact and the new Berlin Wall. (Via Reuters) One of the big questions today will be whether the incursion of Russian troops into eastern Ukraine will spell the end of Nord Stream 2, the pipeline between Russia and Germany that poses an obvious target for sanctions. Following a phone call with US president Joe Biden and France’s Emanuel Macron last night, the German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, harshly condemned Russia’s actions as “a clear breach of the Minsk Protocol”, vowing that “this step will not remain unanswered”. But so far Germany’s government has not yet said what its answer will entail. Scholz’s Social Democrat party colleague Michael Roth, the chair of the Bundestag’s foreign policy committee, has called for swift sanctions targeted at “the oligarchic system, the people who have become rich through Putin”. Roth told Reuters: “The first sanctions already have to be painful for the Putin system.” The SPD party group’s foreign policy spokesperson, Nils Schmid, warned any reaction to the breach of the Minsk protocol should not affect Germany’s restrictive stance on exporting lethal weapons. “We should not deliver lethal weapons to Ukraine”, Schmid said. The far-right Alternative für Deutschland, meanwhile, wants the German government to rule out any sanctions whatsoever, since these would lead to “further escalation”. Instead, it proposes an independence referendum in Donetsk and Luhansk, “such as has been carried out in western European states like Scotland”. Ben Wallace, the UK defence secretary, said that Russia had “broken international law” by unilaterally recognising the self-proclaimed republics in Ukraine’s eastern Donbas region. Ukraine, he added, was a sovereign state that had had land “effectively annexed” from it as Russian troops appeared to be entering the separatist regions overnight. The cabinet minister was speaking at the opening of a day-long meeting of the Joint Expeditionary Force, a forum of 10 European defence ministers from the UK, Nordic and Baltic countries at Belvoir Castle in Leicestershire. It was a “clear fact that Russia has broken international law,” Wallace said. He added: Many of us were forewarning that President Putin already had an agenda. You heard that agenda in his speech last night. This is a sovereign state that has now had some of its land effectively annexed from it. This is a sovereign state that is a democratic state in Europe, all of us in Europe should worry. Frans Timmermans, the former Dutch foreign minister who is now vice-president of the European commission, has described today as “no doubt one of the darkest days of European history”. Speaking in Paris at the EU Indo-Pacific forum, he said: Russia is no longer the power to dominate, therefore chooses to disrupt. And our reaction to that behaviour is going to determine not just the security of Europe, it is going to determine global security for the years to come. That is why I believe we need to answer this blatant act of disregard for the rule of law and for international law with increased resolve to increase our cooperation across the globe, and especially also with the Indo-Pacific. Meanwhile, the Belgian prime minister, Alexander De Croo, has said the EU should “hit Russia where it hurts.” He added: Russia is doing what it always wanted to do, take a piece of territory of Ukraine. We will respond in an appropriate way to what is happening here. It has to be appropriate sanctions, we have to keep a cool head, but we have to show that this leads to a high cost for Russia. EU foreign ministers will decide on the level of sanctions this afternoon. Britain will immediately impose hard economic sanctions on Russia after President Vladimir Putin ordered the deployment of troops to two breakaway regions in eastern Ukraine, Boris Johnson has said. We will immediately institute a package of economic sanctions. This is, I should stress, just the first barrage of UK economic sanctions against Russia, because we expect I’m afraid that there is more Russian irrational behaviour to come … [The sanctions] will hit Russia very hard, and there is a lot more that we are going to do in the event of an invasion. Johnson said he would set out the sanctions in the House of Commons, probably at around 1230 GMT. The sanctions, Johnson said, would be “targeted not just at entities in Donbas and Luhansk and Donetsk, but in Russia itself – targeting Russian economic interests as hard as we can”. Britain has threatened to cut off Russian companies’ access to US dollars and British pounds, blocking them from raising capital in London and to expose what Johnson calls the “Russian doll” of property and company ownership. Britain has not yet spelled out who would fall under the sanctions, but has pledged that there would be nowhere for Russian oligarchs to hide. Johnson has said targets could include Russian banks. Hundreds of billions of dollars have flowed into London and Britain’s overseas territories from Russia since the fall of the Soviet Union in 1991, and London has become the western city of choice for the super-wealthy of Russia and other former Soviet republics. Putin will find he has “gravely miscalculated”, Johnson said, adding that Moscow appeared to be bent on a full-scale invasion of its former Soviet neighbour. Johnson chaired a meeting of Britain’s national emergency security committee early on Tuesday. Speaking afterwards, he said: I think that the tragedy of the present situation is that President Putin has surrounded himself with like-minded advisors who tell him that Ukraine is not a proper country. And I think that he is going to find that he has gravely miscalculated. (Via Reuters) In his BBC interview, Sajid Javid also said the current situation could be compared to the 1962 Cuban missile crisis. I do think it’s as serious a situation as that. There is still an opportunity here for President Putin to step back, despite him having now chosen confrontation over dialogue. It is not too late for him to step back and bring his troops back into Russia and open dialogue. But we have to be realistic – clearly that does not seem his intent, certainly at this point in time, and we have to respond very significantly. This is a real test for the west as well. (Via PA Media) The US briefed a week ago that, unlike during the 2014 invasion of Ukraine, sanctions this time would start at the top of the ladder and stay there, rather than be gradually escalated. Last week, Boris Johnson said sanctions would be implemented as soon as one Russian toe-cap crossed into Ukrainian-held territory. But the reality is proving different, partly due to Vladimir Putin’s step-by-step tactics. The US was briefing that sanctions will probably go wider later today than those intended to cover trade and investment in the two breakaway Republics announced on Monday night. Putin, however, has not yet done enough to justify the big bazooka package. Similarly, Johnson made clear this morning he is not planning to let loose all his firepower when he makes a statement to MPs today. There look to be two reasons. So far, the Russian “peacekeepers” have not gone beyond the borders of the territory currently held by the Russian supporting forces within the two Republics. The borders of the territories that Russia is preparing to recognise are unclear. Sajid Javid has said the invasion of Ukraine has begun. He may be right – but so far the invasion to which he is referring occurred in 2014. But there is a second reason for restraint. The EU is privately struggling to get agreement on the trigger point for its sanctions, which will be announced as early as this afternoon. The bloc will not unleash everything in its locker – hence the call between Joe Biden and the French president, Emmanuel Macron, and the German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, on Monday evening. Even now – despite the fact that a full-scale invasion is the overwhelming likelihood – some European leaders are looking for diplomatic routes out. If there are no exits, it will turn into a battle between the banks – western financial firepower – and the tanks, Russian’s military hardware. Russia’s legislature is expected to rubberstamp the Kremlin’s decision to recognise the self-proclaimed territories in Luhansk and Donetsk on Tuesday, paving the way for Russian troops to formally occupy Ukrainian territory in what they call a “peacekeeping mission”. But a key question remains: In what borders will Russia recognise its two proxy territories? The fine print could determine whether Vladimir Putin is preparing to launch a broader invasion in Ukraine. Both of the Russian-backed territories lay claim to Ukrainian territories that are not currently under their control. For instance, the self-proclaimed Donetsk people’s republic has said that it should control the city of Mariupol, which is firmly on the Ukrainian side of the line of conflict. If Russia recognises those larger territorial ambitions, then under the terms of the treaty Putin signed with the territories yesterday, it would imply a further war of conquest backed by Russia is to come. Andrei Kortunov, the director general of the Russian International Affairs Council, said: The open question is what particular borders they’re going to defend. The question is whether these newly recognised republics might have territorial claims … that might constitute a casus belli. If we assume that Russia is not interested in a big war in Ukraine – because that would definitely mean a war – then we can assume the ball is in the Western court. In Kortunov’s thinking, Putin may wait before sending large numbers of troops into the territories in order to gauge the Western response: The West needs to decide how it is going to react - what kind of sanctions and what will happen to the political dialogue between Moscow and Western capitals? Some western analysts believe that Russia’s massive buildup of more than 190,000 troops near the borders of Ukraine indicates that Putin plans on more than just a recognition of the two territories. According to Michael Kofman of the CNA thinktank: Russia doesn’t need 190k troops on Ukraine’s borders to recognize the independence of separatist republics. These troops are not even near the Donbas. This is the first step in what will likely be a large-scale Russian [military] operation to impose regime change. The decision to recognise the territories also will likely scuttle the Minsk agreements, a peace deal that Moscow hoped to use as leverage to force Ukraine into imposing unpopular political decisions about the conflict. Russia appeared to be leaving the question of the borders open on Tuesday morning before the parliament sessions. Leonid Kalashnikov, an MP, initially told Russian media the Duma would recognise the Donetsk People’s Republic (DPR) and Luhansk People’s Republic (LPR) as the territories recognised at “referendums” in 2014. “This agreement does not specify [the borders], but I think it means statehood, which was approved in the old and only referendum that was held in other borders than those currently occupied by the DPR,” Kalashnikov told reporters on Tuesday, answering a question from Interfax. “How these borders will be restored is not provided for in this agreement. How they will be restored is not our competence,” said Kalashnikov, the head of the a Duma committee that manages issues dealing with ex-Soviet countries. But he soon clarified his remarks, which many took to imply a coming war, saying that they were just his “personal opinion”. In his speech on Monday, Putin appeared to be setting the stage for Russian claims to far more than just the Donbas regions: From those who have seized and are holding power in Kyiv, we demand an immediate cessation of hostilities. Otherwise, the entire responsibility for the possible continuation of the bloodshed will be entirely on the conscience of the regime ruling on the territory of Ukraine. Didier Reynders, the European commissioner for justice, has said that while Russia’s move is an “act of war”, the large-scale sanctions package prepared in Brussels in the event of an invasion of Ukraine will be imposed gradually. Speaking to Belgian media, Reynders said that the first punitive measures would be travel bans against individuals, adding that this could be followed by the seizing of assets in Europe and abroad. Reynders said that in time, depending on developments, it “will be necessary to ensure that there are no more imports of goods or services from Russia, such as energy, and that Russia’s global access to financial services is terminated”. He added: “Everything is on the table.” The UK health secretary, Sajid Javid, has just been interviewed on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. He said that while the government has ruled out military action, it is ready to impose sanctions: We have already, as a leading member of Nato, played a significant role in shoring up and protecting Nato members and that will certainly continue. We have ruled out any forces or military action by soldiers in Ukraine itself. The defence secretary has been clear on that but in terms of support for Ukraine in other ways, including support through military equipment and arms, that will continue. Asked whether it was time to impose sanctions on oligarchs close to Putin who own property in the UK, send their children to British schools and who have funded the Conservative party, Javid said: I think it is. The prime minister has already actually been clear on this – that if Russia were to violate the territorial integrity – the sovereignty – of Ukraine, we wouldn’t hesitate to act. That of course means sanctions … That action in terms of sanctions will almost certainly include action against any individuals, and, for that matter, any companies or businesses, or any other entities, that are linked to the Russian state that have any kind of significant economic influence in Russia. But also I’m sure that we’ll consider what sectors in the Russian economy we can target as well. A clear division has become apparent between the UK and the EU over the presence of Russian troops in the Donbas region of Ukraine. While the health secretary, Sajid Javid, has said the presence of troops is evidence that the invasion of Ukraine has already begun, the EU’s high representative for foreign affairs, Josep Borrell, was more cautious when talking in Paris this morning. It was not, to his mind, he said, a “fully fledged invasion”. The comments reflect the nervousness in some EU capitals – including Paris and Berlin – at hitting Moscow too early with the full “unprecedented” package of sanctions prepared over recent weeks and being left without any further leverage over the Kremlin. In contrast, EU member states in the Baltics argue that Putin will only taunt the bloc with incremental incursions that have the appearance of falling shy of the threshold for the “massive costs and severe consequences” threatened by the bloc over a military invasion. Those EU governments argue that it will be death to Ukraine by a thousand cuts if the bloc prevaricates. The UK health secretary, Sajid Javid, has just been interviewed on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. He said that while the government has ruled out military action, it is ready to impose sanctions: We have already, as a leading member of Nato, played a significant role in shoring up and protecting Nato members and that will certainly continue. We have ruled out any forces or military action by soldiers in Ukraine itself. The defence secretary has been clear on that but in terms of support for Ukraine in other ways, including support through military equipment and arms, that will continue. Asked whether it was time to impose sanctions on oligarchs close to Putin who own property in the UK, send their children to British schools and who have funded the Conservative party, Javid said: I think it is. The prime minister has already actually been clear on this - that if Russia were to violate the territorial integrity - the sovereignty - of Ukraine, we wouldn’t hesitate to act. That of course means sanctions … That action in terms of sanctions will almost certainly include action against any individuals, and, for that matter, any companies or businesses, or any other entities, that are linked to the Russian state that have any kind of significant economic influence in Russia. But also I’m sure that we’ll consider what sectors in the Russian economy we can target as well. The EU’s foreign affairs high representative, Josep Borrell, has said he will call an extraordinary meeting today where EU foreign ministers will adopt sanctions against Russia over its recognition of Ukrainian separatist regions and further deployment of troops on Ukraine territory. “I’m sure there will be a unanimous decision”, he said. There are differences in opinion within the EU as to the strength of the package that will be imposed on Russia at this stage, with Borrell suggesting this morning that Russia had not, as yet, launched a “fully fledged” invasion although its troops were on Ukrainian soil. Borrell said a text on sanctions would be drafted this morning and a decision would be made this afternoon by ministers. I cannot go into the details. The Russian troops have entered into Donbas. We consider Donbas as part of Ukraine. I wouldn’t say that is a fully fledged invasion but Russian troops are on Ukrainian soil.” Amnesty International has just put out these lines from the organisation’s secretary general, Agnès Callamard: After weeks of fruitless negotiations, the protection of civilians in Ukraine must now be the absolute priority. While the potential for full-blown conflict is now a devastating reality, every effort must be made to minimise civilian suffering and prioritise humanity in this crisis. It is a legal obligation of all parties to do so. We urge all parties to adhere strictly to international humanitarian and human rights law. They must ensure the protection of civilian lives and refrain from indiscriminate attacks and the use of prohibited weapons such as cluster munitions. We also call on all parties to allow and facilitate access of humanitarian agencies to provide assistance to civilians affected by hostilities. Amnesty International will be monitoring the situation closely to expose violations of international law by all parties.” In case you missed it last night, this analysis piece from Shaun Walker is well worth a read: Sitting alone at a desk in a grand, columned Kremlin room, Vladimir Putin looked across an expanse of parquet floor at his security council and asked if anyone wished to express an alternative opinion. He was met with silence … EU member states’ ambassadors will meet on Tuesday morning to discuss possible sanctions against Russia in response to its formal recognition of two breakaway regions of Ukraine, with limited sanctions a possible option, an EU official said. An EU diplomat said separately that the meeting would be an “information point” for the envoys, but would also consider how to act on the statement made by EU leaders on Monday that the bloc would “react with sanctions against those involved in this illegal act”. The EU official said some member states wanted sanctions to be limited in response to Russian president Vladimir Putin’s move on eastern Ukraine, while others want to see the full range of sanctions that have been discussed in recent weeks to be rolled out now. The official said there may be a meeting of EU leaders to discuss the bloc’s response, but a decision on this has not yet been taken. (Via Reuters) Meanwhile, in the markets ... The mood in Kyiv is concerned but defiant. MP Serhii Rakhmanin described the recognition of Russian controlled-regions of Eastern Ukraine as independent states “an act of aggression, and Putin’s speech a “de facto call for war”. He added: Military escalation, especially in the Donbas, is becoming almost inevitable. It has not happened yet, but the level of threat has changed from orange to red. He called on the government to mobilise reservists, increase the defence budget, consider cutting diplomatic relations with Russia, and impose martial law in regions claimed by Russia. Rakhmanin said Western countries needed to bring in the toughest possible sanctions, send military aid to Ukraine, and consider an urgent economic rescue package for an economy hobbled by the threat of war. On social media Tuesday morning Ukrainians criticised US sanctions, which directly target the Russian-occupied areas of Ukraine, as too limited in scope. A little more on Sajid Javid’s comments, via PA Media. The health secretary told Sky News: We are waking up to a very dark day in Europe and it’s clear from what we have already seen and found out today that the Russians, President Putin, has decided to attack the sovereignty of Ukraine and its territorial integrity. We have seen that he has recognised these breakaway eastern regions in Ukraine and from the reports we can already tell that he has sent in tanks and troops. From that you can conclude that the invasion of Ukraine has begun.” Good morning. Sam Jones here, taking over the blog from my colleague Samantha Lock. Before I handover to my colleague, Sam Jones, here is a rundown of developments overnight: British prime minister Boris Johnson is chairing a Cobra meeting this morning to “coordinate the UK response”, including agreeing to a “significant package of sanctions to be introduced immediately”, PA Media reports, citing a Downing Street spokesperson. UK health minister Sajid Javid says it is clear Russian president Vladimir Putin has decided to attack the sovereignty of Ukraine and believes an invasion has already begun, Reuters reports. Two Ukrainian soldiers were killed by shelling overnight and 12 more were injured, according to Ukraine’s Joint Forces Operation situation report published this morning. The UK is also set to announce new sanctions on Russia today after foreign secretary Liz Truss said Putin’s actions could not be allowed to go “unpunished”. Downing Street also said Boris Johnson told Ukraine’s President Zelenskiy that he would “explore sending further defensive support to Ukraine” at the request of the country’s government. Ukraine’s ministry of foreign affairs issued a statement condemning Russia’s decision to recognise the Luhansk and Donetsk regions as independent states. The ministry says the decision has “no legal implications” and “sharply escalates the situation”. Ukraine’s defence minister said his country is “ready and able” to defend itself from Russia and says the world cannot be silent. Meanwhile, Russia’s representative to the United Nations has reiterated its combative stance, saying Ukraine “is on the verge of a new military adventure” in a tweet on Tuesday morning local time. UN security council members condemned Russia’s actions in an extraordinary war of words as representatives from the US, the UK, France, Germany, India, Ireland, the UAE, Kenya and Ghana all emphatically urged peace and diplomacy in a bid to avert war in Ukraine. The US ambassador to the United Nations, Linda Thomas-Greenfield, dismissed Putin’s assertion that the Russian troops heading into the separatist regions of Ukraine would take on a “peacekeeping” role. Ukraine’s president used a televised address in the early hours of Tuesday to accuse Russia of wrecking peace talks and has ruled out making any territorial concessions. Zelenskiy added Ukraine was committed to peace and diplomacy. If you’d like to read even more developments, we posted a summary earlier here. Russian state Duma deputy Leonid Kalashnikov, who chairs the Duma’s committee on post-Soviet affairs, said that Russia will recognise the independence of the whole of Donetsk and Luhanks regions in eastern Ukraine, according to Moscow Times reporter Pjotr Sauer. Currently, only one-third of the territories is controlled by the Russian-backed separatists. UK health minister Sajid Javid says it is clear Russian president Vladimir Putin has decided to attack the sovereignty of Ukraine and believes an invasion has already begun, Reuters reports. We are waking up to a very dark day in Europe and it’s clear from what we have already seen and found out today that the Russians, President Putin, has decided to attack the sovereignty of Ukraine and its territorial integrity.” The health secretary told Sky News: We have seen that he has recognised these breakaway eastern regions in Ukraine and from the reports we can already tell that he has sent in tanks and troops. From that you can conclude that the invasion of Ukraine has begun.” Javid added that Boris Johnson will make a statement to parliament today on Ukraine. We will have more on this story as it develops. Two Ukrainian soldiers have been killed by shelling overnight and 12 more were injured, according to Ukraine’s Joint Forces Operation situation report published this morning. The report says Ukraine recorded 84 violations over the past 24 hours from Russia-backed forces, 64 of which were using weapons prohibited by the Minsk agreements. As a result of the shelling, two Ukrainian service personnel died from shrapnel wounds while 12 service personnel were injured and are receiving treatment, Ukraine’s ministry of defence added. South Korea’s foreign ministry has joined the ranks of other countries to voice its “grave concern” over the Ukraine crisis and called for related nations to respect the Minsk agreement while finding a diplomatic solution, the Associated Press reports. Ministry spokesperson Choi Young-sam made the remarks during a briefing on Tuesday, reiterating President Moon Jae-in’s comments during an earlier national security meeting. Our government has consistently supported Ukraine’s sovereignty and the preservation of its territory. Our government strongly calls for related nations to pursue peaceful resolutions based on respect for international law and the Minsk agreement.” Choi was referring to a 2015 ceasefire arrangement signed between Russia and Ukraine at the Belarusian capital following months of bloody conflict in eastern Ukraine. One of the standout submissions to the United Nation’s emergency security council meeting earlier was delivered by Kenyan representative Martin Kimani. Video of Kimani’s emphatic plea to Russia to pursue diplomacy and not conflict can be viewed below. This situation echoes our history. Kenya and almost every African country was birthed by the ending of empire. Our borders were not of our own drawing. Today across the border of every single African country live our countrymen with whom we share deep bonds. The UK is also set to announce new sanctions on Russia today after foreign secretary Liz Truss said Putin’s actions could not be allowed to go “unpunished”. The sanctions will be in response to Russia’s “breach of international law and attack on Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity,” she said. The foreign secretary added that she had spoken to Josep Borrell, the EU’s high representative for foreign affairs, following “Russia’s latest assault on Ukrainian sovereignty”. We agreed (the UK) and (the EU) will coordinate to deliver swift sanctions against Putin’s regime and stand shoulder-to-shoulder with Ukraine. Financial markets in London, Europe and the US are braced for a tough day of trading after the mounting crisis in Ukraine inflicted big losses on stocks in Asia Pacific on Tuesday. The broad MSCI Asia index, excluding Japan, was down more than 2% in its worst day for a month. The Nikkei shed 1.7%, Seoul was off 1.4% and the ASX in Sydney closed down 1% as investors worried about the possibility of conflict. Safe havens such as gold rallied. Brent crude oil, a global benchmark for Russia’s main export, was up 2% at $97.30 a barrel. Hong Kong was worst hit, down 3%, with tech stocks especially affected in the wake of another crackdown on the sector by Beijing. Bitcoin fell 6% to $36,826, while the Russian rouble sank to a more than 15-month low. That all paves the way for some heavy losses on the European indices as indicated by futures trade: New York is also set for losses later on Tuesday: Downing Street also said Johnson told Ukraine’s President Zelenskiy that he would “explore sending further defensive support to Ukraine” at the request of the country’s government. A spokesperson told PA Media: He told President Zelenskiy that the UK had already drawn up sanctions to target those complicit in the violation of Ukraine’s territorial integrity, and that those measures would come into force tomorrow. The prime minister also said he would explore sending further defensive support to Ukraine, at the request of the Ukrainian government. Meanwhile, Downing Street said Johnson outlined his “grave concern at recent developments in the region” in a call with the Ukrainian president on Monday evening, PA Media reports. The prime minister strongly condemned the Kremlin’s decision today to recognise Luhansk and Donetsk as independent states, and said the move made the Minsk agreements and process unworkable. Johnson added that the UK was already engaging with partners on the issue and said the UK would raise it at the United Nations Security Council and Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe in the coming days. British prime minister Boris Johnson is moments away from chairing a Cobra meeting this morning to “coordinate the UK response”, including agreeing to a “significant package of sanctions to be introduced immediately”, PA media reports citing to a Downing Street spokesperson. Johnson earlier told Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskyy that he believes a Russian invasion is “a real possibility in the coming hours and days”, No 10 said. A No 10 spokesperson said on Monday evening: “The Prime Minister will chair a COBR at 0630 tomorrow morning to discuss the latest developments in Ukraine and to coordinate the UK response including agreeing a significant package of sanctions to be introduced immediately.” It comes after foreign secretary Liz Truss said the UK will announce new sanctions against Russia on Tuesday “in response to their breach of international law and attack on Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity”. Ukraine’s ministry of foreign affairs has just issued an official statement condemning Russia’s decision to recognise the Luhansk and Donetsk regions as independent states. The ministry says the decision has “no legal implications” and “sharply escalates the situation”. The statement released on Tuesday morning reads: The Ukrainian side understands Russia’s intentions and its objective to provoke Ukraine. We are taking into account all the risks and not giving in to the provocations as we remain committed to politico-diplomatic settlement of the Russian-Ukrainian armed conflict.” Ukraine’s defence minister says his country is “ready and able” to defend itself from Russia and says the world cannot be silent. “Sanctions? Another brick in the wall? New Berlin Wall?” Oleksii Reznikov tweeted Tuesday morning local time. We’ve now got video of the US ambassador to the United Nations, Linda Thomas-Greenfield, calling Putin’s claims “nonsense”. For those just joining our live coverage now, here is a summary of what was exchanged during the United Nations emergency security council meeting which wrapped up just hours ago. It was an extraordinary war of words as representatives from the United States, the UK, France, Germany, India, Ireland, the UAE, Kenya and Ghana all emphatically urged peace and diplomacy in a bid to avert war in Ukraine. Addressing the session, US ambassador Linda Thomas-Greenfield cast doubt on Putin’s assertion that the Russian troops would take on a “peacekeeping” role in the Donetsk and Lugansk areas. He calls them peacekeepers. This is nonsense. We know what they really are. Referring to Putin’s recent allegations, the ambassador said his words amounted to a “series of outrageous, false claims” that were aimed at “creating a pretext for war.” Putin wants to travel back to a time when empires ruled the world. This is not 1919,” she added. The UK’s permanent representative to the UN, Dame Barbara Woodward, highlighted the humanitarian impact of a possible invasion. The actions Russia has chosen today will have severe and far-reaching consequences. First, to human life. An invasion of Ukraine unleashes the forces of war, death and destruction on the people of Ukraine,” she said. In seeking to redraw borders by force, Russia’s actions show blatant contempt for international law.” After about an hour we finally heard from Russia ,with Vasily Nebenzya calling the prior statements a “direct verbal assault” and saying they would go “unanswered”. Nebenzya also attacked the west for “nudging” Ukraine towards conflict and accused other nations of overlooking the plight of those in the Donbas. Most of you did not find any place for the nearly four million residents of Donbas ... Our western colleagues have been unashamedly cramming weapons into Ukraine.” Russia then alleged Ukraine was on the brink of “military adventure”. Allowing a new bloodbath in the Donbas is something we do not intend to do.” Finally, Ukraine’s ambassador Sergiy Kyslytsya took the stand, insisting that his country’s borders remain “unchangeable” despite Russia’s actions. We are on our own land. We are not afraid of anything or anyone, we owe nothing to anyone and we will not give away anything to anyone. There should be no doubt whatsoever. The international borders of Ukraine are and will remain unchangeable. We demand from Russia to cancel the decision on recognition and return to the table of negotiations. We condemn the order to deploy additional Russian occupation troops to the territories in Ukraine. We demand immediate and complete verifiable withdrawal of the occupation troops. The United Nations is sick. That’s a matter of fact. It has been hit by the virus spread by the Kremlin. Will it succumb to this virus?” US ambassador to the United Nations, Linda Thomas-Greenfield, has dismissed Vladimir’s Putin’s assertion that the Russian troops heading into the separatist regions of Ukraine would take on a “peacekeeping” role. At a fiery emergency meeting of the security council in New York she said: “He calls them peacekeepers. This is nonsense. We know what they really are.” Putin’s allegations about Ukrainian aggression in a speech on Monday amounted to a “series of outrageous, false claims” that were aimed at “creating a pretext for war.” Putin wants to travel back to a time when empires ruled the world. This is not 1919. Speaking after the meeting she said the US would announce new sanctions against Russia on Tuesday. The Australian government has also announced it has moved all diplomatic officials out of Ukraine to eastern Poland and Romania. Foreign minister Marise Payne confirmed the move “due to the increased risk” amid rising concerns of conflict. “Australia stands in solidarity with Ukraine and continues to call on Russia to cease and reverse its unprovoked assault on its democratic neighbour,” Payne said. News of Russia’s recognition of the breakaway territories of Donetsk and Luhansk as independent is filtering through the streets of Kyiv. Maria Levchyshchyna, a 48-year-old painter in the Ukrainian capital, told Associated Press: Why should Russia recognise (the rebel-held regions)? If neighbours come to you and say, This room will be ours,’ would you care about their opinion or not? It’s your flat, and it will be always your flat. Let them recognise whatever they want. But in my view, it can also provoke a war, because normal people will fight for their country.” Artem Ivaschenko, a 22-year-old cook originally from Donetsk, told AFP the recognition was the “scariest news” he had heard since he fled the region to Kyiv eight years ago. He said: I am very shocked...I live here, I already lost a part of my homeland, it was taken away, so I will protect it.” US secretary of state Antony Blinken has reiterated the United States’ “unwavering support” for Ukraine in a statement after he spoke to Ukraine foreign ministyer Dmytro Kuleba by phone on Monday. A spokesperson for the US secretary of state said: The secretary noted our swift response to Russia’s decision to recognize the purported ‘independence’ of the so-called republics controlled by Russian proxy authorities in eastern Ukraine. They discussed the strong measures we announced today in response and reiterated that additional steps would be forthcoming. The pair are due to meet in Washington on Tuesday. Russia’s representative to the United Nations has reiterated its combative stance, saying Ukraine “is on the verge of a new military adventure” in a tweet on Tuesday morning local time. “We cannot allow this,” the representative added. Ukraine’s president used a televised address in the early hours of Tuesday to accuse Russia of wrecking peace talks and has ruled out making any territorial concessions. Zelenskiy added Ukraine was committed to peace and diplomacy after Russia formally recognised two Russian-backed separatist regions as independent on Monday evening. Zelenskiy said “we are not afraid” after Russia officially recognised two breakaway regions of eastern Ukraine as independent. The president said Ukraine was expecting “clear and effective” steps from its allies to act against Russia and called for an emergency summit of the leaders of Ukraine, Russia, Germany and France. Welcome to our rolling updates of developments in the Ukraine-Russia crisis. I’m Samantha Lock and I’ll be bringing you all the latest updates in what promises to be another very busy day ahead. Here are the main developments so far: The United States and allies such as the UK and France will announce new sanctions against Russia on Tuesday, the US ambassador to the UN has said. it was not clear what the extent of the sanctions would be. Earlier on Monday Joe Biden banned trade between the US and breakaway regions in eastern Ukraine. The move follows Russia’s decision to recognise the breakaway regions of Ukraine, Luhansk and Donetsk, as independent states and send “peacekeeping” troops into the areas. Russian president Vladimir Putin said Ukraine has nuclear weapons and is being heavily influenced by the west. A fiery emergency meeting of the UN security council on Monday night in New York saw western governments line up to condemn Russia for “escalating” the crisis. US envoy Linda Thomas-Greenfield described Putin’s claim that the troops were “peacekeepers” as “nonsense”. Britain’s representative said Russia’s actions showed “blatant contempt to international law”. Russia’s representative responded by accusing Ukraine of being “on the verge of a new military adventure”. Ukraine’s president Volodymyr Zelenskiy used a televised address in the early hours of Tuesday to accuse Russia of wrecking peace talks and has ruled out making any territorial concessions. He said Ukraine was “not afraid of anything or anyone”. British prime minister Boris Johnson is set to chair a meeting of the UK’s emergency committee Cobra on Tuesday morning to discuss the latest developments in Ukraine. Russia has acquired the right to build military bases in Ukraine’s two breakaway regions under treaties signed by Putin with their separatist leaders, Reuters is reporting. The Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe said Russia’s move was a breach of international law and fundamental OSCE principles and runs counter to the Minsk agreements. All US state department personnel are now out of Ukraine, having relocated to a hotel in Poland, US secretary of state Antony Blinken has announced.It was launched with great fanfare as a “generational reform” that would fund 1,700 new social and affordable homes in Victoria each year. But just five days later, the Victorian government’s proposed social housing levy on developers is in doubt, with the premier accusing the building and property sectors of reneging on a deal to allow them to make “super profits” in exchange for paying the contribution. The levy, announced on Friday, would see all newly built developments with three or more dwellings or lot subdivisions forced to hand over 1.75% of the expected project value to a social housing growth fund from July 2024. Victorian treasurer, Tim Pallas, said the contribution would affect fewer than 30% of all residential planning permits but raise more than $800m each year, paying for up to 1,700 new social and affordable homes and supporting 7,000 jobs in the construction sector every 12 months. The announcement was immediately met with criticism by the building and property sectors, who said the associated costs were all but guaranteed to be passed on to new homebuyers. On a house valued at the median Melbourne price of $1.1m, the levy would equate to about $19,600. Pushing back against the criticisms on Wednesday, Victoria’s premier, Daniel Andrews, said industry had been extensively consulted on the proposal. He said a deal was struck to introduce the levy in exchange for reforms to Victoria’s planning system, which are expected speed up planning permit applications for major developments by up to six months and make it easier for homeowners to renovate their properties. The government expects the reforms to the planning system will deliver $7bn in benefits over 10 years. “The development industry said to us, ‘Look, if we can get these approvals done much, much faster, then that’s a great thing for us and that’s what we want’. We then quite fairly said, ‘Well that will mean very significant profits for you, how about we share some of those profits to build more affordable housing?’” Andrews told reporters outside parliament on Wednesday. “That was a deal that was done. It was an agreement.” He also hit out at Property Council CEO, Danni Hunter, claiming that her position on the matter had changed. “We’ve now seen that despite the CEO of the Property Council (having) called for these exact measures when that person worked at a different property peak, despite the fact that an agreement had been reached and the outcome of that long dialogue, that deep engagement was they’d support such a profit-sharing model, they now oppose that profit-sharing model,” he said. “So I think it’s fair to say the future of this bill is very, very uncertain. I’m not in the business of creating super profits for developers if they are unwilling to support sharing those profits with those who need more affordable housing.” Chief executive of the Urban Development Institute of Australia’s Victorian branch, Matthew Kandelaars, said he was surprised by the premier’s comments. “There was consultation around planning system reform, improvements to the planning system that were ongoing and constructive. There was never any comment or proposition that was put to me that suggested in any way, shape or form there was a trade off between the development industry and homebuyers funding social housing and securing other planning reform,” Kandelaars said. “The last substantive consultation on social and affordable housing and the industry’s role in that, as far as I’m aware, occurred in late 2019. A lot has changed since 2019 and to see an announcement last Friday and for legislation to be planned … was a big shock to the UDIA and of course to our members.” Kandelaars said he recognised the need for greater funding for social housing but said there needed to be a broader contribution base for the levy. “I’m a homeowner and there’s no reason why I shouldn’t be paying for some of this as well as new homebuyers. It just doesn’t make sense,” he said. “There’s roughly three million ratepayers in Victoria. If you look at a modest contribution on top of rates that’s a lot smaller per person, the impact is going to be significantly less and of course it will be significantly less on a cohort, first time buyers who are already struggling.” Shadow treasurer, David Davis, said a government briefing on the reforms planned for Wednesday evening had been cancelled. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “Nobody wants to pay another $20,000 for their home, nobody thought it was fair. The state government has miscalculated on this occasion and wants to take it off the agenda before the election,” he said. “Make no mistake if Daniel Andrews is reelected he will bring this tax back.” Without the support of the opposition, the government needs the votes of five crossbench MPs for the reform to pass the upper house. Four crossbenchers, including Greens leader Samantha Ratnam, have publicly indicated their support, though they hold some reservations. Ratnam said the government had “bowed down to pressure” from developers not to legislate mandatory inclusionary zoning in new developments and instead have introduced a levy that won’t pay for nearly enough housing. “This levy is a compromise. It will go some way to funding more social and affordable housing, but won’t go far enough,” she said. “With a waiting list of 100,000 people, with 25,000 people on any given night experiencing homelessness, we need to build at least 10,000 new public housing homes a year for the next decade to actually meet the current demand for public housing in this state.” Ratnam also described the government’s decision to stop paying council rates from mid next year for social housing properties as a “disaster”. The reform would be phased in over four years from 1 July 2023 and mean the $54m the government currently spends on rates would instead be reinvested into public housing maintenance, upgrade works and better open spaces. Municipal Association of Victoria president, David Clark, urged the government to reconsider the rates exemption. “There are 85,000 social housing dwellings located across the state, many located in a small number of municipalities, and these are bearing an unfair share of the cost burden,” he said. “The cumulative impact of this exemption on rates and charges, coupled with other cost-shifting measures and the ongoing rate cap, places council budgets in a no-win position when it comes to just maintaining, let alone enhancing, much needed community services. As a result, rates will increase.” Both the levy and the rates exemption will apply to all local government areas in metropolitan Melbourne, as well as the regional cities of Ballarat, Greater Bendigo and Greater Geelong. In a statement, the Property Council of Australia said it remained committed to working with the Victorian government to deliver planning reform and to support social and affordable housing. “All our members are concerned about the flow of effects of new taxes on housing affordability and will to work with government to put in place appropriate reforms.”If Russian forces try to take new territory in Ukraine, they will face an army that is far smaller and less well equipped than their own but hardened by eight years of fighting. Nearly a decade of war has also left Ukraine with nearly half a million combat-experienced veterans, many now preparing to fight again, officially or unofficially. That combination, and the sheer size of Ukrainian territory, means that even if Russia can outgun Ukrainian forces on a conventional battlefield, any military clash could lead to a protracted and bloody partisan conflict. “The Russian army has better weapons and technical equipment than us, so we may lose battles or campaigns. But they can never win the country if the Ukrainian people are motivated,” said Serhiy Kryvonos, a retired special forces general and former deputy secretary of the national security and defence council. Kryvonos is travelling the country speaking to veterans and organising weapons training to prepare for a popular uprising should Russia invade. “Look at the experience of Afghanistan. It could not be held by the Soviet Union, by the USA, by the United Kingdom,” he said. “They could not beat the Taliban because they were well motivated. Their strongest weapon was their partisans, civilians by day, then at night they took up weapons to shoot or bury a bomb in the road.” Ukraine’s government, after months of calling for calm, this week shifted its public position and began preparing the country for war. President Volodymyr Zelenskiy announced he was calling up a first group of reservists and on Tuesday the national security council asked parliament to bring in a state of emergency nationwide. Many of those called up had been preparing for weeks, including Roman Nabozhniak, who has made detailed plans for his brownie business to operate without him. Vladimir Putin had brought the country together in the crisis, he said. “Among my friends and peers, there are no arguments now between those who supported Zelenskiy and those who supported [former president Petro] Poroshenko, we have set them aside. Now we have to back this government with one voice. “Unity is our most powerful weapon. Russia wants us to have lots of internal arguments they can exploit.” Putin’s years of aggressive policy have not only shaped and sharpened national identity – politicians in Kyiv sometimes joke he is a founder of modern Ukraine – but also helped hone the military he may now order Russian soldiers to fight. In 2014, when Russia seized Crimea and Russia-backed forces took control of the east, the Ukrainian army was in such degraded form that soldiers weren’t even getting food. In the years since the collapse of the Soviet Union, discipline had frayed, weapons systems had gone without maintenance for decades, and hardly any of Ukraine’s soldiers had seen combat. “The Ukrainian military in 2014 and the Ukrainian military now are two entirely different things, although without [that army] we wouldn’t have a country at all,” said Taras Chmut, a veteran and military analyst with Come Back Alive, an NGO in Kyiv that supports frontline fighters with equipment and training. “We had a big army, with lots of equipment, but it was old and wasn’t in good condition. Food wasn’t getting to the frontline; people were fighting in jeans,” he said. “Even basic supplies weren’t reaching soldiers, from body armour to first aid kits and communications equipment.” Today, logistics and training have been improved, and the army has expanded by about 100,000 soldiers, to number about 260,000. Chmut estimates that a total mobilisation including veterans and security forces could put more than 1 million Ukrainians in arms. But when it comes to hardware, Ukraine is still extremely vulnerable. It has a long coastline but, after Russia seized Crimea and its ports, almost no naval capacity. It has no missile defence system, and anti-aircraft defence systems are mostly Russian-made, outdated, and impossible for Ukraine to repair as it cannot get parts. If Russia gains control of the skies over Ukraine, Chmut says he fears civilian slaughter like that seen in parts of Syria, where Russian weapons were used in rebel-held areas. “We are trying to highlight that we need to work on strengthening our air force,” he said. “It doesn’t matter how many people are ready to fight: if the enemy control the airspace, it could be like in Syria, bombing of towns and cities with [a] great number of deaths among civilians.” Kryvonos was concerned that civilians could be targeted with punitive measures, even if they were not targeted by weapons. “They don’t even need to open fire. You can cut off Kyiv’s electricity outside the city,” he said. “The larger the city, the easier to create panic and bring it to its knees. If you cut off power it will become a nightmare in a few days, with no water and no heat.” He said governments had not done enough to warn civilians to prepare supplies of food and water, or even put up signs to bomb shelters. That is particularly worrying because in addition to Russia’s superior force of arms in conventional airspace, it could unleash devastating cyberattacks that would make it harder for Ukrainians to access information as any invasion unfolds. While the government is not moving fast enough for him and many other Ukrainians, people are making their own plans and preparations for the resistance that Chmut says would follow a Russian attack “If it comes to an invasion, it will be total war like in 1939. The whole country will be fighting back, there will be a massive resistance. The west should know there will be a large number of refugees, too, maybe 5 to 10 million.” Those determined to fight include Oleg Sentsov, a film director from Crimea who became a national hero after he was detained in his home city in 2014 and convicted of terrorism in a Russian military court. Human rights groups denounced it as a show trial. He spent five years in Russian jails, including in Siberia where the cold severely damaged his health, before he was released in a prisoner swap in 2019. He says he is ready to fight, even as his latest film, Rhino, is feted at festivals. “I will be in uniform. I have some military training and I know how to act in war,” he said in an interview at a central Kyiv cafe, hours before Putin announced his plans to recognise breakaway regions of Ukraine. “The main thing I learned in this life is not to be afraid. In such a difficult time, I will not be the person running from my country.”Plugging methane from leaky oil and gas facilities would be free of cost almost everywhere in the world, and in many cases would produce a significant profit, at today’s soaring gas prices, the International Energy Agency has found, suggesting that governments have few excuses for not taking action to curb emissions of the powerful greenhouse gas. Governments have been underreporting their emissions of methane to a dramatic extent, and those emissions are still rising fast, according to the Global Methane Tracker report from the IEA published on Wednesday. Using satellites and other new data, the energy watchdog found emissions were about 70% higher than national governments had suggested, showing the need for far greater monitoring, as well as efforts to staunch leaks. Fatih Birol, executive director of the IEA, a leading authority on energy economics, said: “At today’s elevated gas prices, nearly all of the emissions [of methane] from oil and gas operations worldwide could be avoided at no net cost. The IEA has been a longstanding champion of stronger action to cut methane emissions. A vital part of those efforts is transparency on the size and location of emissions, which is why the massive underreporting revealed by our Global Methane Tracker is so alarming.” Russia is one of the biggest sources of methane emissions from its vast oil and gas operations, but few efforts are made there to control the leaks. According to the IEA, Turkmenistan and Texas are also leading sources of leaks. Methane is the main component of natural gas, used for fuel, and also one of the most powerful greenhouse gases, responsible for as much as 30% of the rise in global temperatures to date. About 40% of methane emissions from human activity come from the energy sector, mostly from leaky oil and gas wells and pipelines, or fracking operations, but in many countries few attempts are made to control emissions. Last year, leaks from fossil fuel operations amounted to as much gas as Europe burns for power in a year. If that methane had been captured and used, the current gas crisis and soaring prices could have been largely avoided, the IEA said. The IEA’s findings show that there are few excuses for countries to stall on plugging leaks, which come from poorly maintained pipelines and badly managed production facilities, where the gas can be vented or burned – known as flaring – instead of captured and used. The technology needed to eliminate leaks is widely available: Norway, for instance, has some of the world’s best oil and gas infrastructure, having introduced strict regulation on its industry. Christophe McGlade, lead author of the IEA report, said governments needed to step in to ensure companies used the technology. “One reason companies don’t is a lack of awareness of the problem, or a lack of awareness of how cost-effective abatement is,” he said. In other cases, the company that operates the pipeline or facility may incur the cost of cutting leaks while the benefits accrue to the seller of the gas. “That’s why regulation is very important – policies are needed to correct the market failure, to take on the leaks.” More than 110 countries signed up to a Global Methane Pledge at the Cop26 UN climate summit in Glasgow last November, aimed at cutting methane emissions from all sources by 30% by 2030. But some of the world’s biggest methane emitters have not signed up, including Russia, China, Iran and India. Paul Bledsoe, a former Clinton White House climate adviser, now with the Progressive Policy Institute in Washington DC, said the IEA’s findings should come as a warning to EU policymakers, amid the crisis in Ukraine and soaring energy prices at home. “Putin has deliberately hidden Gazprom’s massive methane leaks for decades, fooling a complacent Europe,” Bledsoe said. “In fact, Russia’s huge fugitive emissions of methane make its natural gas worse from a climate perspective than the coal it’s meant to replace. It has taken the current crisis for Germany and the EU to recognise that its codependence on Russian gas is a geopolitical and climate nightmare from which they must finally awake. Reducing Russian gas reliance is a huge climate and moral imperative that Europe must prioritise.”Russian forces massing near Ukraine’s borders can only remain in position for a few days before they have to be sent back to nearby bases or risk their capability being significantly degraded, western officials and experts believe. That means that President Vladimir Putin will come under increasing pressure to use them in a full invasion of Ukraine – or send them back to staging areas, still in Russia’s south or west, but tens or even hundreds of kilometres back. Such advance positions, often with poor protection from the cold, can be held only for a short period – and there is some evidence on social media of the poor conditions endured by soldiers near the border. Postings spotted by military analyst Rob Lee on Monday showed about 100 soldiers camped out – or rather lying down – at a train station about 20km from Ukraine’s border, without rations and having to buy food for themselves. Russian troops based in Belarus, in forests near the town of Khoyniki, 50km from the Ukraine border, were described by one local a few days ago as people who “drink a lot and sell a lot of their diesel fuel”, suggesting a lack of discipline despite the heightened political tensions. Western intelligence estimates that roughly a third of the overall Russian forces are now believed to be “tactically deployed” in frontline positions “poised for operations”. Their movements have been monitored closely using aerial and other reconnaissance for several weeks, as they edge closer to the border. On Monday, one senior official said they believed it would only be possible for Russia to maintain them in their forward positions for “a matter of days” – a conclusion that is endorsed by independent experts. Nick Reynolds, a land warfare analyst with the Rusi thinktank, said: “If the troops are to be used then they will likely be used very soon, while they are as fresh as possible” and concurred with the assessment that commanders would want to move them on in “a few days” if they are to be effective. Latvia’s defence minister, Artis Pabriks, agreed the next few days were crucial. He argued Putin will test western reaction to his recognition of the separatist territories and the formal deployment of Russian forces there. “They will have a small period of reconnaissance and thinking what the west is doing and what the west is planning. They will assess our responses. And if these responses will not be strong enough or convincing enough, then the next stage will be more incidents on the de facto Ukrainian border,” he said. It remains perfectly possible for Russia to reverse the frontline deployment and return troops to the staging areas they occupied in January, in a similar way to what happened last spring, ready to escalate at short notice once they have resupplied. But, either way, military pressures mean the next few days are likely to be significant.A century and more ago, many overfilled country churchyards had invisible “No vacancies” signs, diverting the dead from the expanding villages and nascent towns to the outlying fields, which then grew coffins instead of potatoes. Even so, exceptions were made for a privileged few, so that their remains could lie in the church graveyard itself. A local Tory grandee had four stakes in his future in St Swithin’s churchyard. When I visited the plot during his later years, I sometimes wondered if the old man ever came to see the rectangle of wooden nubs that marked out where he would spend his death. Now, 13 years after I heard the bells toll, it gives me a start to see how quickly the once off-white gravestone of a reputedly courteous and principled politician has weathered into grey and green. A little further along the fence is the aptly named Graves family, residents of the mansion house next door. They found a place in heaven by moving the earth: after Walter Graves died in 1907, the family gave a sliver of their adjoining grounds to the church, and so the boundary shifted to “en-hallow” the Graves’ grave within consecrated ground. A salmon-coloured marble tomb of two facing scrolls occupies the donated land, where his wife, Fanny, and second son would join him. The engraver also chiselled out an inscription of personal tragedy in the absence of their firstborn, killed at Ypres. The epitaphs of some of the last burials of the Victorian period face the high street like advertising hoardings and, until recently, I would often nod a cheery greeting to the largest and most prominent stone, put up “In affectionate remembrance of Charles Carter who died December 31st 1863, aged 68”. A few weeks ago, I discovered that Carter – a market gardener and beer seller on the Great North Road – had hanged himself while in a state of what a jury called “temporary insanity”. A gravestone cannot describe the cruelty of laws that decreed there must be a night burial without a church service for this tortured soul. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryUkraine’s president has called up the country’s reservists and warned that Ukraine could face a battle for its very existence as more countries joined in sanctions against Russia. Volodymyr Zelenskiy ruled out a general mobilisation in an evening address to the nation. But the decision to bring reservists back into active duty was a further sign that Ukraine was bracing for a possible military clash with its neighbour. It came after Russia began moving troops into the country’s east. On Tuesday, Vladimir Putin said that Russia will support the territorial claims of self-proclaimed republics in Luhansk and Donetsk, dramatically increasing the likelihood of a larger war in the near future. Joe Biden denounced the move as an attempt to carve out “a big chunk” of the country. The US president said he was bringing in tough new sanctions against Russia for “beginning” an invasion of Ukraine but that there was still time to avoid war. “Who in the Lord’s name does Putin think gives him the right to declare new so-called countries?” Biden said, announcing sanctions on two Russian banks and sweeping measures to stop Russia raising capital in western markets. Early on Wednesday, Russia’s US ambassador, Anatoly Antonov, dismissed the sanctions, saying: “I don’t remember a single day when our country lived without any restrictions from the western world. We learned how to work in such conditions. And not only survive, but also develop our state.” US secretary of state Antony Blinken cancelled a meeting planned for Thursday with Russian foreign minister Sergei Lavrov, saying Russia’s actions indicated it was not serious about a diplomatic path to resolving the crisis. The White House said a summit between Biden and Putin, proposed by the French president, was “certainly not in the plans at this point”. Speaking alongside Ukrainian foreign minister Dmytro Kuleba in Washington, Blinken warned the crisis was the “greatest threat to Europe since world war two”. He said: “[Vladimir Putin’s] plan all along has been to invade Ukraine, to control Ukraine and its people, to destroy Ukraine’s democracy, which offers a stark contrast to the autocracy that he leads.” The warnings came as Australia, Canada and Japan joined the US, UK and European Union in announcing sanctions against Russia and after Germany halted the approval process for the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline. After Boris Johnson, the British prime minister, announced on Tuesday that three billionaire allies of the Russian president and five Russian banks would face punitive measures, his foreign secretary, Liz Truss has written in the Times that the UK is also considering sanctions for members of the Russian Duma and Federation Council, and extending Crimea’s territorial sanctions to the separatist controlled territories in the Donbas. “No UK individual or business will be able to deal with these territories until they are returned to Ukraine,” she said. Truss said the UK was willing to “[turn] up the heat” on a “long list” of people complicit in the actions of the Russian leadership. The UK was willing to introduce other “measures to limit Russia’s ability to trade and prohibit a range of high-tech exports, degrading the development of its military industrial base for years”. Australian prime minister Scott Morrison said on Wednesday the Russian government was “behaving like thugs and bullies” and there “must be consequences for Russia’s actions”. Eight senior Russian security officials and the oil and gas sectors will be targeted in the first round, he said, and security agencies were on alert for possible counter-actions by Russia such as espionage and cyber-attacks. Justin Trudeau said Canada was sending hundreds more troops to eastern Europe to bolster Nato forces and imposing new sanctions. The prime minister said: “Make no mistake this is a further invasion of a sovereign state and it is completely unacceptable.” Trudeau said trade links with the two Russian-controlled territories in east Ukraine would be severed, the purchase of Russian sovereign debt banned, and Russian MPs and state-backed banks targeted. Japan targeted Russian government bonds and trade and people linked to the self-proclaimed republics in Luhansk and Donetsk. “We strongly urge Russia to return to diplomatic process in resolving the development,” said prime minister Fumio Kishida. For weeks Zelenskiy has urged calm, and a search for diplomatic solutions, even as western allies issued increasingly urgent warnings about Russian invasion plans. Now he has told his country it must “increase the readiness of the Ukrainian army for all possible changes in the operational situation”. He added: “We need to promptly replenish the Ukrainian army and other military formations.” Zelenskiy’s defiant speech came after the US said on Wednesday that the invasion it had forecast for weeks had finally begun. Zelenskiy said that Ukraine is a peaceful country, but its people would not stay quiet in the face of aggression. “If we remain silent today, we will disappear tomorrow. We have hard work ahead, every day, but we are read for it, with confidence in ourselves, our country and victory,” he said. Zelenskiy also said he had held a cross party meeting to propose a defence coalition government and announced the launch of an “economic patriotism” programme of tax breaks and other incentives to bolster a country battered by the threat of war. Ukraine is losing billions of dollars a month as Europe’s worst security crisis in decades has prompted many who are able to flee the capital, Kyiv, moving to other cities or out of the country entirely. He urged businesses to defy diplomatic warnings to foreign citizens to leave the country, after many embassies moved west to the city of Lviv; US diplomats even sleep in neighbouring Poland and commute to their jobs.A communication bungle between Transport for New South Wales and the transport minister’s office is being blamed for why David Elliott and premier Dominic Perrottet did not know about Monday’s total shutdown of the Sydney rail network before the general public. Questions continue to be asked about Elliott’s performance in the aftermath of the rail chaos on Monday that saw the entire network closed with no notice given to passengers. Full services are not expected to resume before next Monday. Having accused the Rail Tram and Bus Union of “terrorist-like activity” on Monday, a day later Elliott announced the government had withdrawn a Fair Work Commission application against workers. He went on to reveal he had gone to bed before the decision to stop the trains had been made, earning him a rebuke from Perrottet on Wednesday. “The minister will reflect on that and realise that all ministers are available 24/7,” Perrottet said. “That’s my expectation as premier.” Elliott insists a briefing he received before going to sleep on Sunday night warned only of “significant delays”, not a total shutdown, blaming the bungle on poor communication. Addressing the parliament on Wednesday afternoon, Elliott said that Transport for NSW considered it had informed the minister, in its obligation to notify him of “any significant developments”. “However, my office remained of the view until approximately 1.30[am] that there would be a significant disruption to services but not a total network shutdown,” he said. “What is clear is that the communication between the department and my office was not sufficiently precise.” He confirmed that in a meeting on Wednesday the premier told the transport secretary, Rob Sharp, that any future major changes to services needed to be briefed to the minister in writing. “That will ensure that there are no further incidence of this nature in the future,” Elliott said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Earlier on Wednesday, Perrottet said he “should have been advised” by the minister and the department that the trains were going to be stopped. He also asked Elliott to “reflect” on earlier comments about not being available at all hours, but said he still had confidence in him. “My expectation is that ministers are immensely connected to the operational matters that are occurring within their portfolios.” The premier has sought legal advice over the decision to close down the network and been looking into the roles played by Sharp, Elliot and senior officials in the shutdown. “The technical legal issues are complex and I need to continue to get advice. I’ve sought advice and I’m working through it,” he said. He said he was confident the decision made to stop trains “was the right one” – which was his first concern – and he was now turning his attention to why proper processes were not followed. When asked if someone would lose their job over the saga, Perrottet said it would “depend on the findings” of an internal investigation. “The ultimate decision needs to sit, in terms of making a call on the safety of the network, not with the union movement, but with Sydney Trains,” he said.The body of a woman has been found in a submerged car and ten people are missing after a torrential downpour hit south-east Queensland and parts of New South Wales, with the wet weather expected to continue into next week. The body of the 63-year-old was found in the vehicle near Skyring Creek at Belli Park, west of Eumundi on the Sunshine Coast, just after 8am on Wednesday. “This is indeed a tragedy during this particular time,” premier Annastacia Palaszczuk told parliament. Emergency services received a report of a submerged car about 4.45am and were at first unable to get to the vehicle due to rising floodwaters. The woman was the only person in the Honda CRV. Sunshine Coast police district superintendent Craig Hawkins said another 10 people were unaccounted for in the Noosa Hinterland area. “We are searching for some people at the moment, particularly again around that Belli Park area,” he said. “We’re hopeful that it’ll be a good outcome, but certainly we are searching for some people that are outstanding.” Some 23 rescues were conducted by Swiftwater rescue teams in the Sunshine Coast and Gympie regions following 12 hours of intense rainfall. The storms were expected to linger in Queensland and NSW throughout the week, causing dangerous flash flooding and record rainfalls. Weatherzone meteorologist Ben Domensino said the stormy weather pattern hitting large parts of eastern Australia could see several hundred millimetres of rain in the coming days. The new Powerhouse site in Parramatta was flooded on Tuesday, as Sydney saw the wettest weather since March last year with totals exceeding 100mm. NSW emergency services minister Steph Cooke said on Wednesday that the SES received 1323 calls in 24 hours with 40 children being evacuated from a childcare centre in Marrickville, in Sydney’s inner west. She said the majority of requests concerned leaking roofs, flash flooding on roads and debris. Parts of the northern rivers are expected to see 100mm of rain over the coming four days. Flood warnings have been issued for Tweed, Brunswick, Wilsons, Richmond, Orara, Bellinger and Nambucca Rivers. BOM’s radar showed heavy falls with thunderstorms leaving many Sydney suburbs recording more than 100mm of rain on Tuesday. Many roads are flooded and ferry services have been cancelled between Parramatta and Sydney Olympic Park on Wednesday due to flooding and debris on the swollen Parramatta River. In Queensland, the BoM said some parts of the south-east could see up to a metre of rainfall in the coming days, with residents urged to be on alert for flooding. At least a dozen drivers had been rescued after their cars became submerged in the Gympie and Sunshine Coast regions, while a train had been derailed at Taveston north-east of Noosa amid the deluge on Wednesday. The Queensland Fire and Emergency Service sent emergency alerts to residents in the Gympie, Noosa and Sunshine Coast local government areas warning of flash flooding impacting roads and bridges. Domensino said the heavy rain hitting south-east Queensland was notable even for this time of year. “We’ve already had some rainfall totals in last 24 hours of more than 400mm near Gympie,” he said. “Brisbane has forecast ranges of 100mm today, again on Thursday then another 40 to 80mm possible on Friday. To put that in perspective, Brisbane’s average rainfall in February is around 158mm. “We could be looking at more than a month’s rain falling in the next three days.” Domensino said the unusually heavy rainfall was being caused by a deep layer of moisture feeding into a low-pressure trough, which would linger until the weekend. He said south-east Queensland from the Sunshine Coast down to the NSW border would likely see the heaviest rain on Wednesday. “Between now and Saturday we’ll see heavy rain in Queensland and parts of north-east NSW, we could easily see more than 100 and 200mm,” he said. “Given we’ve already got major flooding in some creeks and rivers in south-east Queensland we are likely to see flooding there and possibly in parts of north-east NSW during the next three to four days.” Domensino said the weather was typical for what was expected during La Niña, which was being fuelled by the moisture-laden air. “Even as La Niña weakens it still has an influence on Australia’s weather,” he said. “This type of rain event – once catchments are saturated – can cause creeks and rivers to rise rapidly. “People in the regions know what type of flooding can occur, but we could see a rapid onset of major flooding in creeks almost empty to start with.” The BoM had issued a general flood warning for the entire south-east, as well as a generalised flood alert for Brisbane, the Gold Coast, Ipswich, Toowoomba and the Darling Downs. The worst-hit areas had been the south-east coast and the Wide Bay-Burnett region, including the Mary River where major floods earlier this year killed three people and damaged dozens of homes and businesses. “River level rises are likely to follow periods of heavy rainfall, however, the timing and areas for initial flood impacts are uncertain across the flood watch area,” the BoM said. Meanwhile, the Burnett, Burrum and Cherwell, Mary, Noosa, Pine, Caboolture, Brisbane, Logan and Albert, Condamine rivers were set to break their banks, as well as rivers and creeks on the Gold and Sunshine Coasts. Five dams were already spilling, including the Leslie Harrison, Lake Macdonald (Six Mile Creek), Poona, Ewen Maddock and Cooloolabin dams.A senior executive at Imperial College London is stepping down after the publication of damning details from a report on bullying by him and the Russell Group university’s president. Muir Sanderson, Imperial’s chief financial officer, is leaving after he and the president, Alice Gast, were found to have “created or contributed to a culture which involves and tolerates favouritism, exclusion, [and] the making of disparaging comments about others”. The publication of parts of the report this month “caused renewed disquiet, frustration and anger across the college community”, staff and students were told in a message on Tuesday by Imperial’s chair, John Allan, who is also Tesco’s non-executive chairman. Gast – who, like Sanderson, has admitted and apologised for bullying – is staying on until August, despite calls to go sooner. Details from an independent report by Jane McNeill QC on allegations of bullying were published this month after attempts at suppression were rejected by the Information Commissioner’s Office (ICO). Sanderson’s behaviour towards one victim was described as “aggressive and intimidating”. She was undermined and spoken to in a condescending and offensive way, for example being addressed as “young lady” and being told to “watch her tone”, the report said. “The evidence I heard also raises questions about whether MS’s character and powerful role within the college, encompassing the roles of both CFO and COO, impact on good decision-making in the college,” McNeill wrote. Another witness alleged that Sanderson had used the expression “[leaving] the plantation”. He has said he had no recollection of using the term. Sanderson was also alleged to have regarded a reference made by a former senior employee to a “one-armed black lesbian” as a joke. The report said it was “troubling in this day and age” that one of the most senior employees at an institution such as Imperial College should think this was a joke. The report found Gast had bullied a colleague but that her treatment of some others did not amount to bullying. Sanderson has apologised for bullying two colleagues. The report found he had bullied two colleagues between late February and mid-March 2020.High on a pedestal above the fashion week crowd, a model fluttered her white feather fan in time to the strains of a jazz quartet, the starburst beading on her inky blue silk dress twinkling under the chandeliers. Another sipped a negroni as she grooved daintily in a molten gold strapless gown. A pistachio silk dress was accessorised with a beaded skull cap; handpainted velvet was edged with a neckline of black feathers; tiny evening bags swung on delicate gold chains. As the grand marbled hall, where Rixo’s London fashion week collection was being showcased, filled up with editors, buyers and influencers, the audience shrugged off their Storm Eunice trenchcoats and gazed, saucer-eyed, at the Gatsby-esque pyramids of champagne coupes, which stood tall as Christmas trees in each corner of the room. The pop of champagne corks reverberated through this London fashion week. It was an oddly soothing sound, like an all-clear signal after an air raid, to nerves jangled by two years on high alert. The shows have returned to familiar cheek-by-jowl near-chaos, after stilted seasons of masked models and socially distanced audiences. And the new look that is everywhere is not a colour or a must-have hemline or even a hot take on the tracksuit. It is the party dress. At Halpern’s show in Brixton, slip dresses in flamingo-pink satin and tiger-striped velvet dripped from the models’ bodies like butter off hot toast. “I wanted it to be like, Anjelica Huston wakes up at a Scarface-era party after two years in a fever dream,” the designer Michael Halpern explained backstage. Everywhere you went, there was dressing up, and there was dancing. Preen held its first show in two years in Heaven nightclub, under the railway arches at Charing Cross. Ballet students with messily knotted hair and thick scrawls of eyeliner wore ra-ra dresses of white feathers that spun around their hips like punk tutus while they danced. Every so often, a particularly high-energy leap would dislodge remnants of a glitter shower, from some long-forgotten Saturday night, from the rafters, to land in the lap of the audience packed last-dance tight on the wooden benches around the room. Clements Ribeiro, the beloved 1990s London label relaunched by the designer Inacio Ribeiro and his wife, Suzanne Clements, last year, turned their teatime presentation into a Brazilian party, with professional forró dancers pairing up to show off their hip swings, and pulling punters on to the dancefloor to teach them some moves. Erdem Moralıoğlu added beaded opera gloves to slippery bias-cut dresses and sent the models into hushed darkness dotted with pools of milky light. He liked to imagine they were walking home from a club in the dead of night under streetlamps. “I love the swoosh of a sequin,” the designer said. “It’s always been one of my favourite sounds.” The vibe shift towards dressing to go out – or to go out-out – is a radical change of pace. Until recently, two years of eerie tidelessness had left fashion beached. With nowhere to go, we gave up on dressing up. But, as the world allows itself to glimpse a light at the end of the tunnel, our appetite for getting back into the swing of things is returning. Fashion weeks are, undeniably, slightly ridiculous, but they are also part of life’s rhythm, along with muddy music festivals and glossy red-carpet film award ceremonies, office sweepstakes for horse races and water-cooler chats about Love Island. It’s deeply reassuring to see London fashion week getting the wind back in its sails. That fashion should be all about the party dress right now is both the zeitgeist and a business opportunity. The rise of hybrid working has left many of us with a full-time office wardrobe and a part-time office schedule, so we have more smart work clothes than we need. And pretty much nobody is opening their wardrobe at this moment and thinking, what would truly thrill me to the bones would be a new tracksuit. It may have become fashionable to write fashion off, but after all that tablescaping and curating of Zoom backdrops, many of us have come to the conclusion that expressing personal style entirely through expensive twirly pastel candles and high-maintenance succulents is, in the end, a little airless. The buzziest labels in London right now are making dresses for the dancefloor – or, at least, for a Netflix-and-chill vibe rather than just Netflix. Poster Girl is designed by Francesca Capper and Natasha Somerville, who met at Central Saint Martins and, between them, have worked in the Dior, Vivienne Westwood and Jeremy Scott design studios. The brand creates slip-of-a-thing candy-coloured dresses with heart-shaped cut-outs and micro-mini hems, and is already beloved of Dua Lipa and Kylie Jenner. Nensi Dojaka, the winner of the prestigious LVMH prize, trained in lingerie design, and it shows in her bra-styled dresses, corsets and stretchy knits. Supriya Lele’s halterneck necklines and hipbone-baring low-slung minis are riding high on fashion’s current Y2K revival, and brought a powerhouse front row that included Victoria Beckham to her show. The shift towards showing skin was striking at Simone Rocha, where flounced and opulent party dresses were, this season, shrunk to I Tonya-esque proportions. This is happening on the shop floor, too, in real time: Zara is full of distinctly un-February-ish mini wrap frocks in Pucci-adjacent swirls, and the midi dresses at &amp; Other Stories have risque cut-outs and curving ruched seams. The rise of upcycling, making new clothes out of fabric remnants and pre-worn clothing, is also driving a focus on partywear. Young designer Conner Ives’s knotted-and-twisted frocks, sewn from vintage T-shirts, are proof that you can make something fun and flamboyant from discarded clothes. It is probably more difficult to make, say, a trouser suit or a tailored coat from odds and ends. Recycled Lurex fringing regenerates old fabric into new, the shredded texture adding to the general dazzle. And upcycled partywear feels like a celebration of old clothes, which fits with the values of a new generation of designers, who believe sustainability should look and feel aspirational rather than second best. The party atmosphere can’t hide the fact that British fashion is having a tough time, squeezed in a pincer movement between the pandemic and Brexit. The biggest European luxury houses have experienced a remarkable bounce back from Covid. Kering, which owns Gucci, Saint Laurent and Balenciaga, saw a rise in net profit of 37% last year to $3.64bn; LVMH, home of Dior, Fendi and Celine, doubled its net profit to $12bn. Meanwhile, exports of clothing and footwear from the UK were last year down by almost 60% on 2018. That the job is more perilous than ever, combined with designers presenting their clothes at live shows, in many cases for the first time in years, fuels a sense of fashion week drama. “It was getting quite claustrophobic, doing everything in the studio,” noted the designer Molly Goddard, who built a 5ft-high catwalk for her first show since lockdowns began, and dressed models in fishtail taffeta dresses and tulle puffballs. “A show is quite cathartic, and inevitably it gives you a more extreme perspective.” A return to a normal that we can barely remember brings with it its own sense of unreality. “I’ve kind of been waiting to put on a catwalk show my whole life,” Ives said to me at his studio last week. As part of the Central Saint Martins class of 2020, he saw the graduation show that his studies, and childhood dreams, had been building up to cancelled at the last moment. “And now, after everything we’ve all been through … what, are we all going straight back to Milan and Paris and flying around the world? I mean, I believe in catwalk shows, but I also don’t feel the world can just forget the last two years,” he said, shaking his head in bewilderment, even as models filed through the studio door for final fittings. “I don’t feel like we can take anything for granted any more.” Many of us can relate to that. And to some, it sounds like a reason to wear a party dress when you can.Wildfires that have devastated California, Australia and Siberia will become 50% more common by the end of the century, according to a new report that warns of uncontrollable blazes ravaging previously unaffected parts of the planet. The escalating climate crisis and land-use change are driving a global increase in extreme wildfires, with a 14% increase predicted by 2030 and a 30% increase by 2050, according to a UN report involving more than 50 international researchers. The findings suggest there should be a radical change in public spending on wildfires. The report said governments were putting their money in the wrong place by focusing on the work of emergency services when preventing fires would be a more effective approach. Wildfires are becoming an expected part of life on every continent, except Antarctica, destroying the environment, wildlife, human health and infrastructure, according to the report, which was written in collaboration with GRID-Arendal, a non-profit environmental communications centre. The report warned of a “dramatic shift in fire regimes worldwide”. “From Australia to Canada, the United States to China, across Europe and the Amazon, wildfires are wreaking havoc on the environment, wildlife, human health and infrastructure,” the foreword of the report said, adding that while the situation “is certainly extreme, it is not yet hopeless”. Although “landscape fires” are essential for some ecosystems to function properly, the report looks specifically at “wildfires”, which it defines as unusual free-burning vegetation fires that pose a risk society, the economy or environment. This month, researchers found global heating could cause “megafires resistant to fire-suppression practices” in southern California. In the US, nearly 3m hectares (7.7m acres) of land were burned by wildfires last year, with blazes becoming increasingly hard to fight. Direct responses to wildfires receive more than 50% of funding now, while planning and prevention get less than 1%. The paper calls for a “fire-ready formula” with investments rebalanced so half goes on planning, preventing and preparedness, about a third on response and 20% for recovery. Prof Sally Archibald, an ecologist at the University of the Witwatersrand in Johannesburg, who was involved in the report, said: “This is a really important conclusion that I hope diverts money and resources in the right direction, as well as changing policies. “We cannot promise that if the world gives money for proactive fire management, there will be no more extreme fire events because these fires are caused by global climate change,” she said. “But it would certainly help us minimise the impact and minimise the loss of damage.” There are many natural solutions, including starting controlled fires using prescribed burning, managing landscapes by grazing animals to reduce the amount of flammable material in the landscape, as well as removing trees too close to people’s homes. There should be more science-based monitoring systems combined with indigenous knowledge and better international cooperation, the paper’s authors said, ahead of the UN Environment Assembly in Nairobi. “After a century of research we’ve come around to agreeing that how people burn their landscapes traditionally in Africa is probably the most appropriate for the ecosystem,” said Archibald. Fire-management strategies vary globally, but as a very general rule, experts believe that ecosystems closer to the equator should have more controlled fires, and those farther away should have fewer. Exceptions include tropical forests such as the Amazon, which straddle the equator yet should have very few fires. “It’s not a one-size-fits-all situation. Fire is like rainfall – you get different types of fire in different parts of the world,” said Archibald. Wildfires have exacerbated the climate crisis by destroying carbon-rich ecosystems such as peatlands, permafrost and forests, making the landscape more flammable. Restoring ecosystems such as wetlands and peatlands helps prevent fires from happening and creates buffers in the landscape. Climate change increases the conditions in which wildfires start, including more drought, higher air temperatures and strong winds. Equally, carbon emissions from wildfires are at an all-time high. Tackling the climate crisis is a key priority in wildfire prevention, the report said. It also called for better health and safety standards for firefighters, including raising awareness of the dangers of smoke inhalation, reducing their exposure to life-threatening situations, and encouraging proper recovery between shifts. Inger Andersen, director of the UN Environment Programme, said: “We have to minimise the risk of extreme wildfires by being better prepared: invest more in fire-risk reduction, work with local communities and strengthen global commitment to fight climate change.” Prof Guillermo Rein, at Imperial College London, who was not involved in the paper, said it was good to read an “extensive and international overview” of how fire management needed to change. “The full report is impressive. It says so many good and important things,” he said. “Especially important is the emphasis on extreme wildfires and the recommendation for [a] move from reaction to prevention and preparedness.” Find more age of extinction coverage here, and follow biodiversity reporters Phoebe Weston and Patrick Greenfield on Twitter for all the latest news and featuresThe UK is exporting its pesticide footprint to other countries, environmentalists say. A new report, from the Pesticide Action Network UK, has found that increasing trade with Brazil could fund the use of harmful pesticides that are banned in Britain. The Brazilian government is currently pushing through a bill that would slash laws to protect human and environmental health from pesticides. Even without this new package of laws, Brazilian farmers are allowed to use almost double the number of hazardous pesticides as those in the UK, including the lethal herbicide Paraquat, which has caused tens of thousands of deaths across the world from acute poisoning, and neonicotinoids, which are toxic to bees. Campaigners have said a reliance on increasing trade with Brazil after Brexit could incentivise the use of these pesticides and degrade the environment in that country. Vicki Hird, sustainable farming campaign coordinator at Sustain, said: “Most UK consumers have no idea that some of the meat they’re eating has been fed on soya grown using highly toxic chemicals. Right now, the UK government is talking a good game on reducing pesticide harms in the UK, but appears to have no problem with exporting our environmental and human health footprints to Brazil.” The report also warns that the stronger trade bond could end up weakening pesticide regulations in the UK. It says that as a major agricultural exporter, Brazil would have much to gain from a drop in UK standards, which exclude food exports containing pesticides in amounts that exceed UK safety limits. The UK government has proposed a bill that will sanction companies that have deforestation in their supply chains, including farmers in the Amazon who clear the rainforest. However, there is no such law for pesticides. Josie Cohen, head of policy and campaigns at Pesticide Action Network UK, said: “The UK trade secretary is promoting trade with Brazil as providing ‘real opportunities to go further on green trade’. Meanwhile, Brazil’s overuse of highly toxic pesticides is contributing to the destruction of the Amazon and other crucially important ecosystems, contaminating water and poisoning farmworkers and communities. And yet the government has provided no detail on how it will ensure that Brazilian food sold on UK shelves is not contributing to the global climate and nature crises.” Another report, released on Tuesday, found that in 2020 UK-based chemical companies notified the export of multiple hazardous pesticides banned from use on British farms and fields. The investigation by Unearthed, Greenpeace’s journalism wing, found that UK companies exported seven different banned agrochemicals overseas in that year. They included weedkillers containing Paraquat; insecticides containing Imidacloprid, a neonicotinoid banned in the UK because of the serious damage it can cause to bee populations; and a fungicide called Propiconazole, banned after it was found capable of harming babies in the womb. Greenpeace UK’s chief scientist, Doug Parr, said: “By allowing UK-based companies to export harmful chemicals banned for use on our farms, the UK government is behaving like a drug baron with the motto ‘don’t get high on your own supply’. These double standards are deeply cynical and morally indefensible. “Far from acting like an environmental leader, the UK government is failing to keep up with the European Commission, who have rightly committed to ending export of these banned chemicals. Ministers should consider the damage this toxic trade is doing to people and wildlife and should outlaw it immediately.” A spokesperson for the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs said: “This government is united in its commitment to upholding its world leading environmental protection, animal welfare and food standards in our trade deals. In the case of neonicotinoids and other chemicals, the UK goes above the international standard, requiring exporting companies to confirm with countries that they have accepted any imports before they are shipped. “We are committed to basing decisions on the use of pesticides on robust scientific assessment and will not authorise pesticides that may carry unacceptable risks to people or the environment. All agri-food products imported into the UK under existing or future trade agreements and partnerships will, as they do now, have to comply with our requirements.”Britain’s youth has lost its social swagger, with happiness and confidence among 16- to 25-year-olds plunging to a 13-year low, according to research exposing the impact of Covid. With music festivals cancelled, nightclubs shuttered and students confined to halls of residence, 40% of young people now report being anxious about socialising with people, one-third say they don’t know how to make new friends and 35% say they’ve never felt more alone, a study by the Prince’s Trust has revealed. Even as the last lockdown restrictions are lifted this week, youth workers say they face an uphill struggle persuading people to socialise in real life, rather than online. Young people are reporting friendship groups withering and acute anxiety about going out, a legacy of having to negotiate infection control measures and fear of spreading Covid. The impact is worse for those not in work, education or training and from poorer backgrounds, with a quarter of young people in those groups reporting that they always feel anxious compared with 15% among people working or studying. “Young people aren’t getting the same level of new experiences and that’s stopping them becoming independent,” said Claire Carroll, who works with young people in Birmingham for the Prince’s Trust. “There’s not the same level of socialisation you get if you go to college or have a job. I think a lot of people have fallen through the gaps.” The Prince’s Trust NatWest Youth Index, based on polling this month by YouGov, found almost a quarter of young people believed they would never recover from the emotional impact of the pandemic and almost half agreed that the pandemic had left them feeling “burnt out”. A separate Office for National Statistics survey this month showed 16- to 29-year-olds feel considerably more anxious than the general population. 42% reported high levels of anxiety in the first half of this month compared with 34% on average and just 29% for people aged 50 to 69. The youngest are also the only group among whom the majority said they felt lonely often, always or some of the time. “There seems to be a real thirst for people to be together,” said a youth worker in London who said he saw high levels of social anxiety. “There are great hugs and shrieks when they get together, but then everyone goes on their phone.” Some girls have been spending up to 19 hours a day on their screens and others have decided against developing romantic relationships, even dressing in body-covering tracksuits with the purpose of avoiding attention. They don’t want to face criticism on social media if an issue blows up, he said. “Being a teenager you already have to navigate a lot of difficulties. You are exploring your identity and your place in the world. Add the pandemic that has separated you from your peer group, the schools stripping out support services, 12 years of austerity and the explosion of social media and you have a perfect storm.” Molly Trenwith, 23, from Wigan, was among thousands of young people bereaved during the pandemic. She said her anxiety grew after her mother, Jane, 60, died, to the extent she was “terrified to leave the house and scared of getting Covid”. It meant that between the ages of 21 and 23, when young people’s social lives are often blooming, physical contact with her friends and family was replaced with Facebook messenger and WhatsApp. “I would just sit in bed,” she said. “It was easier for me dealing with my mental health, but in reality, it made it worse.” “When you leave college you’re supposed to go out, drink and meet people, but all of that went online,” she said. “I don’t know how to start a conversation. It is strange how it has changed.” Mahoua Koui, 22, from Stoke, said she had found sustaining friendships during the past two years difficult, and said her social dynamic had changed from a large friendship ground to her now just having two close friends. “This alarming downward spiral of anxiety, stress and lack of confidence for the future will impact young people today and in future generations, while widening the gap for the most disadvantaged,” said Jonathan Townsend, the UK chief executive of Prince’s Trust. “With the right support from businesses, government and charities we can turn this around and ensure young people have the right skills and confidence to feel positive about their future work, and about their life overall.”‘I have no idea how to work these machines,” says David Mamet, trying to get himself on to Zoom. He has managed to log on but is just a disembodied voice. “It’s like those old movies where they have one of the first telephones and the grumpy old guy doesn’t know how to make it work.” Mamet is far from a grump, though he is now 74. His tone is baritone deep, bouncy, surprisingly Tigger-ish. He fiddles with his laptop but quickly concedes defeat with regards to us speaking face to face, saying: “Look, I can give you a description. I’m not that interesting anyway.” The writer is at home in Santa Monica, California, where it’s 72 degrees outside. He is sipping tea. There are occasional interjections from others who are ushered away politely with the words: “I’m speaking to the Guardian.” Dialogue in Mamet’s plays is generally staccato, gum-chewing hard talk but his own conversational style is bubbly and loquacious, at times taking on an unstoppable, locomotive energy. He jokes about Shakespeare (“Another Jew – his real name was Velvel Shaperstein, did you know that?”) and describes the latest batch of cartoons he has been drawing. They sound funny, I say. “I’ll send you some,” he replies, and a parcel arrives some days later with a cartoon of “Madame de Sade” and a punning S&amp;M punchline, another one with a cute Jean-Paul Sartre joke, and a copy of the book he has ghostwritten for the adult-film veteran Priscilla Wriston-Ranger, The Diary of a Porn Star. Sex and sexual politics have long featured in Mamet’s work. He has an immense, omnivorous oeuvre, from Hollywood hits to Broadway smashes as well as novels, children’s stories, essays, articles and cartoons. Theatre was where he started and we are Zooming to discuss The Woods, a two-person play that serves as a prime example of the Venus-and-Mars-like gender dynamics in Mamet’s fiction. It premiered in 1977, starring Patti LuPone and Peter Weller, with a 29-year-old Mamet directing, and will be revived at the Southwark Playhouse in London this month. The two characters, Ruth and Nick, are in a remote rural cabin and the drama goes from woozy repartee on desire, biology and commitment to point-scoring and then something much worse. It could be seen to follow on from Mamet’s 1974 drama Sexual Perversity in Chicago (later adapted into the film About Last Night, starring Rob Lowe and Demi Moore), about a couple embroiled in an emotional tug-of-war after realising they want different things from the relationship. Was The Woods intended to continue that conversation? Mamet, never one to explain his work, takes a step back and talks about the place of men and women. It is clear that sexual differences for him are grounded by biological absolutes and polarities. Nick and Ruth, he suggests, are re-evaluating sexual desire and destiny in an era newly liberated by the pill: “The feminists come in and say, ‘Yes, we’re in charge of our own bodies. We don’t have to get married to have sex.’ So the boys – and I was one of them – say, ‘OK, fine by me.’” This, he says, created the illusion that sex comes at no cost. “But sex is never at no cost to anybody, specifically not at no cost to women because, just as men have a biology necessity to have sex, women have a biological urge – whether they give in to it or not – to have babies.” So Ruth and Nick in 1977 is where we are now? No, he replies, we are even more confused. “We say, ‘We don’t have to get married to have sex.’ Then we say, ‘Actually, we don’t have to get married at all. Anybody can have babies.’ So people are walking around impossibly confused about what is a man, what is a woman, who can have babies, blah blah blah. This is a very unhealthy situation. Like most unhealthy situations, it presents itself as a solution but it’s not.” The locomotive hurtles on as Mamet talks about law, morality, the decline of western civilisation and religion, giving answers that are treatise-like and opaque. But bring him on to the art of writing and his early life in Chicago, and he becomes bouncy again, full of memories that are vivid and vigorous. “Playwriting is a job for the young. It’s a huge expense of energy and exuberance. It’s a magnificent release to write these plays – and I got to not only write them but do them. If there’s no place to put on your play, you can’t learn to write a play, because you learn from the audience.” When Mamet first staged The Woods, he and the actor William H Macy were running their own theatre company, St Nicholas, from an abandoned dairy rented for “around 200 bucks a month”. Mamet often doubled up in day jobs as a cab-driver, window-cleaner or telephone carpet salesman. Did he develop his ear for dialogue – its demotic rhythms, pace and profanities – then? No, it was far earlier, in his Jewish-American family household: “We’re very oral people, the Jews. That’s what we do. We love ambiguity. And it wasn’t that I was listening on purpose. I just got a kick out of listening.” His mother, a teacher, and his father, a lawyer, split up when he was 11. They were not theatre lovers but the young Mamet got some early exposure through his uncle, who was the director of radio and television for the Chicago Board of Rabbis. “It meant putting on what they called The God Ghetto at seven o’clock on Sunday morning. He needed actors so my sister and I were in these shows.” There was also Chicago’s Goodman theatre which, in those days, he thinks was “bullshit – it imported second-rate New York productions of The House of Bernarda Alba. Who cares? So that was the theatre I grew up with. I looked around and thought, ‘This is garbage. I don’t get it.’” It all changed when, working as a bus-boy while at school, he encountered The Second City, a now renowned troupe whose actors he’d watch doing improv. Then he started reading Chekhov. “There’s no plot in these plays but you don’t mind because they’re brilliant. That, to me, is what theatre should be.” Mamet dedicated his 1984 Pulitzer-winning play Glengarry Glen Ross to Harold Pinter, another Jewish-born playwright with a sharp ear for vernacular. This was because Pinter was instrumental in bringing the play into being. “I did a reading [of it] in my kitchen and everyone said, ‘It doesn’t work. Don’t worry, we’ll do another one.’ We had the greatest actors in New York and a wonderful director – and it just fell flat. So I sent it to Harold. I said, ‘Harold, I’ve never done this in my life. I’ve never asked anybody for advice. But what’s wrong with this play?’ He wrote back and said, ‘Nothing. It just needs a production.’” Pinter added that he’d given it to the great director Bill Bryden and it was going to be staged at the National Theatre. Mamet’s writing credits range from acclaimed films such as The Untouchables and The Postman Always Rings Twice to the Tony-nominated plays Speed-the-Plow and Glengarry Glen Ross. What have been his highlights? “When you look back, you think, ‘Jeez, I can’t believe I came up with that gag.’ Or, ‘Jeez, I can’t believe I was there when so-and-so did that on stage.’ That’s the stuff that you remember. All those awards and stuff are just plastercast. Big deal.” Does he ever feel the desire to rework anything? “I always want to fix my movies but I never want to fix the plays. I don’t know why.” Which ones? “Oh, I’m not going to tell you.” He does not go back to see his plays revived either. So he didn’t catch Lucy Bailey’s recent, feted production of Oleanna, arguably his most controversial play, which is about political correctness, a university professor and an aggrieved student. The drama sparked stand-up rows in auditoriums in 1992. He hasn’t seen it since that New York premiere, which starred Macy opposite Mamet’s wife, Rebecca Pidgeon. But he agrees with Bailey’s view that there is as much a threat to free speech today as there was then. He has, he says, only just written a book called Recessional: The Death of Free Speech and the Cost of a Free Lunch. “I’ll send it to you,” he says and it arrives electronically the following day. Does he think universities are places where we cannot talk freely? “I know they aren’t. Of course they aren’t.” In 2019, he staged Bitter Wheat, a black farce inspired by the Harvey Weinstein scandal that starred John Malkovich. It came soon after the #MeToo watershed. Was he a little frightened to go there? “I didn’t find it frightening. That’s the terrible thing about the death of free speech. You do a play because there’s something so thrilling you’ve got to write it down – or something so unfortunate you’ve got to figure it out. So I wrote the play and I sent it to John and he called back an hour later and said, ‘I read it twice. I’ll do it.’” It wasn’t just about Weinstein, he says, but the entire movie business, “because the dark secret of the movie business has always been that it was run by men – mainly men – who got into it to get money to get power, and to get power and money to have sex.” But how can he talk about the death of free speech if he got to put on the play? “I got to do it then – but I can’t do it now. Absolutely not. People have become so frightened that it seems rational to say, ‘I have to take into account this constituency and that constituency.’ So, while you’re taking all those constituencies into account, you just wrote yourself out of the equation.” On to Mamet’s much-documented swing to conservatism, from his stand against the NFL’s kneeling-during-the-anthem protests to his support for Donald Trump. It seems so far away from the leftist leanings of his youth, the critiques of capitalism clearly visible in American Buffalo and Glengarry Glen Ross. “I was never, ever a communist,” he says. “All you need to know about communism is that Marx was a sponger. He lived off Engels’ family who had a furniture factory.” He was raised as a “red diaper baby”, he adds – meaning his parents were communists – so even to say he is a Republican “sticks in my throat”. But he is a conservative because “I would like to conserve those things I grew up with: the love of family, the love of the country, love of service, love of God, love of community.” And love of the American constitution too. “For those who say the constitution is over 200 years old and can’t still be relevant, I say, ‘Well, what about the Ten Commandments?’ What’s going to rule in its place? Savagery.” Mamet became a vocal Trump supporter during his presidency, which can’t have been easy in the Democratic stronghold of California. “Well, he did a great job as a president.” Really? “Well, if you put everything you see on these little screens aside and look at what happened during the Trump presidency. We told China to knock it off. We told Nato to start paying their fair share. We moved the Embassy of the United States to Jerusalem in Israel . . . Gas prices were down. There was the lowest black unemployment in history …” There was also Trump’s claim that the 2020 election was rigged. Does Mamet believe America’s democratic process to be flawed too? “It’s an interesting question. I grew up in Chicago, which was run as a mob’s fiefdom by Mayor Richard J Daley. So all elections were rigged. The idea that people are not going to steal elections is ignorance because people steal elections all the time. The question is: ‘What was the extent of the election rigging?’ I don’t know. But was it questionable? Yes.” This article was amended on 24 February 2022, removing an assertion that the US embassy move to Jerusalem “[fixed] the only instance in history of a country that didn’t have an embassy in its capital city”. The Netherlands is a current example, with embassies in The Hague while the capital is Amsterdam. The Woods is at the Southwark Playhouse, London, 24 February to 26 March. David Mamet’s Recessional: The Death of Free Speech and the Cost of a Free Lunch is published in the US in April (HarperCollins).Imagine that a hostile power managed to infiltrate the UK’s government. Imagine that it set out to demoralise and debilitate this country, destroying our sense of common purpose, undermining our stability and trashing the lives of many of our citizens. Imagine that it had to operate below the radar, within the structures of a nominally democratic system. Let’s follow this thought experiment for a moment. What would such a hostile force set out to do? It would seek, first of all, to destroy trust. The people it planted in the government would lie prolifically, then lie about the lies, until we were so disoriented we no longer knew what to believe. They would damage our sense of national cohesion with a blatant disregard for the rules the rest of us must follow. They would seek to ensure that we lost faith in the political system and ceased to believe that those who govern us have our best interests at heart. The hostile power would also set out to destroy, through subtle and insidious cuts, our social infrastructure: the effective delivery of health, education, social, environmental and local services. It would allow our physical infrastructure – public transport, sewerage, public buildings and other essential services – to deteriorate until, in some cases, it came close to collapse. It would attack and undermine crucial symbols of national pride, such as the NHS, the BBC, the National Trust and the universities. It would further harm our sense of nationhood by trashing much of what we treasure and love, such as clean rivers, the green belt and well-planned cities. It would sow division by promoting inequality, enabling a prosperous elite to accumulate ever more of the country’s wealth. After all, as George Orwell remarked during the second world war, “the lady in the Rolls-Royce car is more damaging to morale than a fleet of Goering’s bombing planes”. It would impede trading relations with our neighbours and major economic partners, in the hope of cutting us off from the world. It would undermine peace agreements and impose internal borders. It would allow crime to run rampant, permitting an explosion of devastating fraud and financial crimes such as money laundering that further harm our international standing and the concept of equality before the law. Far from stamping out profiteering during a national crisis, the hostile power would create a special channel, enabling favoured interests to guzzle public money. It’s hard to think of a better policy for destroying trust in public life and the sense that we are all in this together. You can see where this is going. It sometimes seems to me that if this government had set out to harm our country, it could scarcely have done a better job. It seems perversely committed to the destruction of civic life, national pride and a sense of belonging. You can more or less predict Tory policy on any issue by asking yourself: “What’s the most toxic and harmful strategy they could hope to get away with?” So what is going on? Has a hostile power managed to infiltrate the UK government? In a way, yes. That power is oligarchic capital. At the weekend, the Sunday Times reported that people who have donated at least £250,000 to the Conservative party have been invited to join an “advisory board”, with special access to the prime minister, cabinet ministers and senior government advisers. They have used this access to lobby for changes in government policy. The 14 identified members of the group have a combined wealth of at least £30bn, and have donated £22m to the Conservatives. Among them are property tycoons, financiers, two people with connections to the Kremlin, a tobacco magnate and an internet entrepreneur currently facing trial for rape and sexual assault (both of which he denies). The group and its agenda had hitherto been kept secret. The Sunday Times reporting was based on a trove of leaked documents. The advisory group appears to cross the line that separates party business from government business, especially as the official facilitating it is on the public payroll. We have also been told that the Conservative party is helping its donors to apply for key government positions, which looks like another obvious transgression of the line. Another tranche of leaked documents suggest that offering a golden ladder to prestigious public appointments is used as leverage when persuading them to part with their money. Political funding has long been a means by which the very rich can exercise inordinate influence over public policy. But this influence now seems to have become cruder and more extreme than at any time in living memory. Far from seeking to contain plutocratic power, Boris Johnson hopes to strip the Electoral Commission of its powers to stop abuses of the funding system. Big donors are not the only oligarchs with inordinate influence over this government. Dominic Cummings claimed that Boris Johnson referred to the Telegraph, owned by the billionaire Frederick Barclay, as “my real boss”. Rupert Murdoch and his senior executives have held several private meetings with Johnson and members of his cabinet. Are the very rich deliberately trying to harm our country? In some cases, perhaps. There is a strand of capitalism that wants to generate crises, then seize national assets at fire sale prices. But no such intention is required to explain the general damage inflicted by oligarchic capital. It is simply that the interests of the very rich are not the same as the interests of the nation. We should never forget what the billionaire stockbroker Peter Hargreaves, who donated £3.2m to one of the leave campaigns, said about Brexit: “We will get out there and we will become incredibly successful because we will be insecure again. And insecurity is fantastic.” No responsible government would allow the demands of the ultra-rich to override the needs of the nation. But we have no responsible government. George Monbiot is a Guardian columnistThere are six varieties of pipefish living in British waters, the most noticeable of them being the largest, the greater pipefish, Syngnathus acus. For the amateur, the types are fairly difficult to distinguish from one another, with all species being long, thin and bony, and the juveniles of one species looking like the adults of another. They resemble stretched-out seahorses, to which they are related. They are of no commercial value and therefore little studied and largely ignored but they occur all round Britain and Ireland. They are poor swimmers and after storms hundreds can be washed up and stranded at high tide. Adults can reach 45cm (18in) but are generally 35cm long. Like seahorses, the males carry and care for their young after mating but have been known to consume their unborn offspring in order to build up strength when another more attractive female comes along. They have a small mouth at the end of a long snout that allows them to feed by sucking in tiny shrimps like a vacuum cleaner. Their favoured home is among seagrass beds close to shore, a habitat badly degraded and threatened by seabed trawling. Seagrass provides perfect camouflage for their scaly and stripy bodies. Elsewhere, they are more vulnerable to being eaten by larger fish and seabirds.The NHS does not have the 6,000 staff needed to run its promised array of new testing centres designed to speed up diagnosis of cancer and other diseases, medical leaders are warning. The drive to recruit the radiographers and radiologists needed to take and analyse scans and X-rays at the community diagnostic centres (CDCs) in England risks already-understaffed hospitals losing key staff to work there, a “robbing Peter to pay Paul” strategy that would backfire, they claim. The Department of Health and Social Care (DHSC) has confirmed in a written parliamentary answer that the centres will need an extra 3,500 radiographers to carry out diagnostics tests and 2,000 radiologists to interpret the results, as well as 500 advanced practitioners, who are radiographers with additional training to report on images. NHS England has promised to spend £2.3bn setting up at least 100 CDCs by early 2025, and ultimately more than 160 of them, as part of a major effort to identify life-threatening diseases such as cancer and diabetes sooner and tackle the NHS’s huge backlog of non-urgent hospital care. They are central to its “elective recovery plan” to address the 6.1m-strong treatment backlog. It has pledged that the centres “will significantly increase the diagnostic capacity available for suspected cancer and support faster diagnosis and reduced waiting times”. It plans to site many of the new centres on high streets and has promoted them as user-friendly places where “combining a diagnostic test with a shopping trip will be far more common in the future”. The centres will help deliver it 9m more tests and checks a year by 2025, it said. But groups representing the staff needed insist that the extra 6,000 specialists do not exist. “There is a real concern that CDCs will be staffed with radiographers and other staff that are only available because they have left jobs elsewhere in the NHS,” said Richard Evans, the chief executive of the Society and College of Radiographers. “Robbing Peter to pay Paul is never a good strategy and it could be disastrous for NHS diagnostics as a whole.” While “delivering diagnostics quickly and more conveniently for the public is an admirable plan”, the UK will need to train more homegrown radiographers and also recruit more from overseas if the NHS is to fulfil its ambition, Evans added. The Royal College of Radiologists warned that patients who are due to have a diagnostic test at a hospital where staff have left to work in the CDCs could face a longer wait for it, a delay to the start of their treatment and potentially a poorer outcome as a result. “Over 80% of patients treated in a hospital have images such as an X-ray, CT or MRI interpreted by a radiologist, often at the beginning of their diagnosis and treatment. “Any delay in taking or interpreting these images risks creating a choke point for other areas of the NHS, impacting our ability to deliver effective treatment for most illnesses,” said Dr Jeanette Dickson, the college’s president. The NHS is already short of 1,939 consultant radiologists, she added. Wes Streeting, the shadow health secretary, said patients were paying the price for the government’s failure to address longstanding NHS staff shortages. “The super massive black hole in the government’s NHS recovery plan was the lack of a workforce strategy. NHS staff have gone above and beyond in the past two years, but there aren’t enough of them. Patients will continue waiting longer for care until the staff shortages are fixed. “After a decade of Tory mismanagement, the NHS went into the pandemic with 100,000 vacancies. It’s not just that the Conservatives didn’t fix the roof when the sun was shining, they dismantled the roof and removed the floorboard,” he said. A spokesperson for the DHSC said: “Our record investment in the NHS includes an extra £2bn this year and £8bn over the next three years to tackle the backlog caused by the pandemic. “There are record numbers of staff working in the NHS in England and we are focused on securing even more staff, as well as making patient care as effective and efficient as possible, so we can continue to ensure the NHS is always there for those who need it.”We Are Black and British 9pm, BBC Two “Just because we’re from the black community doesn’t mean we all think the same.” Lin Mei – whose father is black and mother is Asian and white – is one of six people who come together in this two-parter. Each person shares their story and presents a topic to be debated: how schools are failing black pupils; the reality of being a black single mother; the barriers faced as a black gay man; and racism within your own family. Hollie Richardson Paul O’Grady: For the Love of Dogs 8pm, ITV “It’s like a Sherman tank on a lead!” Another heartwarming visit to Battersea in the company of O’Grady, who is almost literally bowled over by Bruce, the chunky bulldog. While Bruce’s various health issues are addressed by caring staff, the spry host also bonds with a nervous saluki and a stray Polish dachshund nicknamed Sausage. Graeme Virtue Flat Out Fabulous 8pm, BBC Three The much-needed renovation show for Generation Rent returns with two episodes. Whinnie Williams and Tyler West jazz up rented homes within budget and abiding by landlord stipulations. Tonight: three flatmates in Bristol want a place that represents their big personalities. HR Zen Motoring 9.50pm, BBC Three More gloriously placid urban perambulations from battle rapper and street philosopher Ogmios, possibly the only person in history to render driving in London both calming and restorative. Tonight, our questing hero encounters a lost pigeon in need of assistance. Needless to say, Ogmios is only too happy to oblige. Phil Harrison Frayed 10pm, Sky Max Sarah Kendall returns, with Diane Morgan and Robert Webb in tow, for a second series of the 80s-set UK/Australia-based comedy. After an eventful time in Oz (involving an accidental murder), Sammy (Kendall) and the kids return to London. Tonight’s opener sees Sammy attempt to reclaim her worth by helping at the school disco. HR Great Escapes With Morgan Freeman 10pm, Sky History Think David Attenborough nature documentary, but instead make it Morgan Freeman on crime. His deep, dulcet tones narrate this over-the-top series about great prison escapes. Tonight we’re in Alcatraz, in 1962, where four small-time crooks are about to make history. HR Live sport International Women’s Football: England v Germany 6.45pm, ITV4. Final match of the Arnold Clark Cup from the Molineux stadium, Wolverhampton.US rock band Foo Fighters will perform a one-off Victorian concert in Geelong next Friday, becoming the first major international music act to travel to Australia since the pandemic began. The band’s Geelong show – the first major music event at GMHBA Stadium – will coincide with the launch of a new 7,500-capacity pop-up gig venue at Reunion Park as the Victorian government attempts to revitalise the battered music scene. But local venues and promoters have said more is needed at a grassroots level, including giving certainty about how future potential Covid lockdowns could work, in order for the industry to recover. Foo Fighters, who have won 12 Grammys and are premiering their horror comedy film Studio 666 this week – will be supported by local acts Amyl and the Sniffers, and The Meanies. The performance will announce the arrival of a new statewide music event – Always Live – to be held across Victoria in the second half of the year. The state’s tourism minister, Martin Pakula, on Wednesday said about 25,000 music fans would attend the Geelong gig on 4 March. “Foo Fighters, in terms of the quality of that act, should give you a really good sense of what we’re trying to achieve here,” he told reporters. Always Live – spearheaded by the late music industry executive Michael Gudinski – aims to fund and celebrate contemporary live music from Australia and abroad. The full program for the event will be released in the middle of the year. Always Live chair and Michael Gudinski’s son, Matt Gudinski, said the event had been a “passion project” for his late father to ensure Victoria remained the “music capital of Australia”. “I know Dad would be very proud to see the event launched and form a major part of re-establishing a thriving live music scene,” he said. In New South Wales, a similar state government-driven live music series called Great Southern Nights kicks off next month, featuring a lineup of local acts such as Jimmy Barnes and Kate Ceberano. Paris Martine, a tour promoter who also books gigs for the Curtin Hotel, said the Foo Fighters’ gig was welcomed, but the Victorian government needed to shift its focus from major events to smaller band room venues. “It’s wonderful that sector gets to come back, but those types of gigs are not the engine room where bands are built. They’re not the engine rooms where bands cut their teeth and perform their first album show,” she said. “There needs to be a focus on smaller band rooms and what needs to happen to see them through.” Last week, the Curtin – a cornerstone of Melbourne’s music scene – became the latest live music venue to announce it would close its doors for the final time in November, with the owners of the almost 150-year-old building deciding to sell the space. Martine said while the sector was excited about the recent removal of restrictions on live music events, it was time to start planning for what would be needed if Covid restrictions were to return. “This is not the government’s first rodeo any more, so nobody can turn around and say, ‘We didn’t expect this to happen’. What we need is some certainty so that we know what does happen if there is a new strain,” she said. “There needs to be a tick list where the government says, ‘these are the environments that solely rely on high-density to be viable’, to ensure support comes in immediately. And when we come out of it, [restrictions in] live music venues need to lift directly in line with other forms of activity. So, if dancing’s back, it’s back right across the board, not just at weddings. If density restrictions lift at major events, it lifts for small venues.” Simone Pulga, director of Melbourne venue The Butterfly Club, said Always Live would not be enough to counter the “two years of catastrophic systemic collapse” the music industry had suffered. “It’s very unlikely that this is the last we’ll hear of Covid challenges … whenever there is a need to lock down, the government feels as if it’s the first time and it’s March 2020 all over again,” he said. “It’s now fair for us to expect that the government will develop policies when we are not in emergency mode that will be used when an emergency comes up. Things like if liquor licences should be charged in full during Covid restrictions, and financial support of a kind that can be quickly given to artists and venues.” Tickets for the Foo Fighters’ Geelong performance go on sale from midday Friday and range from $99 to $220. Victoria’s Reunion park, which will be located in the City of Yarra’s Burnley Circus Site in Melbourne’s inner east, will host one-off music performances, festivals and art shows. The 7,500-capacity space consist of two tents and will run from 4 March to 10 April.Top story: More countries pile sanctions on Putin regime Hello, Warren Murray bringing you into the middle of a momentous week. Ukraine has called up its military reservists after Russia began moving troops into the country’s east, while Vladimir Putin said he supported vastly expanded territorial claims made by two breakaway areas. Overnight, Antony Blinken, the US secretary of state, said it was Putin’s “plan all along to invade Ukraine”. Volodymyr Zelenskiy, the Ukrainian president, ruled out a general mobilisation of the army while warning that Ukraine could face a battle for its very existence. From Kyiv, Emma Graham-Harrison writes that nearly a decade of war has left Ukraine with about half a million combat-experienced veterans, many of whom are preparing to fight again. That combined with the sheer size of Ukrainian territory means that even if Russia can outgun them on a conventional battlefield, any military clash could lead to a protracted and bloody partisan conflict. After Putin on Monday signed a presidential order recognising the self-proclaimed republics in Luhansk and Donetsk, it has become clear the Russian president is backing the territories’ claims to nearly three times the area currently under their control. In developments on the sanctions front, Japan has targeted Russian government bonds and trade and people linked to the self-proclaimed republics in Luhansk and Donetsk. Australia said eight senior Russian security officials and the oil and gas sectors would be targeted in its first round of sanctions. Justin Trudeau said Canada was sending hundreds more troops along with sanctions against Russian MPs and state-backed banks. It comes after Joe Biden said the US would sanction Russian banks, oligarchs and others. The German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, has suspended certification of the Russian gas pipe Nord Stream 2, while the EU announced punitive measures that may be expanded at a G7 meeting later this week. Britain’s sanctions package unveiled by Boris Johnson in the Commons has come under attack from his own Conservative MPs, among others, as too weak. * * * ‘Embarrassment’ of Johnson questionnaire – The first glimpse of a “partygate” questionnaire confirms Downing Street insiders are being questioned under police caution and asked if they have a “reasonable excuse”. Boris Johnson has already returned his replies to the Metropolitan police’s questions, and is believed to have argued, with the help of a lawyer, that he attended lockdown-breaching social events in No 10 in a work capacity. Angela Rayner, Labour’s deputy leader, said: “This is an embarrassment that for the first time in UK history we have a PM interviewed under police caution.” Johnson receiving a fixed penalty notice for breaching rules that he himself drew up is regarded as unacceptable to many Conservative backbenchers, and would be likely to prompt more letters calling for a vote of no confidence. * * * Midweek catch-up &gt; An armed robber who held people hostage in an Apple store in central Amsterdam was overpowered last night after a siege lasting several hours, police have said, with his captives all freed. &gt; Fraud and error are likely to have cost the UK government as much as £16bn across the Covid-19 emergency loan schemes, according to parliament’s spending watchdog, which described the losses as “unacceptable”. &gt; The Pentagon is expected to approve sending 700 to 800 unarmed national guard troops to Washington in the face of truck driver protests next week against pandemic restrictions. &gt; So much methane is leaking from the world’s oil and gas facilities that the money gained by plugging them and recouping the gas could easily offset the cost of doing so, the International Energy Agency has found. &gt; An unknown director, producer or writer will be given £1.5m and a global launch on Netflix, in an effort to discover a future generation of “bold, distinctive” UK storytellers. * * * ‘Robbing Peter to pay Paul’ – The NHS does not have the 6,000 staff including thousands of radiographers and radiologists that it needs to run promised new testing centres designed to speed up diagnosis of cancer and other diseases, medical leaders are warning. NHS England has promised to spend £2.3bn setting up at least 100 community diagnostic centres (CDCs) by early 2025. Richard Evans from the Society and College of Radiographers, said there was a risk the NHS would end up “robbing Peter to pay Paul” by pulling specialists into the CDCs from other areas of the health service that still needed them. A spokesperson for the health department said the NHS was employing record numbers of staff and was “focused on securing even more staff”. * * * Young turn inward – Happiness and confidence among Britain’s 16- to 25-year-olds is at a 13-year low, according to research exposing the impact of Covid. Forty per cent of young people report being anxious about socialising with others and 35% say they have never felt more alone, the Prince’s Trust reports. “There are great hugs and shrieks when they get together, but then everyone goes on their phone,” said a youth worker in London. Claire Carroll from the Prince’s Trust said: “Young people aren’t getting the same level of new experiences and that’s stopping them becoming independent.” Jonathan Townsend, the trust’s UK CEO, said: “With the right support from businesses, government and charities we can turn this around and ensure young people have the right skills and confidence to feel positive about their future work, and about their life overall.” * * * Light on the tiles – The largest expanse of Roman mosaic found in London for more than half a century has been unearthed at a site believed to have been a venue for high-ranking officials to lounge in while being served food and drink. Dating from the late second to early third century, the flowers and geometric patterns were a thrilling, once-in-a-lifetime find, said Antonietta Lerz, of the Museum of London Archaeology (Mola). The mosaic, which is eight metres long, was discovered about a month ago at a construction site near London Bridge. It will be lifted later this year for preservation and conservation work, with the eventual hope of it being publicly displayed. Today in Focus podcast: What will Putin do next? After weeks of threats, Vladimir Putin has sent soldiers and tanks into eastern Ukraine. Shaun Walker and Patrick Wintour explain what the new stage of the crisis means for Ukraine and its allies. Lunchtime read: ‘The swoosh of a sequin’ After two years of you-know-what, the party dress is back! If you’re looking to dance the night away, London fashion week was bursting with ideas, writes Jess Cartner-Morley. Sport Thomas Tuchel says Romelu Lukaku was dropped from Chelsea’s 2-0 win against Lille in order to take him out of the firing line after a torrid afternoon at Crystal Palace in which he touched the ball only seven times. Dusan Vlahovic scored 31 seconds into his Champions League debut as Juventus drew 1-1 at Villarreal in the first leg of their last-16 tie on Tuesday. Jürgen Klopp has said the punishing demands of a title race with Manchester City ensure Liverpool can never afford to “get a bit soft” in their pursuit of the Premier League leaders. Sarina Wiegman has urged England to be more “ruthless” in the final game of the Arnold Clark Cup against Germany on Wednesday. Athletes at the Commonwealth Games this year will be allowed to raise a fist on the podium to protest in favour of racial equality, and wave Pride flags in support of LGBT+ rights during victory laps, the Guardian has learned. Phil Mickelson has apologised for his “reckless” comments about a proposed Saudi-backed breakaway league and said he will be taking a break from golf. Wales have been warned to expect a fast and furious welcome from England at Twickenham on Saturday in a game the home team are billing as a knockout eliminator. Business Petrol prices could reach 150p a litre in Britain this week after the worsening tension in Ukraine added fresh pressure to the cost of living crisis facing households. Oil reached $99 a barrel yesterday although it has since fallen back slightly to around $97 today after the markets judged that the west’s sanctions would not disrupt supplies from the world’s third largest producer. The FTSE100 looks like climbing around 0.25% at the opening bell today while the pound is on $1.359 and €1.200. The papers We have a separate roundup of front pages today, summarised as follows. The Times says “West imposes sanctions as Biden warns of war” and carries an image of Russian troops and tanks in the Rostov region, close to the border with Ukraine. The Express demands “Punish Putin harder now” urging Boris Johnson to squeeze 150 Russian oligarchs. The Mirror agrees, saying “Get dirty Russian money out of UK now” and calls UK sanctions “feeble”. The Metro says “We’ll grab him by the roubles” – it carries a hint of discontent at the extent of the sanctions but is broadly positive about the “first barrage” of measures. The Guardian focuses on the latest developments abroad, with the headline “War threat grows as Putin backs Ukraine proxy states” and a huge image of Russian tanks ploughing through the mud close to Ukraine’s border. It gives prominence to Biden’s comments and Germany’s decision to put the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline from Russia on hold. The Telegraph gives the US president the headline – “Putin is invading and will go much further, says Biden” – and Johnson the main image. The Mail takes a more visceral approach with “Twisted Putin is ready for bloodshed”. It notes Russian tank movements and says 100 Nato jets are on alert. The Financial Times has “Putin backs separatist claims to whole Donbas region of Ukraine”. “Putin takes Europe to brink of war”, says the i, and the Sun’s headline is “Boris: stop mad Vlad”. Sign up The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekendSouth Korea’s prime minister has called for calm after a record number of Covid-19 cases, amid warnings that the latest surge had yet to peak. Kim Boo-kyum said serious cases and deaths were still at “manageable levels”, after health authorities reported 171,452 new infections on Wednesday, a sharp increase from the 99,573 cases a day earlier and the previous all-time high of 109,831. “Although our awareness and implementation of anti-Covid rules should not be loosened, there is no reason at all to fear or panic about the numbers of new cases as in the past,” Kim, said, according to a transcript of a pandemic response meeting. His comments came after the Korean Disease Control and Prevention Agency (KDCA) cited data showing that people infected with the highly transmissible Omicron variant were almost 75% less likely to become seriously ill or die than those who contracted the Delta variant. About 56% of the 1,073 people who died over a recent five-week period were either unvaccinated or had received only one dose, a KDCA study showed, with people aged 60 or older accounting for 94% of deaths. More than 86% of South Korea’s 52 million people have been double vaccinated and nearly 60% have received a booster shot. On Wednesday, the government approved Pfizer vaccinations vaccine for children aged five to 11. With 2.3 million cases and about 7,600 deaths since the start of the pandemic, South Korea has fared better than many comparable countries, but the recent dramatic rise in infections is at odds with global trends. On Tuesday, the World Health Organization (WHO) said the number of new Covid-19 cases around the world had fallen 21% over the past week – the third straight week of decline – but added that infections were still rising in the western Pacific region. South Korea was one of five countries with the highest number of new infections, the WHO said. Experts have predicted that the latest wave could peak at as many as 270,000 infections a day by early next month, around the time South Koreans elect a new president. The administration of Moon Jae-in, whose single five-year term is about to end – has been criticised for relaxing targeted social distancing measures last week. It partially eased restrictions by extending curfews for cafes and restaurants by one hour to 10 pm, although it left the six-people cap on private gatherings and other measures, including mask mandates in public spaces, unchanged. Newspaper editorials reflected concern about the steep rise in the number of people who are being asked to recuperate at home to relieve pressure on the country’s health services. The Korea JoongAng Daily said deaths and serious cases could rise if more than half a million people recovering at home were “neglected”. “Home treatment can hardly be described as treatment, because most patients must endure it without any prescription medicine,” it said. Kim said remaining social distancing rules would not be relaxed until cases had peaked. “Omicron’s spread is still racing to its peak, but once it is assured that severe cases and deaths can be stably managed, we will reform the broad framework of our anti-virus quarantine policy including social distancing,” he said.Patient care may suffer as a result of cuts to the NHS budget to fund the continuing costs of Covid, NHS leaders and Labour have said, after Sajid Javid refused to say where the axe would fall. The Department of Health and Social Care is trying to make savings from its budget to fund free lateral flow tests for elderly people, Covid surveillance studies and genomic sequencing, after the Treasury refused its request for £5bn in extra funding. Although the government announced an end to most free mass testing and contract tracing on Monday, remaining Covid measures are expected to cost more than £1bn. The Treasury and the DHSC refused to say exactly how much cash would be needed or which services would have to be cut back, prompting fears that the NHS could have to find savings at a time of a huge waiting list backlog. It is understood that DHSC officials are working on identifying savings in the department’s £178.5bn budget for 2022-23, to fund the measures agreed on Monday, including maintaining a “baseline” testing capability that can be scaled up if necessary. They have ruled out hitting Javid’s plan for tackling waiting lists, but a government source would not rule out any other areas being affected, saying a “significant amount of money” would have to be found by “reprioritising”. “There’s not any easy cuts to be made anywhere, but we are going to have to shift money from elsewhere towards this, because having this in place is the priority. It’s a significant amount of money, but we think it’s doable,” the government source said. Wes Streeting, the shadow health secretary, said it was “pretty humiliating for Sajid Javid” after he lost the cabinet row with the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, over the extra cash for Covid. “He asked for £5bn and has ended up with nothing. We know as a result of the chancellor stitching him up there is a significant shortfall facing the NHS budget and the health secretary needs to come clean about where those cuts are going to fall and address concerns of NHS leaders that funding cuts of this nature might compromise NHS care,” he said. Saffron Cordery, the deputy chief executive of NHS Providers, warned the government against abandoning its commitment to give the NHS “whatever it needs” to tackle Covid and called for transparency about “where the impact of these extra costs will fall”. “Trust leaders are understandably anxious over reports that the ongoing and significant costs of living with Covid will be met by ‘reprioritising’ the NHS’s existing budget,” she said. “There is a very real risk of trade-offs affecting the quality of patient care – something no one wants to see.” The British Medical Association also raised concerns that the NHS may have to fund the cost of testing for its own staff. Dr Vishal Sharma, the BMA consultants committee chair, said it would cost “a significant amount for hospitals who are already under financial pressure and could be faced with having to make further difficult decisions about how best funding should be allocated which could leave a shortfall elsewhere”. Hospital bosses are concerned that the Treasury’s refusal to give the DHSC any more money to cover the NHS’s costs of dealing with Covid could force them to either pay for the cost of Covid drugs and the enhanced cleaning regimes from their own budgets or use the billions they have been given to tackle the 6.1 million-strong backlog of patients awaiting hospital treatment. An NHS source said: “Everyone’s been arguing about where the money will come from. Although it’s been reported that the argument is over and that the Treasury have refused to give the DHSC the money they asked for, discussions about this are still going on and we are waiting to hear the government’s last word on this. But the money may have to come from the money set aside for elective recovery or we might get more money in the next autumn statement.” Ministers confirmed last month that they would cover the cost of personal protective equipment for NHS staff in England in 2022-23 at least.I repaid my student loan early, but the Student Loans Company (SLC) is still deducting repayments – £1,089 over two months – from my earnings. The problem began when SLC assigned my final, lump‑sum payment to the wrong account. Its systems therefore show me as owing £12,000. It has admitted an error, but can’t say when I’ll be refunded. SM, London Student loan repayments are crippling enough, but judging from the cries of pain in my inbox it seems that technical problems, human error and buck-passing by SLC and HMRC are compounding the issue. JA from Torquay has also appealed to me after reading my report last year on a graduate who feared she was overpaying thousands of pounds because SLC was unable to confirm her balance. “I haven’t been able to view a statement since 2019,” JA wrote. “SLC says it doesn’t know my balance as HMRC has put a mark on my account. HMRC says it can’t help.” It’s deeply concerning that problems deemed intractable by SLC and HMRC when a customer complains can be miraculously solved if a headline looms. SLC was able to pinpoint its error in SM’s case within two days of my contact. “We apologise that when he called to pay off his student loan we incorrectly applied the payment to the bursary element of his account, instead of his loan balance.” He was refunded his overpaid £1,089 the next day. HMRC and SLC investigated JA’s situation at my instigation, and discovered that his employer had miscalculated the loan repayments deducted three years ago. “The account has been impacted by a discrepancy in the amount of deductions reported by his employer to HMRC for the 19/20 tax year,” SLC says. “This has caused an additional repayment of £63, which he did not, in fact, have to pay, to be applied to his student loan account. Due to this discrepancy, access to his online account was restricted.” HMRC confirmed it was rectifying the issue and SLC is expecting it to send his end-of-year reconciliation file by the end of this month. Email your.problems@observer.co.uk. Include an address and phone number. Submission and publication are subject to our terms and conditionsDonald Trump’s former attorney Rudy Giuliani is expected to cooperate with the House select committee investigating January 6, and potentially reveal his contacts with Republican members of Congress involved in the former president’s effort to overturn the results of the 2020 election. The move by Giuliani to appear before the panel – in a cooperation deal that could be agreed within weeks, according to two sources briefed on negotiations – could mark a breakthrough moment for the inquiry as it seeks to interview key members of Trump’s inner circle. That is the case because even though Trump’s allies and Republican members of Congress already known to have been involved in such efforts have refused to help the panel, Giuliani is now in a position to inform House investigators about any possible culpability. Broadly, Giuliani has indicated through his lawyer to the select committee that he will produce documents and answer questions about Trump’s schemes to return himself to office on 6 January that House investigators had outlined in a subpoena issued to him last month. The former president’s attorney is prepared to reveal his contacts and the roles played by Republican members of Congress in the scheme Giuliani helped orchestrate to have then-vice-president Mike Pence stop the certification of Joe Biden’s election victory. Giuliani is also prepared to divulge details about Trump’s pressure campaign on Pence to adopt the scheme, and the effort coordinated by him and the Trump White House to have legislatures certify slates of electors for Trump in states actually won by Biden. But the former president’s attorney has indicated that he will assist the select committee only if his appearance is not pursuant to his subpoena, and does not have to give records or discuss his contacts with Trump over executive and attorney-client privilege concerns. The select committee has conceded that Giuliani cannot violate privilege, the sources said, making a deal attractive to Giuliani, who can avoid being held in contempt of Congress by providing information the panel could not otherwise get - while also not giving up Trump. Giuliani is prepared to make exceptions in instances where the panel can demonstrate that meetings with Trump that would have otherwise been subject to those protections might have been broken, and that the protections should not apply. The demands surrounding the circumstances of his cooperation reflect comments he made on Newsmax last week when he falsely claimed the select committee was “illegal”, and claimed that “it doesn’t have minority membership and really can’t subpoena anybody.” The select committee appears to have ignored his remarks as they move to finalize an agreement with Giuliani. The comments did not come up in recent talks and the panel last week allowed Giuliani to postpone his document production deadline for a second time, one of the sources said. That may be explained in large part because of the panel’s determination to get the cooperation of one of Trump’s closest if problematic advisers who was involved in efforts to overturn the 2020 election from the start – and has a penchant for sometimes revealing too much. Giuliani could speak to events such as a 18 December 2020 meeting in the Oval Office where Trump reviewed a draft executive order to seize voting machines and verbally agreed to install conspiracy theorist Sidney Powell as special counsel to investigate election fraud. The Guardian has reported that Giuliani then led the Trump “war room” at the Willard hotel in Washington DC when Trump called from the White House and discussed ways to stop Biden’s certification – and could speak to non-privileged elements of the plan. The cooperation deal would also technically involve Giuliani turning over documents in addition to appearing before the select committee, the sources said, but the logistics were unclear given the FBI last year seized his devices that he used on 6 January. Giuliani is committed to appearing before the panel, the source said, but it was not clear whether he would testify under oath in a closed-door deposition, for which the select committee has been pushing, or appear in a more informal interview on Capitol Hill. In a tweet, the former US Attorney and DOJ official Harry Litman noted that “the ‘electoral fraud’ content he supposedly will address is replete with possible [criminal] liability for him. We’re a long way from a raised right hand.” Jon Cooper, former fundraiser for Joe Biden and Barack Obama, also tweeted the news, adding: “Not a very good week for Donald Trump.” A spokesperson for the select committee declined to comment on negotiations with witnesses. The sources added negotiations could still collapse, but if a deal could be agreed, Giuliani would probably appear before the panel at least before the end of March. The select committee has been quietly making substantial progress in its investigation into the events of 6 January, securing records from the National Archives, as well as documents and testimony from some of Trump’s top aides and advisers. Last month, the chairman of the panel, congressman Bennie Thompson, revealed that House investigators had spoken to more than 500 witnesses and obtained more than 50,000 documents, including thousands from Trump’s former White House chief of staff, Mark Meadows. The willingness by Giuliani to negotiate what appears to be an expansive cooperation deal has come in stark contrast to the defiance expressed by the initial set of Trump aides and advisers who were subpoenaed by the select committee last year. Trump’s former chief strategist Steve Bannon refused to comply with his subpoena in its entirety, boasting executive privilege protection – only to be referred to the justice department for criminal contempt of Congress and indicted on two counts about four weeks later. That has served as a warning to other witnesses. Even if his cooperation deal ultimately falls through, Giuliani may be engaging with the select committee at least to avoid a similar fate to Bannon and a potentially costly legal battle to fight such charges. The benefits of partial cooperation have also become apparent, after Meadows was held in contempt of Congress for refusing to appear for a deposition as required by his subpoena, but remains unindicted two months after his initial referral to the justice department.When I was a boy we were not encouraged to think about death, presumably because we could not be expected to cope with such a challenge to the imagination. The closest we got to its complexities was watching Zulu, and the song from Shenandoah, and burying a succession of pets. Then auntie Flo died. I didn’t know her. I must have met her three or four times. I did know that she had been married to uncle John, who was a bit deaf, had been in the war and played tennis to quite a high standard until he got old and had bony claw-like hands with which he used to pat me on the knee. I also knew that she ran a sewing shop somewhere in Stechford, Birmingham, but that was it. She was buried in Yardley cemetery. I remember it being autumn, but then I remember all funerals as being in autumn, or at least as the colours of the woods in Miller’s Crossing. I also remember it as the first time I encountered grief: one minute I was sitting there, politely observing the ritual, the next I was a spluttering mess of snot and hot tears. Grief is irrational and rational, honest and dishonest, wholly expected and not. It is alarming, a peculiar source of comfort – I, at least, am functioning as I should – insidious and visible, even performative; there are precedents and protocols. Grief lives in the gut and can kill you through the damage it does. It appears slowly, irresistibly; or it blindsides you, attached to a song or coat. It can be like a mugging. It becomes part of your character – you bury it, or wear it as you wear your skin. It feels like catharsis or like sorrow or emptiness. I’ve encountered grief many times since auntie Flo died, in various guises. Sometimes it has been connected to celebrities. I didn’t cry when David Bowie died, even though I know all the words to Hunky Dory, Ziggy Stardust, Unwashed and Somewhat Slightly Dazed and just about enough of Diamond Dogs. Yet when I heard Burt Lancaster was soon to be barrel-chested and toothy no more, I burst into tears, despite only liking The Swimmer. Friends and family, too. My granny, who drove ambulances in the war and gave money to the African National Congress in the 1950s, died at 100; on the day of her funeral, as the bells rang out from her church in Lanchester, County Durham, a rainbow appeared and my grief was reflective and almost serene, if melancholic. A friend killed himself and I was atomised, left scrabbling for pieces of me that I could assemble into some sort of emotional or cognitive sense. My dad died recently and although I am grieving, I am a long way from beginning to grieve. Each version of grief is singular: there are all types of grief in the world but never the same grief twice. Yet even if there are years between its iterations, and particular manifestations seldom reappear, it is also one single protracted negotiation – with existence, with mortality, with yourself. And it started, for me, with the funeral of auntie Flo. • To order Charlie Hill’s most recent book, I Don’t Want to Go to the Taj Mahal: Stories of a Birmingham Boy, for £9.29 go to guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyOK, spill: who has been adding gay pills to the water supply? Someone must have been, because the number of LGBTQ-identifying adults in the US has jumped dramatically. According to a recent Gallup poll, the numbers have gone from 3.5% in 2012 to 7.1% in 2021. Gen Z, defined by Gallup as people born between 1997 and 2003, is leading the charge: 20.8% of them identified as LGBTQ+ in 2021, up from 10.5% in 2017. People take things very seriously these days, so I should probably state for the record that I am obviously joking about the whole gay pills in the water thing. As a card-carrying member of the International Society for the Advancement of Homosexual Lifestyles (ISAHL), I can assure you that the Gay Agenda explicitly prohibits the use of bioweapons. No, we focus solely on mind control techniques. A little bit of brainwashing, subliminal messaging during the ad breaks, that sort of thing. I can’t divulge the details of any of ISAHL’s top-secret techniques, I’m afraid. But I will say this: it warms the cockles of my homosexual heart to see such a big increase in young people feeling comfortable being themselves. I came out 20 years ago when “gay” was still an acceptable insult, you could count the number of out celebrities on one hand and if you saw an LGBTQ+ character on TV there was a 99% chance they were a psychopath or a predator. The first time I worked up the courage to kiss the woman I was dating in public, a stranger tried to hit me in the face. I came out relatively early in life but, thanks to the stigma that was still attached to being gay, it took me a long time to be proud. Things are far from perfect now, of course, particularly for trans people, but we’ve made a hell of a lot of progress. A reactionary faction may be trying to drag us back to the bad old days, but the kids are all right. Arwa Mahdawi is a Guardian columnistThe drinks company Innocent has had an advert banned by the Advertising Standards Authority after environmentalists reported it for claiming that drinking its smoothies is good for the environment. In the television ad, a man and his otter companion find that their boat is hijacked by revellers celebrating chaotically as they approach a large waterfall. They sing about “messing up the planet” until they find themselves in peril, hanging off the edge of a cliff. They then row back to safety, clear up the rubbish, and start turning apples on a tree into Innocent smoothies, which they all drink as they “fix up the planet”. The brand, which is known for its “wackaging” and is majority owned by Coca-Cola, has been making an effort to improve its climate credentials among consumers. Complainants, including the activist group Plastics Rebellion, argued that the ad implied that drinking smoothies from a disposable plastic bottle was good for the environment. In response, Innocent said it was a B Corp, which was a certification granted by the organisation B Lab to companies that demonstrated a high social and environmental performance. Innocent said it had committed to being carbon neutral by 2030, and had opened a carbon-neutral factory that ran on renewable energy and a cleaning system that reduced water usage by 75%. It also said it was not trying to show that smoothies are good for the environment, and was instead making a call to action to its customers not to harm the planet. The ASA ruled in favour of the complainants. It found that Innocent’s advert drew a strong association between the drinks and a positive impact on the environment. The ruling states that “many consumers would interpret the overall presentation of the ad to mean that purchasing Innocent products was a choice which would have a positive environmental impact”. Officials said they wanted evidence that this claim was in fact correct, and they were not satisfied with the response. The ASA said: “Although we acknowledged that Innocent were undertaking various actions which were aimed at reducing the environmental impact of their products, that did not demonstrate that their products had a net positive environmental impact over their full life cycles. We also noted that their drinks bottles included non-recycled plastic and that the extraction of raw materials and subsequent processing of those materials in order to produce the bottle would have a negative impact on the environment.” Innocent is now not allowed to use the advert in its current form, or make claims about the supposed environmental merits of its products without proof for them. A spokesperson for Plastics Rebellion said: “You can’t be a major contributor to a global health and environmental emergency and claim to fix up the planet. Innocent are being disingenuous about the dangers of plastic’s threat to human health and environment, as well as trivialising the horrific scale of the problem by repeating the mantra ‘reduce, reuse, recycle’. They’re guilty of brushing the plastic crisis under the carpet and trivialising it.” A spokesperson for Innocent said: “We’re disappointed to see the ruling from the ASA. Our advert was always intended to highlight important global environmental issues and the need for collective action to make a change. We transparently share more about the work that we do on sustainability on our website. As with any new guidelines, we’d like to work with the ASA and other brands to understand how to align to them to continue the conversation on these important topics.”Britain is being urged to pledge billions of dollars to get the fight against malaria, tuberculosis and Aids “back on track” after efforts were ravaged by the Covid-19 pandemic. The UK has historically been one of the main donors to the Global Fund, an international financing organisation aimed at ending the three deadly epidemics by 2030. Now it is warning that, unless donors make an unprecedented total funding pledge of $18bn (£13.25bn) this year, that goal will be missed. “In the face of the catastrophic impact of Covid-19 on the fight against HIV, TB and malaria, the choice is stark: we either increase funding, or we abandon hope of finally defeating these epidemics by 2030,” said Peter Sands, executive director of the Global Fund. In a statement seen by the Guardian, a group of African politicians echoed that warning, stressing that the world faces “a critical moment”. “Covid-19 devastated health systems and crippled the global response to health challenges … What follows now will be decisive in getting progress back on track,” write the seven parliamentarians from the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Kenya, Rwanda and Senegal. “Key donor countries who have played an important role in this historic partnership, such as the US, UK and others, once again have the opportunity to demonstrate leadership with strong funding pledges, which will be met by implementing countries upholding commitments to mobilise their own resources.” Campaigners said the UK government’s decision to cut the aid budget from 0.7% to 0.5% of gross national income has already had an impact on global efforts against HIV, Aids, TB and malaria, contributing to a wider stalling of progress during the pandemic. Doubt was cast on Britain’s likely commitment to the Global Fund on Tuesday when the foreign secretary, Liz Truss, said, in a written statement, she was “rebalancing the aid budget towards bilateral programmes” and, implicitly, away from multilateral organisations. The Global Fund said the record target of $18bn was needed because “significant progress” in tackling the three diseases had been lost. “Hard-won gains against HIV, TB and malaria are being reversed, with devastating consequences for the poorest and most vulnerable communities,” it said. “The entire United Nations sustainable development goals agenda is now at risk, as inequities deepen, poverty spirals and social and political tensions grow.” If the target was reached, it said, it would enable the fund to save 20 million lives between 2024 and 2026, and reduce the death toll across the three diseases to 950,000 in 2026, down from 2.4 million in 2020, and from 4 million in 2005. Mike Podmore, director of StopAids, welcomed the African MPs’ call. “These parliamentarians are right to speak out,” he said. “The UK has played a leading role in the global response to date, but in order to avoid losing the substantial progress made against Aids, tuberculosis and malaria, the UK must deliver a strong funding pledge at this year’s replenishment, and maintain its position as the second biggest donor to the Global Fund.” With deaths from TB increasing to 1.5 million in 2020, Aaron Oxley, executive director of non-profit Results UK, said commitment was needed “now more than ever”. “It is essential that the UK government listen to their counterparts in countries who are implementing programmes in partnership with the Global Fund and make an ambitious pledge at the upcoming seventh replenishment.” Gareth Jenkins, director of advocacy at Malaria No More UK, said it was “vital that the UK continues to make a leading down payment on the health security of the world”. According to the World Health Organization, 627,000 people died of malaria in 2020, an increase of 12% on the year before. Most – 96% – were in sub-Saharan Africa. Set up in 2002, the Global Fund raises and spends funds during three-year “replenishment” periods, the seventh of which begins in 2024. The sixth replenishment meeting in 2019 in Lyon, hosted by President Emmanuel Macron, raised $14.02bn, the largest amount ever for a multilateral health organisation. The seventh replenishment meeting will be in the US later this year hosted, by President Joe Biden. A spokesperson for the foreign, commonwealth and development office said: “As one of its largest donors, UK aid to the Global Fund is actively fighting malaria, Aids and tuberculosis around the world. We continue to support the Fund’s vital work.”Eight senior Russian security officials and the oil and gas sectors will be targeted in the first round of Australian sanctions, with the prime minister vowing to go after anyone “aiding and abetting” the invasion of Ukraine. Scott Morrison met with the cabinet’s national security committee on Wednesday before declaring the Russian government was “behaving like thugs and bullies” and there “must be consequences for Russia’s actions”. Morrison characterised the sanctions as only the first step of Australia’s response and indicated Australian security agencies were on alert for possible counter-actions by Russia such as espionage and cyber attacks. The Russian president, Vladimir Putin, earlier this week recognised the independence of two Russian-controlled territories in east Ukraine and sent in what he called a “peacekeeping” mission. Australia will begin by imposing travel bans and targeted financial sanctions on eight members of the Russian Federation’s security council – a body that is chaired by Putin and has 12 permanent members including the foreign minister Sergei Lavrov. Morrison did not specify which eight members would be sanctioned, but said the body had provided Putin with policy advice and justification leading to Monday’s presidential decree that “fundamentally undermines Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity”. Australia will also amend its existing sanctions regulations to cover the breakaway regions of Donetsk and Luhansk, prohibiting trade in sectors including transport, energy, telecommunications, oil, gas and mineral reserves. The government says it will broaden the scope of people and entities that Australia can list for sanctions to include those of “strategic and economic significance to Russia”. Australian individuals and entities will be banned from doing business with Rossiya Bank, Promsvyazbank, IS Bank, Genbank and the Black Sea Bank for Development and Reconstruction. This is in addition to restrictions on Australians investing in the Russian state development bank VEB, according to a statement issued by the Australian government late on Wednesday. Morrison acknowledged Australia did not have a large volume of trade with Russia compared with the US and Europe. But he said it was “important that we play our part in the broader international community to ensure that those who are financing and profiting from an autocratic and authoritarian regime that is invading its neighbour should have nowhere to run and nowhere to hide”. “Australians always stand up to bullies,” he said. “This is only the start of this process.” The announcement follows moves by the US, the UK and the EU to introduce a first round of sanctions. The US president, Joe Biden, said he was determined to “cut off Russia’s government from western financing”. Major parties united The major Australian political parties are united on the issue. Senior Labor opposition frontbenchers were briefed by senior officials on Wednesday afternoon. The opposition leader, Anthony Albanese, said he supported the sanctions because Australians should stand united against “aggressive Russian action which undermines security in the region and indeed the world”. “The aggressor here is Vladimir Putin,” Albanese said in a press conference alongside the shadow foreign minister, Penny Wong. “Calling it peacekeeping is quite farcical. It is anything but. This a peace-breaking intervention in violation of international law.” After weeks of Morrison telling voters Labor would be weak on national security, Albanese said: “We believe it is important when it comes to national security that we express a common view on behalf of the Australian people.” The Greens, too, condemned Putin’s “military aggression” against Ukraine “as we condemn all military aggression”. The “peacekeeping” mission means Russia will formally occupy sovereign Ukrainian territory for a second time after the 2014 annexation of Crimea. Putin said on Monday that he saw Ukraine as “an inalienable part of our own history, culture and spiritual space”. “These are our comrades, those dearest to us – not only colleagues, friends and people who once served together, but also relatives, people bound by blood, by family ties,” the Russian president said. Putin had been seeking a range of security guarantees from the west, including curbing the expansion of Nato and a promise that Ukraine would never be able to join the military alliance. But Morrison said on Wednesday accepting such demands from Russia would reduce Ukraine to “a nation in name only”. The prime minister said the Chinese government’s language about respecting Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity had improved over the past week, but Beijing should go further in denouncing Moscow’s actions. He said the Russian government “should be called out as thugs and bullies”. The top official at Ukraine’s embassy in Canberra said his government was grateful for Australia’s sanctions. Volodymyr Shalkivskyi, the chargé d’affaires at the embassy, told Guardian Australia the impact of the sanctions would “depend on the unity and determination of the international community” to react to Russian aggression. “We believe that expansion of the sanctions by our international partners is needed in order to deter the Kremlin from further escalation,” he said on Wednesday. Ukrainians ‘top of the pile’ for visa applications Morrison said he had instructed the immigration minister, Alex Hawke, to put 430 Ukrainians citizens who have applied for an Australian visa at “the top of the pile” for a decision. The government was looking at various options for humanitarian support, including through skilled migration and student categories, he said. Any Ukrainian nationals in Australia who have a visa due to expire by 30 June will be granted an automatic six-month extension. On Tuesday, the Australian government directed its officials to leave Ukraine “due to the increased risk”. Officials have been deployed to eastern Poland and Romania to provide assistance to Australians who are trying to leave Ukraine. Morrison said Russia’s ambassador to Australia, Alexey Pavlovsky, was being called to a meeting with the head of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade in Canberra on Wednesday – but was not being expelled at this stage. He said the Russian government was “an autocratic, authoritarian government that has forgotten what democracy is and what liberal democracy is”. Pavlovsky denied last month that Russia’s troop buildup near Ukraine’s border was a sign of aggression and said Australians should look beyond “comic book-style propaganda” about “liberal democracies versus autocracies”. At the time, the Russian ambassador said it was wrong to portray Russia’s concerns about Nato’s eastward expansion as irrational and said any Australian sanctions would be a “gesture” with no impact on Moscow’s behaviour. The Russian embassy in Canberra was contacted for comment.He was at the side of the American president on one of the most important diplomatic trips in history, enjoying sumptuous banquets as a guest of Chinese dictator Mao Zedong. Three and a half years later he was in prison after becoming first person to go on trial in the aftermath of the Watergate scandal, despite protesting his innocence. But half a century on, Dwight Chapin is not bitter and does not blame Richard Nixon for his fall from grace. On the contrary, he believes that the jowly-faced 37th president – who resigned in shame in 1974 – was a brilliant man and is still misunderstood. “Richard Nixon was not a crook,” says Chapin via Zoom from his home in Riverside, Connecticut. “Sometimes the term ‘evil’ is used: that’s not what the man was about. In his heart, he was not only a patriot but an incredible public servant. He was in the arena serving the public for half a century.” Challenging baked-in perceptions of Nixon was the main motivation for Chapin, now 81, to write a memoir, The President’s Man, which delves into the thousands of hours they spent together, from small hotels in New Hampshire to the Forbidden City in Beijing. They first met in 1962 when Chapin was a 21-year-old student and Nixon – narrowly defeated for the presidency by John F Kennedy two years earlier – was running for governor of California. Chapin recalls: “Mr Nixon had been a congressman, a senator, vice-president for eight years and then had all that notoriety running against Kennedy, so he was a commanding figure. When he was in a room, you knew it. His presence was very strong.” He worked as a field organiser on the 1962 campaign then as Nixon’s personal aide during his successful run for president in 1968. At the White House he was appointments secretary, with a door that opened into the Oval Office, and deputy assistant to the president, responsible for the planning and logistics of his public appearances. But he does not claim to have been Nixon’s friend. “I knew him so well; but as I have continued to discover through the decades, in many ways I barely knew him at all,” Chapin writes wistfully. Despite his relative youth he served as acting chief of protocol when, 50 years ago this week, Nixon became the first US president to visit China. It was a leap into the cold war unknown: China was closed to the west and the US refused to recognise its communist government. The Washington Post newspaper wrote in an editorial at the time: “If Mr Nixon had revealed he was going to the moon he could not have flabbergasted his world audience more. It is very nearly mind blowing.” Such was the cultural impact that it inspired an opera by John Adams. Chapin reflects: “History should remember the trip as the single most significant and dramatic foreign journey by any American president ever. The world stood still while Nixon went to China.” He writes that Nixon relished the meeting of adversaries as a unique opportunity to demonstrate diplomatic and strategic expertise. “He loved planning this trip. Loved it … Here was Richard Nixon, the leader of the free world, marching off to the darkest, and most mysterious, part of the Communist empire.” Nixon was accompanied by three Americans, including national security adviser Henry Kissinger, during his meetings with Chairman Mao, while Chapin and the rest of the delegation remained at a guest house. “When he got back, the president reported to us that it had gone well,” he recalls. “I would use the word elated.” Not that Chapin had time to be bored. He writes: “The banquets kept coming. At each banquet there were toasts and more toasts and toasts of the toasts. Between banquets there were meetings and tours. Six months earlier I had known nothing about the Forbidden City. At this point, if it had been necessary, I could have conducted a tour myself.” At a banquet in Shanghai, Nixon offered a toast that he had scribbled on one of his yellow legal-sized notepad in his suite, declaring: “This trip was the week that changed the world.” Chapin writes: “In retrospect, yes, it was ‘the week that changed the world’, but as Chairman Mao had proclaimed, ‘A single spark can start a prairie fire’. What a prairie fire of aggressiveness, influence, and trade, reaching around the world, was ignited by that week fifty years ago. “Looking back I have a special appreciation for Nixon’s prophetic prediction that ‘Within fifty years, the United States and China will be adversaries, and we need to be able to talk with one another.’” But today the wisdom of Nixon’s outreach is questioned. China’s rise as a global power has become a defining principle of Joe Biden’s presidency as he warns of a struggle for the 21st century between autocracy and democracy, rival systems competing to show which can better deliver for its people. The communication channel with President Xi Jinping, China’s most powerful leader since Mao, remains open but relations are strained. China is flexing military muscles and threatening Taiwan. The US staged a diplomatic boycott of the Beijing Winter Olympics over human rights abuses. Chapin reflects: “Any official American involvement there is missing and you have the the Russians and the Chinese together. I think Nixon would have been handling that differently. Nixon would be thinking of this in a very strategic sense. He would be wanting to do anything besides having a war or conflict and he would be looking for diplomatic answers.” But just four months after the historic China trip, the seeds of Nixon’s – and Chapin’s – downfall were sown. A break-in at the Democratic National Committee headquarters in the Watergate office complex in Washington, which involved wiretapping phones and stealing documents, was traced to officials at Nixon’s re-election campaign committee. Although the president comfortably won re-election later that year, White House attempts to conceal the scandal began to unravel. A key whistleblower was Mark Felt, a senior FBI official who secretly fed information to Washington Post reporters Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein. Felt was immortalised as “Deep Throat” by their book All the President’s Men, which became a Hollywood film. But five decades later, he is no hero to Chapin. “It’s disgraceful that the number two man at the FBI is leaking material regarding an investigation,” he says, evidently still rankled. “I met with the FBI and I told them the truth and I told them everything and two days later it’s on the front page of the Washington Post because Mark Felt got the report and leaked it. “I have nothing but disdain for somebody that took an oath to the constitution to follow the rules of the land. This leaking by FBI is so outrageous and goes way back into the J Edgar Hoover days. Part of the culture of the old FBI was leaking stuff and I happen to feel that’s wrong. Mark Felt is a real sleazebag and a disgrace to the FBI.” Chapin acknowledges that Nixon “made mistakes” and the White House did not “come clean” early. But he argues this was because the president had not been told exactly what happened or why. “He was treating it like a public relations problem.” As the walls closed in, Chapin was among several staff who, in December 1972, learned that they would be fired. “My eyes welled with tears,” he writes of a decision he found profoundly unfair. “Everyone was expendable. But me? Processing what I had been told was very painful.” Announcing the shake-up two months later, Nixon declared: “There can be no whitewash at the White House.” But despite further purges, there was no escape. A drip-drip of damaging headlines led to high-profile congressional hearings and bombshell testimonies. The courts forced Nixon to surrender tape recordings that confirmed he had tried to use the CIA to divert the FBI investigation – an abuse of presidential power and an obstruction of justice. The “law and order” president had behaved as if he was above the law. Nixon lost the confidence of fellow Republicans and in August 1974, facing almost certain impeachment, became the first and still only US president to resign. Chapin maintains his own innocence, insisting that he had nothing to do with the break-in or cover-up. But his earlier decision to hire an old university friend, Don Segretti, a political dirty trickster who would eventually serve four months in prison, was his undoing. Chapin was indicted on four counts of making false statements to a grand jury, charges that he still adamantly denies. He was found guilty on two counts and spent nine months in a low security federal prison in California. “I was fortunate that I could go to a minimal security place so there were no cells, no doors that slammed,” he recalls. “There was more of an army barracks type situation. Now, I’m not saying it was pleasant because you’re losing your freedom and I was being punished. I always viewed this as a political thing, not that I was a criminal.” Two or three weeks in, Chapin got hassled by two younger inmates. He went to see an older inmate, “Big Mike”, who happened to be keenly interested in politics and used his influence to ensure that Chapin never got bullied again. “When he put out the word, nothing was going to happen to me.” Chapin believes incarceration changed him and proved one of the most valuable learning experiences of his life. “When I was going off to prison, a friend said, ‘Dwight, it can get the best of you, or you can make the most of it.’ That was a wonderful piece of advice. I kept myself very busy. I read constantly. “I was probably in better physical shape than ever in my life. I started a programme for other prisoners that were getting ready to go back out into society. I had a desk and a little office and I helped them write letters and find jobs they could go to. I tried to make myself productive there and that helped make the time go faster.” But did he not feel abandoned and betrayed by Nixon, who was pardoned by his successor, Gerald Ford, and escaped criminal prosecution? “He couldn’t help me out,” Chapin says. “Richard Nixon was president of the United States. He had to resign so he went through his own hell, different than mine, but equally traumatic, maybe even more traumatic than what I went through, particularly for such a proud man, such a good man. “What he made it possible for me to witness and be a part of so outweighs any of the negatives of Watergate. I’m very proud of what we accomplished and I think he did a great job. There’s no question I was heartbroken, there’s no question I went through hell, but so did he.” Some readers may find Chapin’s praise of Nixon hard to swallow and draw comparisons with the blind loyalty of former aides to another Republican president, Donald Trump. But Bernstein is among those who have observed that while Nixon was a crook, liar and media hater, Trump is infinitely worse: an authoritarian who staged an attempted coup. Chapin, an admirer of Ronald Reagan who seems reluctant to talk about Trump, found his footing when he regained his freedom. He was a magazine publisher, held a senior position at a public relations company and managed his own consulting firm. He has put his prison time behind him and, at 81, written his first book so his children and grandchildren can understand his version of history. “Things happen to people all the time and it’s important that individuals realise that their life is not over,” Chapin reflects. “Time is a great healer, and I try to make the point in my book that I was able to recoup from this. “I was happy it happened to me as a young man and not like with some of the older guys where it was the capstone of their career. For me, it was at the start of my working life and I’ve been able to do many other interesting things with my life since then.” The President’s Man is out nowA police officer involved in the arrest of Kumanjayi Walker has agreed in evidence before the Northern Territory supreme court that the Warlpiri man continued “fucking around” and “was not incapacitated” after being shot three times. Remote Sgt Adam Eberl was the only other person in the room when Constable Zachary Rolfe shot Walker on 9 November 2019 at a house in the remote community of Yuendumu, about 300km from Alice Springs. On Wednesday, Eberl continued his evidence in Rolfe’s trial for murder. Rolfe is charged in relation to the second and third shots fired at Walker, which the prosecution has told the court were delivered at close-range while Eberl and Walker were struggling on a mattress on the floor of the property. Rolfe has pleaded not guilty in the Northern Territory supreme court and defends his actions on the basis they were justified in light of the risk to him and Eberl posed by Walker, who had stabbed Rolfe with a pair of scissors shortly before the shooting. Eberl told the court on Wednesday that he did not know Walker had been shot until after the third shot had been fired. In court, he was played body-worn camera footage of the incident, which detailed him saying to Rolfe, “did you? Fuck”. He agreed with Philip Strickland SC, for the prosecution, that at that time he was asking Rolfe if he had shot Walker. Eberl said he heard a “dull thud” when the first shot was fired, while he was standing and wrestling with Walker. He believed a bean bag round may have been fired by another officer who had been outside the property, as the noise did not sound like a shot. Soon after, Eberl and Walker ended up on the mattress, the court heard. Eberl said he knew Walker had a sharp weapon in his right hand, but did not know what it was. He said he used his left arm to grab Walker’s left arm, and, while standing, tried to apply a police manoeuvre known as a “seatbelt hold”. Once they were on the mattress, Eberl told the court he used both arms to try to contain Walker’s left arm, knowing that Walker’s right arm was underneath his own body. Eberl said he wanted to try to stop Walker from turning his right arm towards him. Eberl, who previously confirmed in his evidence more than a decade’s experience in martial arts and weighed about 95kg at the time of the incident, told Strickland that he could not remember seeing or feeling Walker’s upper body move between the time he fell with him on to the mattress and when he heard the third shot. He said he could not see the scissors while he was on top of Walker, and agreed with Strickland that he was attempting to use ground stabilisation techniques he had learned during police training while struggling with Walker. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Strickland told the court during his opening address that it would be alleged Eberl had control of Walker, 19, when he was shot for the second and third time by Rolfe. Lawyers for Rolfe have previously said they will dispute the extent to which Walker was under control. Eberl said on Wednesday that while he could not recall seeing or feeling Walker’s upper body move during this time, “I believe he was trying to move the whole time”. Under cross-examination by David Edwardson QC, for Rolfe, Eberl was asked about being captured on body-worn camera footage saying to Walker “don’t fuck around, I’ll fucken smash ya mate” soon after the third shot was fired. Officers were attempting to handcuff Walker about the time Eberl is heard uttering the remarks. Edwardson asked whether Eberl had said this because, despite having being shot three times, Walker was “still fucking around, he was not incapacitated?” “Correct,” Eberl responded. Eberl later gave evidence that NT police training dictates that an offender with an edged weapon can be fired upon until they are incapacitated. The trial continues.The last time I visited my ancestral home, in a typical Bengali village, no roads led there; we made our way on foot, crossing bamboo bridges at night, our path lit by fireflies. The village had no electricity, no running water. Twenty years later, I am there again, having recently arrived via a motorway whizzing through the village, or what’s left of it. Now with electricity and plumbing, my neighbours have mastered the smartphone and the WC simultaneously: two centuries traversed in two decades. The Indian writer Pankaj Mishra is fascinated by these transformations, first observing them in travelogues written in south Asian backwaters, then analysing their philosophical underpinnings and psychological reverberations in book-length essays. He has also tackled the subject polemically, especially in the Modi era, with opinion pieces in almost every major newspaper, including this one. The changing forms of his writing, always straining to encompass the chaotic reality Mishra sees around himself, reveal him to be a profoundly literary voice, as interested in how to write about a subject as the subject itself. Run and Hide is his first novel since an unjustly forgotten debut more than 20 years ago. It offers a new way to envision what is by now, for him, familiar material. The characters in Run and Hide are the masterminds of the “New India”, who have risen from dusty hinterlands to Wall Street boardrooms and London penthouses, although Arun, our narrator, has dropped out of the rat race to translate Hindi fiction. He and his friends Aseem, a social-climbing literary celebrity, and Virendra, a hedge-fund billionaire, first met during their freshers’ hazing at IIT Delhi (one of India’s hothouse technical colleges whose alumni include Google’s CEO). The intersecting, transnational careers and personal lives of the three men ultimately involve a woman too, Alia, the Ivy League-educated scion of old-money Muslims, now writing an exposé of global elites. The novel poses as a letter from Arun to Alia, an account of fleeing their glitzy romance in London to return home to the Himalayas, from where Arun is writing in a state of moral clarity. This epistolary form (in which we never get Alia’s side) is a curious choice. The philosophising tone is reminiscent of 19th-century Russian discourse, in which the letters of the sceptic Peter Chaadaev – often referenced in Mishra’s nonfiction – critiqued his country’s modernisation. “It had become impossible for educated people like us to rest in a worldview,” Arun reflects; unlike his ancestors’ values, “unchanged from generation to generation”. Chaadaev made a similar observation, widely quoted in Russia at the time: “Our memories are no older than yesterday … and the past is lost to us for ever.” The novel manages to be somewhat plotless, yet unnecessarily convoluted. There are, at points, three levels of narrative: Arun’s letter to Alia, Alia’s own book, and Aseem’s novel. The latter two exist inside the first, an occasionally disorienting framework hardly helped by Mishra’s vacillation between first, second and third person. But Mishra is having fun with the newfound freedom of fiction, and the reader comes to share in it. Satirical snippets from post-Brexit soirees or from activist Instagram accounts are part of this; so is the vivid use of Hindi invective. Those vernacular fragments do hint, more seriously, at the linguistic wounds of success in India. Fluency in the lingua franca of global capitalism is slavishly acquired as a matter of necessity (the colonial government of Thomas Macaulay could only dream of such institutionalised deracination). In a brilliant irony, the word Aseem struggles with most is “career” (pronounced “carrier”). After the density of his recent books, with their weighty bibliographies, Mishra’s fictional prose is permitted, once again, to take lyrical flight. Here he is soulfully recollecting, in Arun’s childhood, “many moments that detach themselves from the noise of time to whisper of enchanting and irretrievable things: like the one rocket we buy at Diwali that flares into life with a gratifying hissss and then soars up and up, and then, when green and red sparks tumble down, all our smiling upward faces briefly glow”. There is such feeling behind that lovely, lilting image. Mishra, after all, embodies his own subject; writing about India’s development from an inward-looking, custom-bound society to a neoliberal global player is what instigated his own elevation from the deprived, semi-rural landscape of his birth to a London postcode nestled among the liberal elite. The mirroring of autobiography and subject recalls VS Naipaul, the Nobel prize-winning author whose enigmatic arrival in London from a tropical island allowed him to understand the postcolonial craving for modernity. Indeed, Naipaul, constantly cited and recited and even making a cameo in the book, casts an unshakeable shadow over it; wherever Mishra treads, Naipaul’s spectre looms steps ahead. Naipaul was the prophet who caught the mood of India’s ascendancy before it existed – its self-serving, self-made men – in A Bend in the River: “The world is what it is; men who are nothing, who allow themselves to become nothing, have no place in it.” The whole sublime line is quoted on the first page of Run and Hide, as Aseem’s credo. Arun, however, resists such “visions of aestheticised amorality”. Where Aseem is always repeating, after Naipaul, that “to be modern is to trample on the past”, Arun repudiates metropolitan mod cons for a monastery in the Himalayas, doubting the point of modernity if trampling on the past means deforestation and mosque demolition (which Naipaul justified). Naipaul was once a hero to every young man from the boondocks seeking to leave his mark on the world. Mishra – no different – championed Naipaul’s work in admiring reviews and edited two collections of his essays, an association that links him to Aseem in the novel. But Aseem’s Naipaulian drive leads to moral disgrace. Of the two alter egos Mishra has here, it’s Arun who remains uncompromised; Arun who shows true self-possession. With this disavowal of his onetime hero, Mishra has dispelled a troublesome shadow with one last act of homage: he has overridden the past, just like the motorway whizzing through my village. • Run and Hide is published by Hutchinson Heinemann (£16.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.The Australian government will implement a raft of sanctions against Russia, insisting there “must be consequences” for Moscow’s recent military actions along its border with Ukraine, and recognition of separatist-controlled regions in the east of the country. Prime minister Scott Morrison unveiled the “first tranche” of sanctions on Wednesday, bringing Australia in line with the US, UK and European allies’ initial responses to Russian president Vladimir Putin’s actions in relation to Ukraine. Western powers have responded with outrage to Putin’s moves to recognise as independent the republics of Donetsk and Luhansk and send so-called “peacekeeping” troops into Ukrainian territory to secure the new statelets’ proclaimed borders. Australia’s sanctions would target specific Russian individuals, corporations and industries in the hope of pressuring the Russian government to stop “behaving like thugs and bullies”, Morrison said. Here’s what we know about Australia’s new sanctions on Russia, what they’re designed to do, and what their impact might be. What are the sanctions? Eight members of the Russian Federation’s security council will be targeted with financial sanctions. Australian law will now prohibit dealing with these individuals financially, as well as facilitating another person to deal with these individuals or assets they own or control. In effect this freezes their assets in Australia – which can include property as well as financial holdings. Travel bans will also be placed on the eight individuals, barring them from entering Australia. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Several Russian financial institutions will also be barred from transacting with Australian banks. The banks are the Russian State Development Bank, VEB, the military bank Promsvyazbank, Rossiya, IS Bank, the General Bank and the Black Sea Bank. Morrison announced Australia would extend sanctions that it already had in place for Crimea and Sevasatopol – Ukrainian territory which Russia annexed in 2014 – to include the breakaway Donetsk and Luhansk regions now recognised as independent by Russia. The expansion of those sanctions would focus on sectors including transport, energy, telecommunications, oil, gas and mineral reserves, Morrison said. What are other countries doing? After Russia announced it would recognise the breakaway regions as independent states and send in “peacekeeping” troops, the US, UK and EU said they would introduce sanctions. The US president, Joe Biden, announced sanctions that target VEB (Russia’s state development bank) and the Russian military bank, as well as the country’s sovereign debt and five Russian elites and their families, saying: “Who in the Lord’s name does Putin think gives him the right to declare new so-called countries on territory that belonged to his neighbours?” The EU and the UK also announced sanctions in a show of concerted western resolve, with EU foreign ministers banning Russian bond trades in the European market, and the British prime minister, Boris Johnson, unveiling a package of asset freezes on five Russian banks and three individuals. Germany also announced it would halt the approval process for the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline from Russia. Morrison said Australia’s sanctions “ensure that we are in lockstep with the United States and the United Kingdom in the sanctions that they are imposing”. Both Morrison and foreign powers, including Biden, have warned of a ramp up in sanctions if the situation in Ukraine deteriorates. What’s the point of targeting sanctions in this way? The first tranche of sanctions were designed to target “persons and entities of what is termed strategic and economic significance to Russia”, according to Morrison. In relation to the eight members of Russia’s security council, Morrison said these individuals were being targeted because the body had “provided policy advice and justification” to Putin which led to him recognising the breakaway republics – a decision which “fundamentally undermines Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, and it has no validity under international law”. Dr William A Stoltz, from the Australian National University’s national security college, said the sanctions “clearly focused on pressuring those people who are part of Putin’s inner circle”. “These would be the people that we would want to prevail upon Vladimir Putin to take a different course of action … the people who are powerful enough to put pressure on Putin to retreat, so it makes sense to put the screws on them personally.” Will Australia’s sanctions have an impact? Stoltz said Australia’s sanctions alone were unlikely to significantly sway Russia’s behaviours – noting the relatively small trade volumes between the two countries. “Our economic exchange with Russia is pretty small, so we don’t have a great deal of leverage over Russia in that regard.” However, he said Australia bringing in similar sanctions to those introduced by the US and European nations was important. “For sanctions to have an effect you need to create a situation where there isn’t a safe haven country for those designated by the sanctions to turn to. So Australia has to be in lockstep with the European and North American countries.” If major countries are united, will that be enough? Stoltz is pessimistic that the initial wave of sanctions will have a significant impact. He notes Australia implemented sanctions against Russia in response to the MH17 passenger flight that was shot down while flying over eastern Ukraine in 2014. “We implemented concerted sanctions over MH17, and to put it brutally honestly, they’ve not been very effective. The Russians still haven’t come to the table for the investigation, they’ve really prevented justice for the families of the victims,” Stoltz said. What more can be done with sanctions? A large part of the ineffectiveness of sanctions against Russia, Stoltz said, had been the country’s economic resilience to foreign financial punishments. “Over the past 20 years Russia has hardened itself to the impact of sanctions, and the Russians are quite used to sanctions by now, they almost wear sanctions like a badge of honour, especially in a situation such as now where they’re kind of martyring themselves in the national interest,” Stoltz said. Oligarchs had previously been the target of foreign sanctions – with their lives in foreign countries upended and assets frozen – in an attempt to pressure them to use their influence over the country’s leadership. “The oligarchic class has experienced a net falling over them over the past 20 years, over their ability to travel freely and spend their money. Rules have been continuously tightened, and there’s a sense in Russia that it is hurting that class as they’re not able to live the luxurious life they’re used to. “So far that hasn’t affected Putin, who has put in place protections for the oligarchs to get around sanctions … and technologies like crypto [currency] make it difficult to police the sanctions. But that could stop if he goes too far and sanctions further impact the oligarchic class. He is getting older and he doesn’t have an anointed successor.” While western sanctions were designed “to influence wealthy elites by stopping them from buying homes and going Christmas shopping overseas”, Stoltz said sanctions could go much further. “There is probably going to have to be an attempt to target everyday Russian people, the general population, perhaps by constraining their access to certain everyday goods. That’s an ethically challenging thing to do. “Short of doing that, economic sanctions against Russia, especially by Australia, are largely symbolic at this point.”Independent challenger Zoe Daniel claims her campaign has been cleared by Bayside City Council of prematurely erecting political signs but federal Liberal MP Tim Wilson still believes she jumped the gun. The council issued a statement on Wednesday stating that although the federal election had not yet to be been called “we are within the [three-month] period in which an election must be held” so it would allow the signs. The statement was later taken down following a complaint from the Wilson campaign that the council had incorrectly calculated the timing of the election. The battle between the sitting Liberal MP and the independent challenger in the Melbourne seat of Goldstein is increasingly bitter. Wilson had accused the Daniel campaign of “ignoring the council” by erecting campaign material in breach of bylaws. “It is unlawful to erect signs until after the election has been called,” Wilson wrote to his Goldstein constituents. “They don’t care if they break the law,” he said, inviting voters to dob in the allegedly unlawful signs. Daniel is one of a crop of independent candidates backed by fundraising vehicle Climate 200 running for parliament on a platform of integrity, greater action on climate change and better treatment of women. Although Wilson holds the blue-ribbon seat of Goldstein on an 8% margin it is threatened by the independent challenge. On Wednesday, the council issued a statement clarifying that candidate promotion signs must not be displayed longer than three months under Victorian planning provisions. The council claimed that 21 February marked the start of the three-month period within which the election must be held – suggesting signs erected after that date did not require a permit unless they were larger than 5 sq metres or on council land. “Council has received complaints in relation to candidate signs installed prior to 21 February however no fines have been issued,” they said. Daniel claimed victory in the sign fight, declaring the council had “confirmed that our campaign signs are legal and do not require a permit”. Guardian Australia understands Wilson has appealed against the decision, on the basis of parliamentary library advice that 3 September is the deadline for the House of Representatives election, not 21 May which is the deadline for a combined lower house and Senate election. The council statement was no longer available online on Wednesday night and the council was contacted for comment. Wilson has also taken aim in recent days at Daniel’s voting record, arguing her vote for Labor in 2019 amounted to a vote “to introduce a retiree tax”. Daniel responded that she did not support any change to franking credits or to negative gearing. “To suggest that I do is a lie,” she said in a statement. Daniel confirmed she voted for Wilson “as a vote for Malcolm Turnbull in 2016” and voted “against him and Scott Morrison in 2019”. “I am a classic swinging voter,” she said. “The unsatisfactory nature of these choices was one of the key reasons I accepted an invitation from Voices for Goldstein to run as an independent. “The Liberal party exhorting people to dob in members of the Goldstein community who are displaying my signs amounts to bullying and intimidation.” After encouraging constituents to dob in allegedly unlawful signs, Wilson said: “I feel sorry for those households about to be fined nearly $1,000 each … because their candidate is knowingly encouraging them to break the law.”And with that, Boris Johnson ended all remaining pandemic measures in England. Those who test positive for Covid will no longer have to isolate by law from this Thursday – and from April will not even be advised to stay at home if infected. The £500 self-isolation payment for some people on lower incomes will end. Meanwhile, free testing for the vast majority of the public will end from 1 April, apart from some symptomatic clinically vulnerable and very elderly people. It will soon be entirely legal to test positive – if you’ve even got that far – for coronavirus and then wander into a packed pub. This was less a plan to “live with coronavirus”, and more to simply ignore it. Ministers offered no epidemiological evidence for pulling Covid protections this winter, with experts warning it could cause a rapid rise in the virus. It would not be overly cynical to suggest that Johnson, wounded by “partygate”, is attempting to win the support of his libertarian backbenchers. Rishi Sunak is said to have added to the pressure on fiscal grounds, pushing to slash the Covid budget by as much as 90%. This is public health policy founded in politics, not science. The lessons the pandemic taught us – that preventive action and strong public messaging not only save lives but reduce the need for harsher restrictions further down the line – are, not for the first time, being wilfully ignored. The front pages on Monday lauding the Queen for “powering through” Covid in many ways sum up England’s new stance on the virus: a public health crisis can be tackled with personal responsibility mixed with the good old blitz spirit. It is the millions of clinically vulnerable people who will be the collateral damage. A few days after all England’s coronavirus measures end it will be two years since the shielding programme to protect those at high risk of hospitalisation or death began. It is a bleak anniversary gift from ministers. Many high-risk people, some of whom are not protected by the vaccine owing to their immune systems, feel they must now return to shutting themselves away at home – and with none of the financial or practical support available in 2020. One woman in her 60s, whose husband has asthma and diabetes, told me she already barely leaves the house, and the removal of Covid measures will see the couple’s life become worse. “It means I will never be able to even walk down the street without being terrified.” As another woman with a blood disorder, asthma and ME put it: “It’s confined me to never seeing anyone or going anywhere again.” To live with coronavirus – to really live with it – requires action from the government, including targeted help for clinically vulnerable people, such as access to antiviral treatments and employment protection; better ventilation in schools and offices; mask mandates during surges; and taking seriously the threat of long Covid. No matter what the government says, this also requires free and regular testing while infection rates are still high. Throughout the pandemic, lateral flow tests and PCRs have played a central part in monitoring outbreaks and reducing transmission: an imperfect but precious reassurance for high-risk people that enabled them to see a friend or simply let an electrician into the house. Simultaneously ending free tests along with the requirement to isolate will naturally discourage people from checking if that new cough is Covid, with research suggesting it might even give some the message it is acceptable to socialise despite having symptoms. Many others will want to take a test but won’t be able to afford to; it’s estimated taking regular lateral flow tests will now cost more than £500 a year. Recent years have seen the obscene choice of “eating v heating” for families in poverty. At a time of food and energy bills rising, ending free lateral flow tests will surely unleash “eating v meeting” – low-income people having to choose between buying food or getting tested to be able to see their nan. Cabinet disagreements mean limited eligibility for free tests has not yet been decided but it’s thought it will be restricted to a “small number of at-risk groups” – possibly the over-80s – and care home staff. It’s vital younger clinically vulnerable people are not abandoned in an aged-based approach; lifestyle habits mean a 30-year-old teacher with a lung transplant may actually be at higher risk than a pensioner. Similarly, there is concern many pre-existing conditions will be missed out; ministers refer to a “small number” of at-risk people getting free lateral flow tests, but the shielding programme alone contained 3.7 million people in England. Besides, such selection misses the point of mass testing: clinically vulnerable people aren’t protected because they can easily check if they have coronavirus, but because everyone around them can too. “Living with Covid” also requires tackling the fact many sick workers can’t afford to isolate. A new report by the Institute for Public Policy Research (IPPR) warns that low sick pay rates and limited eligibility criteria will make it hard for many to take time off work with symptoms. The UK’s statutory sick pay is one of the lowest in Europe, while the study warns many marginalised people – including ethnic minorities and people on low incomes – are not even able to access basic levels of sick pay. Without the back-up of a legal right to isolate, decent sick pay or isolation payments, workers are even more vulnerable to pressure applied by unscrupulous bosses to turn up to work even if they have Covid. Away from the worst of social media and the 1922 Committee of Conservative backbenchers, most people are actually kind and reasonable and have willingly made sacrifices – often significant ones – over the past two years for the collective safety of their neighbours. Many will continue to, despite the new announcement. But a pandemic cannot be tackled by individual will alone. It requires leadership, something Johnson is all too lacking in. We all wish to see a time when no Covid measures are needed. But pretending we can magically return to a pre-pandemic normal in the next few weeks will not make it so – it will simply lead to a “new normal” with more anxiety, illness and, tragically, death. Johnson had a choice: roll out a programme of smart, non-invasive public health measures or allow the virus to spread unmonitored and uncontrolled. Shamefully, the prime minister is more interested in saving his own skin than people’s lives. Frances Ryan is a Guardian columnist“What are the highest-profile examples of players who have failed a medical and then gone on to have long and successful careers,” wonders Crispin Leyser. Club doctors and physios, look away now. One has to be pretty confident in a diagnosis to halt a multimillion pound deal in its tracks, but a failed medical is no laughing matter. That said, there are lots of players who have overcome the odds and gone on to have stellar careers elsewhere. Tom Aldous is first through the door. “Demba Ba failed a medical at Stuttgart in 2009 and Stoke in 2011, but still went on to have a good career at West Ham, Newcastle and Chelsea, which included some goal after someone slipped,” he emails. “Kanu underwent a medical following his transfer to Internazionale in 1996 which found a heart defect and stopped him playing until 1997. He still went on to have a great career at Arsenal and Portsmouth, in particular. Ruud van Nistelrooy failed a medical in April 2000, which delayed his move to Manchester United by a year … it’s fair to say that it all went well anyway. John Hartson failed a medical at Rangers, Charlton and Spurs in 2000; he instead moved to Celtic and scored 88 goals in 146 league games.” For a bit more context, the Rangers chairman, Sir David Murray, had flown Hartson up from Wimbledon in his private jet with his dad. Such were the crowds, “it was like Michael Jackson was arriving”, remembers the former striker. Murray did not hold back after the results of the medical. “His levels of fitness, our doctor told us, was a risk,” said Murray. “We did not feel that he had the correct fitness at the time to go straight into the Champions League. No disrespect, but to score against Huddersfield is slightly different to scoring against Galatasaray.” Celtic’s manager, Martin O’Neill, had a different view: “Look John, unless you’ve got a hole in your heart, I’m gonna sign you,” he said in a phone call in 2001. More Rangers cautiousness, from Jordi Gómez. “In 2000, all was set for Rangers to sign a very young Raúl Tamudo, but the medical found a knee problem with an injury that he had got during the Olympic Games,” writes Jordi. “Tamudo would go on to become Espanyol’s captain, arguably their most important player ever, and even the doctor that blocked the signing got an Espanyol supporters’ club named after him.” Garry Brogden takes us back to the 1970s for the next entry: “In November 1971 Leeds were about to buy Asa Hartford for what I think was a club-record fee from West Brom, only for it to fall through when Hartford was discovered to have a minor heart condition. I distinctly remember a picture of Hartford in the crowd at the West Brom game in the Sunday papers after the deal collapsed and speculation followed as to whether he’d ever play again. He played another 500-plus club games in the 20 years after that, including a League Cup win while at Norwich, and played 50 times for Scotland.” Fred Sullivan nominates Frank Worthington, who was also 24 when a Liverpool medical picked up his high blood pressure in 1972. Famously, he was sent on a sunshine break to Mallorca but ignored orders to relax, returned with blood pressure unimproved and the transfer from Huddersfield fell through. Worthington went on to become a Leicester City legend instead, and represented England, before playing for dozens of other teams in a playing career that ended only in 1992 – 20 years after that failed medical. To more recent years on Merseyside, and a combination of a dodgy knee and confusing negotiations led Liverpool to pull out of the £53m deal to sign Nabil Fekir from Lyon in 2018. Fekir’s agent, Jean-Pierre Bernes, said the medical was “negative”, Fekir blamed Bernes, who hit back by claiming that Fekir’s brother-in-law had worsened relations with Liverpool by demanding a fee at the last minute. The deal was called off, but Fekir would win the World Cup with France a month later, and join Real Betis a year later for £17m, where he is now one of the most creative midfielders in La Liga. Latest comebacks to win (3) Continuing our thread of remarkable late shows to come from behind and win – which we followed up on last week – Jim Clark has a real doozy … “Sorry I’m late to the party,” he begins. “On 25 August 2018, there were 87 minutes on the clock and home side Airdrie led Raith 3-1. Rovers had been down to 10 men since the 72nd minute after centre-back Iain Davidson was shown a deserved straight red for violent conduct. The small band of away fans were getting ready to vent their collective spleen at the team and manager Barry Smith for a dismal performance and result. “Goals on 87, 90 and 90+4 minutes brought the most unlikely turnaround imaginable. The final 10 minutes, complete with wild commentary from Rovers fans for our club TV channel are on YouTube. Despite all this, Smith was in charge for just one more game – a 4-0 home win over Forfar which took us to second place in League One. He resigned the following Monday citing a breakdown in the relationship with the board.” Knowledge archive “Have a husband and wife ever been sent off in the same match?” wonders Steve Turner in September 2010. Indeed they have. Back in December 1999 Bristol Rovers were taking on Oxford United in the South-west Women’s Combination league. Midway through the match an Oxford player appeared to handle the ball, but the referee was unmoved. A livid Mandy Gornicki-Bond furiously protested, and was promptly shown a red card, despite her insistence that her remarks had not been directed at the official. The decision infuriated the Rovers manager, who just happened to be Mandy’s husband Bill. Angered by the perceived injustice he strode on to the pitch to confront the official. Bill, a policeman and class one referee, later insisted that he had not been abusive, but he too was sent to the stands. Can you help? “On 8 January this year, Barrow’s Ollie Banks scored away at Barnsley. His goal came exactly 41 years, 11 months and 27 days after his father Ian scored his first goal for Barnsley, at home to Torquay on 12 January 1980. Is this the longest time between a father and son scoring at the same ground?” muses Jonathan Wray. “Bristol City’s 2-1 win over Middlesbrough on 19 February 2022 was their 12th consecutive league game in which they have both scored and conceded. What’s the longest such streak any team has managed?” wonders Simon Orriss. Plus … “After Billy Sharp took the Championship record, who actually stands as the all-time English second-flight top scorer?” asks Mark Stephenson. “Romelu Lukaku only had seven touches of the ball while playing the full 90 minutes of Chelsea’s 1-0 win over Crystal Palace,” writes Michael Vraney. “Certainly this must be a record low number of touches by a player in a winning side?” Mail us your questions or tweet @TheKnowledge_GU.There is something unusual about the list of top scorers in the Champions League this season. Robert Lewandowski is not top, and neither is Cristiano Ronaldo, Lionel Messi, Kylian Mbappé, Mohamed Salah or Erling Haaland. Instead it is a forward who was let go by West Ham in January 2021 at a loss of £25m after 13 months at the club. Step forward Ajax’s Sébastien Haller, who had never played in the Champions League before this season. It is a remarkable turnaround for the 27-year-old, whose 10 goals in the group phase are a record for a debutant. Not that he cares about records. “I’m keeping an eye on it, but only because friends, family and teammates remind me about it,” he tells the Guardian. “In fact five minutes ago Steven [Berghuis, his Ajax teammate] did. I’m not obsessed with it. I may have broken some records but mine will be broken as well. To me it matters more that we keep winning.” Ajax won all their Champions League group games in a tough group with Borussia Dortmund, Sporting and Besiktas. Haller scored in every match, making his biggest mark in the opening fixture in Lisbon against Sporting, scoring four goals in a 5-1 rout. On Wednesday they face Benfica in the last 16 in the same city, although Haller says he has not watched back that memorable night. “Everything I do on the pitch is stuck in my head,” he says. “Especially the chances I miss. Against Besiktas for example I missed three headers. I am a perfectionist. I don’t think: ‘Oh wow, I have scored 10’ I think: ‘It should have been 13, 14, 15.’” His perfectionism goes all the way down to how he cuts the lemon for his sparkling water and means he does not smile a lot on the pitch, even after scoring. “Ask anyone – I like a laugh off the pitch but on it, it can be distracting. You have to keep your focus.” Thierry Henry had the same non-laughing drill but Haller says he did not copy the Frenchman in that aspect, although the former Arsenal forward was one of his idols, together with Didier Drogba. Haller has not been able to adapt the same style of play as those two. Most importantly, they were both a lot quicker than Haller. “That’s the problem. I asked my mum for speed, but she couldn’t give it to me,” he says, laughing. “I’m not one to go on long, dribbling runs either because I’m not good at it! It’s a pity but also a blessing. I always have to think twice about which choice I make, have to make room in a different way, really time my runs because it’s difficult for me to overtake a defender. There were 10,000 boys with more talent on the streets where I come from. But it’s the choices you make that make the difference.” Haller, who was born in France but plays for Ivory Coast, says he is blessed with a good mix of people around him who helped him “be more positive and never complain”. He grew up in the Paris suburb of Ris-Orangis. Paul Pogba, Mbappé, Riyad Mahrez, Anthony Martial and Henry are among others who had their football education on the stone squares and sandy pitches of France’s capital. There is a lot of pressure on the kids to make it, which Haller finds “a bit scary”, and his father was different. “He never pushed me,” Haller says with a smile. “He won’t like reading this but he doesn’t know anything about football. Maybe that was my luck. But he was always getting me to training and games. He got up very early, because we first picked up other guys who had no one to take them. I am very proud of my father for that.” Haller’s career has been full of ups and downs. He was tall for his age and a sensation for France’s youth teams. He was spotted by Didier Martel, a former Auxerre player and now scout for Utrecht, and moved to the Netherlands at the age of 20, first on loan and then permanently. A move to Eintracht Frankfurt followed and after two successful seasons in Germany, West Ham paid £45m for him. West Ham fans have wondered how the player who struggled in England can be the Champions League top scorer but Haller explains there are a lot of reasons why he failed to perform as well as he wanted. “I was brought in by Manuel Pellegrini but then David Moyes came and we got in a situation where we were … like trapped together,” he says. “I was playing in a system that I didn’t really enjoy. Moyes preferred someone like [Michail] Antonio up front, and I’m super happy he [Antonio]’s doing so well; I am for all the guys at West Ham. I had a good time there with them but I was also really mad at the situation, [with] the way we were playing, the way I was playing, the way I was feeling …” Haller was not in the best period of his life, arriving with his wife seven months pregnant with their second child. “We had to stay in a hotel for a month, then had to go to an apartment, she had to arrange everything,” he explains. “Then the little one came and had some problems, suffering from bad reflux. He didn’t sleep at night, was crying all the time, in constant pain. “I’m not the type that just shuts the door and acts like nothing is happening. You have to help to raise your children – it’s not only up to the mother. I was worrying about him, about my wife, who couldn’t sleep and was feeling like a zombie. Then you have to adapt to your new environment, a new competition, then there was Corona, pfffff … that was maybe a lot to deal with.” He says he did not complain, just tried to make it work. “I don’t want to blame David. Sometimes a style of play doesn’t suit a player and I wasn’t the striker he needed. And I also wasn’t his signing. If you bring in players [as a manager] that cost money for the club, you need to show that you didn’t make a mistake.” The move to Ajax to play for Erik ten Hag again made sense. It was Ten Hag who supercharged Haller’s career at Utrecht and his work at Ajax has led to him being mentioned as a possible future manager at Manchester United and Tottenham. “He can definitely go to a top competition,” Haller says. “No doubt. I have never seen a coach who is so obsessed with everything and I’ve had a lot of really good coaches. I like it when you have ideas and stick with them until the end to make it work.” Still there were people who did not understand why he swapped the Premier League for the Eredivisie. “I had to think for a long time if I should do it. In the end I wanted to enjoy football. I thought: ‘Why am I thinking what other people think?’ They want to comment on everything they see, even if they don’t know about the situation. This is not their life, it’s my life. You can say: ‘Look at me, I play for a Premier League club, though I’m always on the bench.’ “But at Ajax I can score goals, play for trophies, play in the Champions League, enjoy football. It was a simple decision in the end, a no-brainer. So I went to David Moyes and said: ‘I am asking you if you can let me go and not block a move. I want my confidence back.’ Luckily he and the club agreed.” Life in the Netherlands is good. He and his wife now have three children and he does not follow what is written about him in England, France or the Netherlands. He has enjoyed playing for Ivory Coast since November 2020 after not being selected for France’s senior squad. “If people say Didier Deschamps made a mistake, I think: ‘There is no mistake.’ I’m really proud and happy with the choices I make. My mother is proud, her family in Ivory Coast is proud.” As for Ajax, they are in a position to win three trophies. “There is no limit for us,” he says. “Anything can happen, even in the Champions League.” The club have been through some turbulent times of late with the director of football Marc Overmars leaving after sending inappropriate messages to female colleagues. Haller says the fallout has not affected the players. “In the dressing room everyone is focused on the next team we have to play,” he says. “Sure, a lot of players came to Ajax thanks to Marc but life in football never stops. You can never look back on what has happened. “Yes, it’s absolutely an egoistic world. Football is a big fight to reach higher every day. Only if we stay humble, if we keep working like we have done before can we continue like we are at the moment. Losing is the easiest thing to do. To keep winning is the difficult part. But I like that.”That is where we will leave the blog for today. Thanks for following along. Here’s some of what you might have missed today: Scott Morrison announced targeted sanctions on Russian individuals and banks, and said Russia was acting like “thugs and bullies”. The opposition leader, Anthony Albanese, offered bipartisan support on the sanctions, as Penny Wong urged Australian nationals to leave Ukraine as soon as possible. One person has died in the floods in Queensland, as much of the east coast continued to be battered by heavy rainfall. The Moderna vaccine was approved for children aged six to 11 years old. NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, sought legal advice over the decision to close down Sydney’s train network on Monday, while he issued a stinging rebuke to his transport minister, David Elliott, saying he “should have been advised” about the shutdown before it occurred. Victoria’s chief health officer, Dr Brett Sutton, defended the decision to maintain mask mandates in primary schools, as other mandates are lifted. Construction giant Probuild is reportedly on the verge of collapse, with reports of tradies and workers are walking off sites or being let go. NSW recorded 8,931 new Covid cases and six deaths, Victoria recorded 6,926 new cases and 17 deaths, Queensland recorded 6,300 new cases and 37 deaths, the ACT reported 946 new cases, WA reported 645 new cases, SA reported 1,958 new cases, the NT reported 864 new cases and Tasmania reported 842 new cases. Jai Wright’s family released a statement, asking for privacy as they mourn and thanking the community for their support. Thanks for reading. Scott Morrison has spoken to Ukraine’s prime minister this evening, just hours after warning a full-scale Russian invasion was “likely to occur within the next 24 hours”. Australia has levelled financial and travel sanctions against Russian individuals and banks, but Morrison said the government was prepared to “do more”. Morrison reached Ukrainian prime minister, Denys Shmyhal, by phone around 6pm tonight. A spokesperson for the Australian PM said the government had an “unwavering commitment to Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity”, and denounced “Russia’s aggressive behaviour towards Ukraine as unacceptable, unprovoked and unwarranted”. The spokesperson said: The Prime Minister informed Prime Minister Shmyhal of Australia’s immediate action to sanction Russian individuals, organisations and banks as part of an international effort to impose a sharp cost on Russia for its actions against Ukraine. The Prime Minister affirmed Australia’s preparedness to do more, working with our partners, and in response to Ukraine’s needs. In a joint statement released just before 6pm, Morrison and the foreign minister, Marise Payne, said today’s round of sanctions was “the beginning of our sanctions process”, and warned any further invasion would be met with “the high cost it deserves”. The Australian government did not outline what further action could be taken. Only five days after the the Victorian government’s proposed social housing levy on developers, the premier has accused the building and property sectors of reneging on a deal to allow them to make “super profits” in exchange for paying the contribution. The decision has thrown the levy in doubt, with the initial announcement met with criticism by the building and property sectors. You can read more on the story from Benita Kolovos at the link below: The PM has formally confirmed the Russian sanctions in a statement released earlier. Although not much is new or different to what he announced in the morning, he does specify the banks that will be affected: Rossiya Bank, Promsvyazbank, IS Bank, Genbank and the Black Sea Bank for Development and Reconstruction. These are in addition to the restrictions on state development bank VEB. Morrison also added that visa extensions will be granted to all Ukrainian nationals currently in Australia, with visas set to expire by 30 June. The extension will last for six months. Here are the latest coronavirus numbers from around Australia today, as the country records at least 60 deaths from Covid-19: ACT Deaths: 0 Cases: 946 In hospital: 40 (with two people in ICU) NSW Deaths: six Cases: 8,931 In hospital: 1,246 (with 69 people in ICU) NT Deaths: 0 Cases: 864 In hospital: 131 (with four people in ICU) Queensland Deaths: 37 Cases: 6,300 In hospital: 379 (with 35 people in ICU) South Australia Deaths: 0 Cases: 1,958 In hospital: 192 (with 14 people in ICU) Tasmania Deaths: 0 Cases: 842 In hospital: 10 (with two people in ICU Victoria Deaths: 17 Cases: 6,926 In hospital: 319 (with 22 people in ICU) Western Australia Deaths: 0 Cases: 645 In hospital: five Workers are packing up tools across Probuild sites around Australia today, as reports circulate that the major construction company is on the brink of going into administration. Construction sites in Brisbane, Melbourne and WA have been affected, but Guardian Australia understands a number of the company’s problems centre on the development of the site at Cbus Property’s 443 Queen St, Brisbane. Industry sources estimate that site has lost the company approximately $50m, after an already low tender was followed by foundational problems, partial site flooding, design changes and the construction supply chain squeeze. Deloitte has declined to comment on the matter, and Probuild could not be reached for comment. The appointment of Deloitte as administrators, however, is expected to be announced on Thursday morning. The defence minister Peter Dutton has called the situation in Ukraine “ominous”, adding that it was “not beyond the realm of possibility” that missiles and weapons would strike hospitals and childcare centres. Speaking on ABC Radio earlier, Dutton said that it could become a “bloody conflict” and that it was already in the early stages: It’s not beyond the realm of possibility to consider that missiles and weapons fired can strike hospitals or daycare centres. I think if it goes to a full-scale war, full-scale conflict, then that’s exactly what will happen. I think most of the indications are at the moment, that it will be a bloody conflict and most analysis is that we’re in the opening hours of that already. There are reports that construction giant Probuild is facing collapse. The ABC is reporting that a board meeting is expected to agree to either restructure the company or go into administration. Probuild is one of the largest construction companies in the country, having built the Melbourne Convention Centre, the new headquarters of Victoria police and the glass wave of “The Ribbon” on Sydney’s Darling Harbour. It has building sites across the country and there are reports of tradies walking off projects or were being stood down. An official statement on the issue is expected tomorrow. Despite all the media coverage of Russia’s invasion of the would-be breakaway regions of Ukraine, it seems that investors weren’t too fussed today at least. Australia’s benchmark ASX 200 share index ended 0.6% higher, not far off the highs for the day. Higher commodity prices, meanwhile, has propelled the Australian dollar to almost 72.5 US cents, or the highest in almost a fortnight, according to Reuters. Elsewhere, stocks in China including Hong Kong and South Korea (doubt much trading goes on in the north), were also up about half a percent with trading still going on. Not a bad outcome, then, after US shares dropped more than 1% overnight. Closer to home, New Zealand’s central bank raised its key rate by 0.25 percentage points to 1%, with a warning that the rate is headed to more than 3% by next year, according to AP. Australia’s Reserve Bank is not expected to be pushing the rate rise button at anything like that pace, but quickening wage risessuggest the first move might not be that far off. Labor’s shadow treasurer Jim Chalmershas pointed out the 2.3% annual rise in wages in the December quarter from a year ago is well short of the 3.5% pace of consumer price increases. (The RBA looks at the underlying inflation rate, which is more like 2.6%.) Meanwhile, investors lost a bit of faith in Mike Cannon Brookes and Brookfield offering much more than the $7.50 a share they are offering to take over AGL Energy. AGL’s shares dropped another 20 cents, or 2.5%. on Wednesday, to $7.65, to be just 2% above that bid price. Penny Wong has added to Albanese’s statement by urging Australians still in Ukraine to leave as soon as they can: I echo the leader’s point that we do offer a full bipartisanship support to the government on the sanctions which have been announced, and on Australian playing its full part as a member of the international community, standing in solidarity with Ukraine and with the Ukrainian community. I would also make this point. We do know that there are Australians who remain in Ukraine. I would echo the government and the view is that it is time to leave. So opposition leader Anthony Albanese has stepped up, along with Penny Wong, and thrown his support behind Australia’s sanctions against Russia that Scott Morrison announced earlier today. Albanese said it was “appropriate” that Australia introduce those sanctions, and said he was not looking for any disagreement on the issue: This is a shocking development, whereby we have a situation [where] Russia has undertaken aggression against the people of Ukraine, and all Australians stand with the people of Ukraine against Russian aggression. Labor supports the announcement that has been announced by the government. We believe it is important when it comes to national security that we express a common view on behalf of the Australian people, in support of democracy, in support of sovereignty, of Ukraine and against Russian aggression. Jai Wright’s family have released a statement, asking for privacy as they mourn and thanking the community for their support. Wright’s family also distanced themselves from rallies and fundraisers that were being organised in Jai’s name, saying they will be organising a march after Jai’s funeral. They also say they hope to have “the opportunity to find the truth about Jai’s death”. Jai’s family will not be making any further comments at this point in time. They also want the community to know they are not affiliated with any current march, rally or fundraiser, but will be organising a march in the days and weeks after Jai’s funeral. The family are taking time to privately remember Jai and plan his funeral. They look forward to a coronial inquest and the opportunity to find the truth about Jai’s death. Jai, 16, died after the trail bike he was riding and an unmarked police car crashed in Sydney’s inner-west on Saturday morning. Police have launched a critical incident investigation into the crash, but Wright’s father, Lachlan, told reporters on Monday that an independent inquiry was needed. The top official at Ukraine’s embassy in Canberra has welcomed the Australian government’s announcement on sanctions, while suggesting countries should be ready to further expand the measures against Russia. When contacted for comment, Volodymyr Shalkivskyi, the chargé d’affaires at the embassy, told Guardian Australia: [The] government of Ukraine is grateful to the Australian side for joining [the] coalition of our partners who introduced new sanctions against Russia. [The] impact of the sanctions depend on the unity and determination of the international community to react on Russian aggression against Ukraine. We believe that expansion of the sanctions by our international partners is needed in order to deter [the] Kremlin from further escalation. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, had indicated that Russia’s ambassador to Australia, Alexey Pavlovsky, was being called into the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade for a meeting with the secretary this afternoon. Russia’s embassy has also been contacted for comment. The Bureau of Meteorology has released a weather update, saying there is more rain to come across the east coast, especially in south-east Queensland and north-east NSW. Jonathan How, a meteorologist at BOM, said severe weather warnings for heavy to intense rainfall remain for those two regions, who will see steadily increasing rainfall every day leading into the weekend. We are likely to issue severe thunderstorm warnings, in addition to this, for thunderstorms that have the potential to bring life-threatening flash flooding. Labor MP Nick Champion has resigned from federal politics and will move to contest the South Australian state election. In a statement, the speaker, Andrew Wallace, said considerations will be given to the possibility of a byelection, although there is a general election around the corner. Earlier today, Victoria’s chief health officer, Dr Brett Sutton, defended the decision to maintain mask mandates in primary schools. It comes after the government lifted mask mandates in most indoor settings from Saturday. But Sutton, speaking on ABC Radio, said the mandate was necessary given the high case numbers in Victoria, and because vaccine coverage in that age group remains low: It won’t be forever, but it’s the appropriate time to do it, with cases still very high. I think we’ll review [it] certainly at the end of this term, we’ll see where vaccination coverage has got to and where our numbers are. One of Australia’s most wanted men has told reporters he’s been “living life” and “avoiding being killed” in the 12 years he was on the run. Graham Potter was flanked by senior officers from Victoria Police, who were escorting him back to Victoria from Queensland, and grinned as he responded to questions from waiting journalists. Here is what he said when asked what he’d been doing while on the run: Living life and avoiding being killed. You’ll appreciate I can’t talk to you. I’d like to but I can’t at this stage. Here’s yesterday’s story on his arrest in far north Queensland: The NT recorded 864 new Covid cases. There are 131 people in hospital, with 11 on a ventilator and four in ICU. Good afternoon, and as always a quick thanks to Cait Kelly for her expert work on the blog this morning. Mostafa Rachwani with you, taking you through the rest of the day’s news. And with that, I am going to leave you there. I will pass you on to my colleague, Mostafa Rachwani whose capable hands will take you through the rest of the day! Australia’s membership of a global, US-based anti-corruption alliance is under threat after years of inaction and missed deadlines prompted a formal warning that the Morrison government was acting “contrary” to the body’s requirements. The Australian government signed up to the Open Government Partnership in 2015, a 78-country multilateral initiative designed to promote open government, fight corruption and empower citizen participation in policymaking. More on the ACCC chief Rod Sims’ speech to the National Press Club. Despite a bit of media hyperventilating, Sims is not yet in a position to make a call on the $8bn takeover bid for AGL by Mike Cannon-Brookes and Brookfield. Yes, Brookfield’s planned $18bn purchase of Victoria’s AusNet distribution network could pose competition issues should the bid succeed. But the deal’s not yet done so there’s not a lot to say. (The ACCC has said: “If a transaction proceeds, the ACCC expects it would conduct a public review into the impact on competition.” Within AGL, they reckon Brookfield’s lawyers are well aware of the legal and regulatory minefields.) Sims was also asked about what could be done to ease the pain for motorists given petrol prices are at record levels and the Russian aggression towards Ukraine won’t help. He noted that 55c in the price of each litre is a tax. But that’s the fourth-lowest in the world, Sims said, and it goes to pay for the roads. (In other words, he’s not pushing for an excise cut.) Sims also addressed gas prices and makes an interesting historical point. Before Australia’s east coast market was opened to international prices, firms could expect to pay $3 a gigajoule. That rocketed (to $10/GJ or beyond) after governments approved three $20bn LNG gas export trains in Queensland, when there was only enough gas for two, Sims said. Sims said those gas developers who said prices for users wouldn’t rise may have told governments “something that turned out not to be true”. There may be a three-letter word for that. The PM has been asked about the dialogue between the French president, Emmanuel Macron, and Vladimir Putin to try and put Putin off a full-scale invasion. I do support any attempts to try and avoid this, but not without qualification. I mean, there cannot be any suggestion that concessions should be provided to a bully and a thug in return for not following through with threats of violence. That’s not the sort of appeasement I would ever support and I don’t think Australians would either. The PM has been asked what the worst-case scenario looks like. His answer: The sanctions that are imposed not just by Australia, but all countries around the world, they will just keep stepping up. I mean, there must be consequences for Russia’s actions. And those who perpetrate them support those who perpetrate them as those who benefit from this. There must be consequences for this type of behaviour. This type of behaviour is not acceptable. The PM is asked why the Russian ambassador is still in Australia. The Russian ambassador I understand will be coming in to see the secretary of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade today. But that step hasn’t been taken as yet. Other countries and I’ve discussed this with other leaders. They haven’t taken those decisions as yet. But we will see where this proceeds. We’re taking this step by step. I feel for the Russian people and there are many Australians of Russian extraction here, who I know will be very disappointed by what president Putin is doing and they will feel strongly about that because that’s not what they believe their country’s about. That’s not what their values are about. That’s not what their heritage is about. And I know that I’ll be very disappointed about this. This is the actions of a Russian government, an autocratic authoritarian government that’s forgotten what democracy is and what liberal democracy is, in undertaking these actions of bullying and threats and intimidation. It’s important that we play our part in the broader international community to ensure that those who are financing profiting from an autocratic and authoritarian regime that is invading its neighbour should have nowhere to run and nowhere to hide. What’s being aimed at the people of Ukraine is unacceptable and won’t be stood for by the international community. And all nations who want to stand up to bullies should do so now as so many have done, and Australia as always is pleased to be doing that. The PM says the Australian government is open to offering more Ukranian citizens visas to come to Australia - not under the humanitarian stream. At this stage, it is too uncertain to predict how long it will be or what circumstances will be. But we’ll be working in providing support to the Polish government and others who are providing direct assistance to displaced persons where they are being accommodated in those countries. We will also be looking at the options for humanitarian support in terms of visa access to Australia. And I’d stress with Ukrainian citizens – this wouldn’t just be through our humanitarian programme. It would be through the many streams of our migration programme skilled migration student visas, other visas, family reunion visas, things of that nature. So I would expect that we’d be able to provide that support through those many channels, but we’re still in the very early stages of that. There are some 1,027 Ukrainians outside of Australia who have visas to enter Australia and of course they would be welcomed. We will work very closely, especially with Poland but other European partners to deal with the likelihood of displaced persons coming into their countries. This is where we think we can provide some quite effective assistance. I’ll be speaking next week to the Polish prime minister. I’ll be speaking tonight to the Ukrainian prime minister and discussing these matters. The PM says he has also instructed the Minister for Immigration to accelerate the conclusion of Ukrainian visa applications to Australia. They will go to the top of the pile and I’ve asked for those to be concluded urgently. There are some 430 roughly applications from Ukrainian citizens to come to Australia. They’re across a range of different visa classes, student visas, family visas and others. And so I’ve asked for those to be concluded. The PM says there is believed to be 1,400 Australians inside Ukraine and the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT) is in direct contact with 184 of them. We have been warning them for some time, now is the time to make their way out of Ukraine. We are working with our partners to identify additional individuals who will be subject to the sanctions that have been made possible by our autonomous sanctions legislation that we recently took through the parliament. Our government continues to coordinate closely with the United States, UK and European Union and other governments to ensure there are severe costs to Russia’s aggression. The PM says the sanctions will target transport energy, telecommunications, oil, gas and mineral reserves. Australia, along with the UK and the US will also put sanctions on several Russian banks. These sanctions will significantly expand the scope of persons, and I stress, entities that Australia can list for targeted financial sanctions and travel bans. It’s included to capture persons and entities of what is termed strategic and economic significance to Russia. So that gives us a broad coverage to ensure that we can target those who are particularly involved in these actions and who are aiding and abetting this invasion. Our intention today, and the decisions taken by the National Security Committee, will ensure that we are in lockstep with the United States and the United Kingdom in the sanctions that they are imposing upon Russia. Morrison says the government will “immediately” begin placing sanctions on Russian individuals. We will also amend the Autonomous Sanctions regulation of 2011 to extend existing sanctions that apply to Crimea and Sevastopol to the regions of Donetsk and Luhansk. Morrison: Australia always stand up to bullies. And we will be standing up to Russia, along with all of our partners, and all those who believe that it is totally unacceptable that Russia could invade its neighbour. The PM says “the invasion of Ukraine has effectively begun.” My first thoughts are for all the people of Ukraine and for those many 38,000 Australians of Ukrainian descent, who are here. They’re, of course, very concerned for their families, for their friends and for their homeland, where they have come from. The PM is speaking in Canberra now. Rod Sims, the chair of the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission, is giving his farewell address to the National Press Club in Canberra. He is outlining 10 “issues and challenges ahead”, but here are a couple of the highlights. For one, he bemoaned our penchant for us to “flog off” infrastructure rather than work out how they might benefit the community (which typically paid for them in the first instance). Australia “almost uniquely” seems to focus “on how much we can sell infrastructure assets for, rather than having our infrastructure benefit our wider economy”, Sims said. “Such behaviour can dramatically affect existing users and could be considered a continuing tax on the community.” Our electricity and gas markets are “a mess”, Sims said, a comment that’s especially topical given the $8bn takeover bid for AGL proposed by the tech billionaire, Mike Cannon-Brookes, and Canada’s Brookfield Asset Management. Interestingly, he takes aim at the Abbott government’s scrapping of a price on carbon (which was never a tax, even its foes later admitted). “Most of the world has accepted that there is a negative externality associated with carbon,” he said. “With Australia having decided not to deal with this issue via a market-based mechanism, we are left with a challenge of how we achieve affordability, sustainability and reliability, without seriously trading off one of these objectives to achieve another.” Most advocates pushed for only two and sometimes just one of those three objectives. Anyway, there’s a lot in Sims’ speech, and no doubt the Q&amp;A session to come, so stay tuned. WA has seen a big spike in cases, recording 643 new Covid infections in the last 24 hours. In the last few days, cases have sat just over 200. There are five people in hospital, up three from yesterday. The Victorian government has gone to town today on this – the Foo Fighters are playing at the biggest gig in the country in two years. While we wait for the PM, here is some news out of Victoria, where drug and alcohol treatment services are lining up to back decriminalising drugs. From AAP: The Reason Party leader, Fiona Patten, will introduce her decriminalisation bill to the Victorian upper house on Wednesday. Under the changes, police would issue a mandatory notice and referral of drug education or treatment to those found to have used or possessed an illicit drug. If a person complies with the notice, there will be no finding of guilt and no criminal record. Patrick Lawrence, the chief executive of addiction, mental health and legal services hub First Step, said the bill would ensure those struggling with addiction – who were often targeted by Victoria’s drug laws – received help rather than condemnation. “We’re talking about adults who survived childhood traumas, childhood abuse and neglect, homelessness, poverty, and the absence of love,” he said. “Most of us would move mountains to prevent harm occurring to a child. At what age (is) an adult ... no longer worthy of our compassion?” We are standing by to hear from the PM, who is expected to address the media soon. We have more information about the Queensland floods from AAP here: A woman’s body has been found in a submerged car and another 10 people are missing after intense rainfall triggered flash floods in southeast Queensland. The 60-year-old’s body was found in the vehicle near Skyring Creek at Belli Park, west of Eumundi on the Sunshine Coast, just after 8am on Wednesday. “This is indeed a tragedy during this particular time,” she told parliament. Craig Hawkins, a Sunshine Coast police district superintendent, said another 10 people were unaccounted for in the Noosa Hinterland area and there was a search underway for a man whose motorcycle was found near Gympie. “We are searching for some people at the moment, particularly again around that Belli Park area,” he said. Emergency alerts have also been sent to Gympie, Noosa and Sunshine Coast residents warning of flash flooding that may affect roads and bridges. From AAP: New Zealand has posted a record 3,297 community Covid-19 cases amid another increase in hospitalisations. The coronavirus is straining the country’s health system like at no other time during the pandemic. On Wednesday, health officials reported 179 people were in hospital including one in intensive care. The number in hospital, and the single-day increase, are the highest recorded in NZ. One in every eight tests are returning positive, showing how widespread infections currently are. From AAP: Foreign skilled workers in Australia have been paid as little as $40 a day, meaning they were only able to afford to eat plain white rice for three meals a day, an inquiry has heard. A Senate committee is examining new laws to protect migrant workers from exploitation. The Electrical Trades Union told the inquiry on Wednesday two Filipino and two Thai workers were engaged on a solar farm construction project outside of the north Queensland city of Townsville in 2018. It was discovered the workers were being paid $40 a day, plus a $42 allowance for food and accommodation, and employed under subclass 400 “short-stay specialist” visa arrangements. Union members passed the hat around to raise money for the workers. It emerged the “highly specialised” work they were hired to do included licensed electrical work, but their skills and qualifications were never assessed and they were not licensed to perform it. The employer, through lawyers, said it had done nothing illegal and was under no obligation to pay, but settled the matter by increasing the wages and making back-payments. The meeting of the national security committee of cabinet – dominated by discussion of Russia and Ukraine, including potential sanctions – has wrapped up. At this stage, we’re expecting the prime minister, Scott Morrison, to address the media in Sydney around 12.45pm AEDT. The ABS has released the December quarter wage price index figures and they have come out more or less as expected. In the final three months of 2021, the WPI rose 0.7%, in line with the market’s “consensus” forecast of 0.7%. On an annual basis, the index was up 2.3% on the previous December quarter. Interestingly, the 0.7% increase was matched by public and private wage slaves. The data was a key figure for those speculating when the Reserve Bank will have to lift its official cash rate from the record low 0.1% before too many months pass. (The markets were tipping June-ish for that first move to 0.25% before today’s wages data – assuming that’s how much the RBA would respond.) Of course, higher wages are what most of us want, particularly when the consumer price index is on the rise, including 1.3% in the December quarter. No wonder real wages feel like they are going backwards. More to come a bit later. In follow up to his press conference earlier, Health minister Greg Hunt has released a statement, saying Australia has secured more than 25 million doses of Moderna. Before any COVID-19 vaccine can be supplied for use in Australia it undergoes a rigorous evaluation by the TGA for safety, quality and effectiveness. The TGA will only approve a vaccine once it has established that the benefits greatly outweigh any potential risks. Moderna has been clinically proven to produce a strong immune response in children. Most side effects are mild and short-term, and similar to those experienced by children who have received the Pfizer vaccine. For children aged between six and 11 years old, a paediatric dose of Moderna is half the dose currently provided for people aged 12 years and over - two doses of 50μg per dose (0.25mL), eight weeks apart, or three doses for immunocompromised children. The recommended eight-week interval can be shortened to four weeks for children at risk of moderate to severe COVID-19, for example those with underlying health conditions, in an outbreak or before international travel. For all the sound and fury over Russian troops moving into the renegade regions of Ukraine, investors in this part of the world at least aren’t in panic – yet. The benchmark ASX200 is roughly flat in early trading. Woolworths, which might have invited some share selling as it trimmed its dividend (by 1c) gained close to 2% in value. US share markets dropped 1-1.5%, depending on your index, while Europe’s main bourse ended the day mostly flat despite the heightened tensions in the continent’s east. Energy prices were higher, as you might expect given the prospect of tightened sanctions on Russia, one of the world’s biggest energy exporters. Still, while Brent crude neared the $US100 a barrel mark for the first time in seven years, it eased back to under $US97 (though still up 1.5%) through the overnight trading. So no panic there either. Local attention, meanwhile, will shortly turn to wages, with the ABS due to release the December quarter wage price index at 11.30 AEDT. The market consensus is tipping a 0.7% increase for those three months. Anything higher will prompt more “RBA will soon raise its official interest rate” chatter. On the other big business story, AGL’s have extended their falls into a second day, losing more the 10%-plus rally on Monday after news of Brookfield and billionaire Mike Cannon-Brookes’ $8bn bid for the energy company. As we reported, AGL is looking for a 30-40% premium on its recent share price before it will engage with the suitors, among other conditions. No sign of that yet either. The Queensland premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk, has told parliament a 60-year-old person has died in the floods on the Sunshine Coast. Tragically, Mr Speaker, I have been advised a 60-year-old person has been found deceased after a vehicle was submerged in water just after 8am this morning. Once again this is indeed a tragedy. She said a freight train has also been overturned south of Gympie and the driver has been rescued with minor injuries. Tasmania has recorded 842 new Covid-19 cases, an increase on the 820 recorded on Tuesday. There are 10 people in hospital and of those two are in ICU. The New South Wales premier, Dominic Perrottet, has sought legal advice over the decision to close down Sydney’s train network in the early hours of Monday, while issuing a stinging rebuke to his transport minister, David Elliott, saying he “should have been advised” about the shutdown before it occurred. But the premier insisted he still had confidence in Elliott despite asking him to “reflect” on comments made on Tuesday, making clear his ministers were expected to be available at any time of the day or night. Elliott yesterday said he was not called by senior bureaucrats when they decided to shut the metropolitan train network down early on Monday morning but said he would likely not have answered a call were attempts made to contact him. The minister also confirmed he went to sleep despite having an “inkling” a major disruption was on the way, despite Labor later on Tuesday brandishing a text message in parliament that appeared to contradict his claims. “The minister will reflect on that and realise that all ministers are available 24/7,” Perrottet said. “That’s my expectation as premier. “My expectation is that ministers are immensely connected to the operational matters that are occurring within their portfolios.” Perrottet said that he and the minister “should have been advised” and would investigate the role played in the decision by Transport for NSW secretary Rob Sharp, the minister and senior officials in the shutdown. “There’s a breakdown in process here,” he said. “The technical legal issues are complex and I need to continue to get advice. I’ve sought advice and I’m working through it.” He said he was confident the decision made to stop trains “was the right one” – which was his first concern – and was now turning his attention to why proper processes were not followed. When asked if someone would lose their job over the saga, he said it would “depend “on the findings” following an internal probe. Australia is spending billions to build thousands of kilometres of new gas pipelines that may end up worthless stranded assets as the world moves to deal with climate change. The warning comes in a new report by Global Energy Monitor tracking 600km of pipelines currently under construction and 12,200km of proposed new infrastructure across Australia, with the total value of this work amounting to $25.8bn (USD$18.6bn). The resources minister, Keith Pitt, has just re-announced almost $20m in taxpayer incentives for fracking company Empire Energy, a firm with links to the Liberal party, after a federal court ruling that previous grants to the company were invalid. Pitt announced on Wednesday that the Coalition had signed three new grant agreements worth $19.4m to incentivise Empire Energy to conduct exploratory drilling in the Northern Territory’s Beetaloo Basin, a region thought to hold vast gas reserves. The money was awarded through the $50m Beetaloo Cooperative Drilling Program, which forms part of the Morrison government’s gas-led recovery. The federal court previously ruled that three grants to Empire Energy worth $21m were legally unreasonable because the agreements were signed just days after environmentalists launched an urgent case arguing they were invalid. The government, the court said, should have waited for the legal challenge to end before signing the grant agreements with Empire. But the court rejected another argument from Environment Centre NT that the minister should have considered the risk to climate change prior to awarding the grants. At the time, Pitt said that aspect of the decision would allow him to proceed with the grants in future. Pitt said on Wednesday: The government is committed to a gas-led recovery and we are now getting on with the job of opening up the Beetaloo as part of the Strategic Basins Plan and these grants will assist in that important process.Australian gas is in high demand domestically and internationally and it’s important that we work to get new gas production online. A Senate inquiry has previously probed Empire Energy’s links to the Liberal party. The inquiry has heard Empire has donated to the NT’s Country Liberal party and flew a Liberal party fundraising chair to inspect its operations. Empire is chaired by Paul Espie, a frequent Liberal donor and director of the Menzies Research Centre, the inquiry has heard. The company told the inquiry the links played “no role whatsoever” in its applications for the grants and that it followed “due and proper process at all times”. The federal government has been urged to act on the findings of a Senate inquiry into the disability support pension. As reported by Guardian Australia on Friday, the inquiry found “serious flaws with the [disability support pension], its underlying policy framework, the way that it is administered, and how applicants are able to access it”. Recommendations included that the government review a rulebaring those with temporary or fluctuating conditions and consider other changes to allow people with multiple impairments to more easily make a successful claim. A group of disability and social service peak bodies, including the Australian Council of Social Service and People With Disability Australia, said in a statement today that while the policy issues raised in the recommendations were welcome, “more urgency” was needed. It said: Now is not the time to ‘further consider’ or ‘investigate’ the issues with DSP which formed the basis for this inquiry in the first instance. People with disability need urgent action. It also argued some necessary reforms were overlooked, including a clear commitment to lift the rate of the jobseeker payment. The inquiry report had a Labor-Greens majority and was chaired by the Greens senator Janet Rice. Separately, the Greens have backed significant increases to welfare payments and flagged support to overhaul the disability pension, but Labor is yet to outline any specific commitments on these issues. The peak body’s statement noted: We urge the next government to form a Ministerial or DSS Departmental advisory group led by agencies representing people with disability and to urgently implement the recommendations of the review as early as possible. The Acoss chief executive, Cassandra Goldie, said the “inflexible and misguided eligibility rules” led people “forced to survive on jobseeker payments and exposed to onerous mutual obligation requirements”. Acoss hears from people caught up in this cruel and unjust system every day and we cannot stress how much suffering this causes people in our community. The Australian Federation of Disability Organisations chief executive, Ross Joyce, said: We believe that people with disability are experiencing institutional abuse and neglect when they come into contact with the eligibility and review processes for the disability support pension. Economic Justice Australia, which represents some community legal centres, said in a separate statement on Tuesday that its members would be “understandably disappointed that the committee has recommended consideration of these matters rather than immediate action”. Executive director Leanne Ho said: Our members report they see clients who are hospitalised with the stress of the DSP claims process and experience immense suffering while struggling to comply with JobSeeker mutual obligation requirements when they should really be on DSP. Those who cannot maintain jobseeker mutual obligations and cannot provide the evidence required to be granted DSP, end up without payment for long periods and fall into a dire situation of poverty. Guardian Australia revealed last year that the pension rules were leaving thousands of cancer patients languishing on the jobseeker payment. Mandatory surveillance testing and cohorting of students will be scrapped across New South Wales schools from next week. The premier, Dominic Perrottet, and the education minister, Sarah Mitchell, announced the changes on Wednesday, saying it was time to “get back to normal”. The state government will provide two rapid tests per student per week for a further fortnight, but using them will not be mandated. Parents will also be allowed back on to school grounds and face masks will no longer be required for high school students and teachers. Perrottet said: We were able to make these changes because of the efforts and sacrifices that people have made right across our state. Mitchell said it was important for students to be able to mix between year levels and to see schools return to normal. She said: Things like kindergarten to year 6 buddy programs, choirs or student councils or dramatic plays that might take place across year groups – we will be able to do that again. For a lot of our kids, they do really miss that. Next week we’ll start to see our schools return pretty much back to normal after nearly two years of having different settings in our schools. Now’s the time to get back to normal. Hunt: The next thing is, in terms of the boosters, we have now passed 11 million boosters. We’re at 62.1% of the eligible population and so Australians are stepping forward, they’re being boosted with Pfizer and the Moderna, and we want to continue to encourage them to do that. At a national level, we have reached 96.2% of first doses and 94.3% of second doses. Hunt: In the terms of the children’s vaccination program, we’re at 49.4%. In the absolute latest figures, that has increased to a 76% intention to have children vaccinated in the sentiment tracking of parents. So this is an important indicator. It means that the will is there. Greg Hunt is up, he is announcing Moderna approval for children. I’m delighted to be able to announce that we now have a double greenlight for the Moderna children vaccine, and this will be for six to 11-year-olds. It will be able to commence as of tomorrow. The important thing is it’s the same formula, it’s half of the adult primary dose, but it’s the same as the adult booster dose. He says Moderna can be found in 4,000 vaccination clinics, GPs, pharmacies around the country. They’re using the comparatively low number of Covid deaths relative to other deaths over the same period to make the argument that people overstated the seriousness of Covid or the need for various interventions, writes Nick Evershed in this really good piece on the ABS Covid deaths data. Have a read here... We are expecting Greg Hunt to address media with the head of the Therapeutic Goods Administration, John Skerritt, at 9.45am. NSW has reported six deaths of people with Covid-19 and 8,931 new cases, with 1,246 people in hospital; of those 69 are in ICU. Victoria has recorded a spike in Covid deaths, losing 17 people to the virus. Authorities say 319 people are in hospital; of those, 22 are in ICU and eight are ventilated. Treasurer Josh Frydenberg, minister for aged care Greg Hunt and minister for aged care services Richard Colbeck have released a joint statement: The Productivity Commission will examine the merits of unpaid leave allocations for all workers who need to care for an older relative or friend and undertake a study of employment models across the aged care sector. As a part of the Morrison Government’s response to the Royal Commission into Aged Care Quality and Safety Final Report, both matters have been referred to the Commission. The examination will provide the Government with a detailed understanding of the economy-wide impacts of both matters. The Productivity Commission will establish a formal inquiry into the potential impact of amending the Fair Work Act 2009 to provide all employees with a minimum entitlement of unpaid carers’ leave, if they are caring for senior Australians living at home. This investigation is in direct response to Recommendation 43 of the Royal Commission, which urged the Government to examine the potential impacts of providing an additional entitlement. Informal carers are a critical element of the care system for older people. Partners, children and other relatives not only provide care but help seniors maintain their social and community connections. It will provide its study into employment models by September 2022. A pilot has died after a light plane crashed into rugged terrain in regional Victoria. Emergency services were called to a plane crash in an area near Grand Ridge Road in Seaview about 7am. Victoria police said the pilot and sole occupant of the plane, who is yet to be identified, died at the scene. Officers will prepare a report for the coroner. Via AAP: People living in Queensland’s south-east have been warned to be on alert for flooding, with up to a metre of rainfall expected in some areas. In the early hours of Wednesday, an emergency alert was sent to residents in the Gympie local government area warning of flash flooding. “Residents are being advised that roads and bridges may be impacted,” Gympie regional council said. The Bureau of Meteorology’s Jonathan How said everyone needed to take care because conditions could become “quite treacherous”. He said heavy rain was expected in south-east Queensland, including Brisbane and the Gold Coast, and would continue for the next few days. “We could see up to a metre of rain for parts of south-east Queensland,” How told the Nine Network. There are emerging reports that masks for school students will be dropped by the end of the month in NSW. Anthony Albanese has been asked about comments made by Labor member Alicia Payne about decriminalising drugs such as ice and cocaine for personal use. Reporter: “Do you agree?” No. “Can you elaborate on that?” No. “Why don’t you agree?” Because I think the current settings are appropriate. Anthony Albanese says he has not been consulted about the decision: But I would expect that that will occur. I know that I’ve been here in Launceston and that the prime minister has been travelling as well. He says he is comfortable with how much information he has been given. The Labor leader has been asked about Ukraine – he says Australia needs to join the sanctions against Russia. The Australian government must be a part of that action. I hope that there’s an announcement later today. And we’d certainly call upon the Australian government to join with our partners and allies in taking this action. Because in order for it to be effective, it has got to be wide. Albanese says the first thing he would do was fix wages in the sector. The first thing we would do is to commit to and make a submission to the Fair Work Commission about wages and conditions in the sector. That’s clearly been identified by the royal commission as a major issue for how you need to attract staff. Anthony Albanese is speaking now from Launceston, attacking the government for not acting on the recommendation of the royal commission into aged care: Older Australians deserve respect. We have an aged care minister here based in Tasmania who retains his job in spite of multiple scandals. It is quite extraordinary. I’m not sure what you have to do to lose your job under the Morrison government. Richard Colbeck is a symbol of the incompetence of this government. We’ve had 800 deaths in aged care alone. I’ve got more on the national security meeting here via AAP: Scott Morrison will convene cabinet’s national security committee as western nations begin to impose the first tranche of sanctions against Russia. Sanctions by the US and UK will target Russian billionaires and financial institutions while Germany put the brakes on a new gas pipeline. The committee is expected to finalise what sanctions and measures Australia will introduce. Australia has ruled out direct military assistance and is supporting Ukraine’s cyber-capability. It has left the door open for technical military support but the prime minister declined to elaborate on what the term meant. But before the committee had even met, the former British ambassador to Russia told the ABC previous economic sanctions have had little effect against the country, only knocking off around 0.2% of GDP each year. The Royal Australian College of General Practitioners has called for a health-first approach to alcohol and other drug use. This comes after reports of the Reason party’s Fiona Patten introducing a private member’s bill to institute a decriminalisation model in Victoria. Instead of a punitive approach via the criminal justice system, Victorian police would instead issue a mandatory notice and referral to drug education or treatment to people possessing a drug of dependence or who are believed to have used a drug of dependence. Compliance with this process would result in no finding of guilt or criminal record. It is similar to the Portuguese model introduced in 2001. Of the more than 32,000 drug arrests in Victoria in the year leading up to September 2021, 80% were for drug use or possession only rather than trafficking large drug quantities. RACGP president Dr Karen Price said saving lives and reducing harm must always come first: Alcohol and other drug use is, primarily, a health issue that should be managed by health professionals, including GPs. Almost everyone knows someone who has been negatively affected by alcohol or other drug use in some form, it cuts across all demographics and all segments of society. So, if you declare a “war on drugs” you are declaring war on someone’s partner, family member, colleague, or friend – it just makes no sense. Instead, we should treat drug and alcohol use as a health issue that, with the right kind of care and support, can be successfully treated and managed. Australians want more than a fat pay packet or free tea and coffee from their job, with a survey showing the importance of meaningfulness. Research by National Australia Bank found that one in five people changed jobs in the past year and almost one in four are considering it. The study surveyed 1,200 people and found that the most popular reason for leaving a job was a lack of purpose or meaning – closely followed by lack of career growth. Younger workers (33%) are more likely to have changed jobs in recent years compared with older employees (18%), particularly in the last 12 months. The biggest turnover was in agribusiness, health services, finance and insurance, retail and property services. The Victorian Greens are set to introduce a bill to state parliament that would legislate a target to eliminate homelessness by 2030. The human rights and housing legislation amendment (ending homelessness) bill 2022, to be tabled by leader Samantha Ratnam on Wednesday, would amend the Housing Act to set a 0% homelessness target by the end of the decade, and ensure the Victorian government created a plan to achieve it. It would also update the Charter of Human Rights and Responsibilities to include housing as a human right. In a statement, Ratnam said: Homelessness is the number one social justice issue facing Victoria right now. And while the Victorian Labor government has made some progress to provide more social housing, they’ve chronically underspent on what we need most: more public homes. In fact, after spending the least of all states across Australia on public and community housing over the years, successive Victorian state governments have directly contributed to a public housing waiting list that now exceeds 100,000 people. And until the government addresses this, more and more Victorians will be forced into housing stress and homelessness. Scott Morrison has announced a snap meeting of cabinet’s national security committee to discuss Australia’s response to Russia. It comes as Russian troops have started to move into rebel-held areas of eastern Ukraine and US President Joe Biden announced the US will impose sanctions on Russia. On Tuesday Vladimir Putin recognised Donetsk and Luhansk as independent territories. Marise Payne says it is “not helpful” to speculate if there will be a war: We have to be absolutely clear that there is a cost to Russia for such behaviour that is severe sanctions that will target a Russian individuals and entities that are responsible for these actions. Payne says there will be an announcement later today about sanctions but she cannot give an indication of what they might be: I don’t think it’s appropriate to forward run sanctions options because what you do if you forward run sanctions options is that you give those whom you intend to sanction a chance to make their own decisions around what losing assets or whatever it might be. Marise Payne says Australia has had sanctions against Russia for years: I understand though, that it’s important to remind Australians that we have existing sanctions in place and they have been imposed since 2014. And we will use whatever tools we have available to us to the greatest degree to ensure that we are applying sanctions in conjunction with our counterparts and that is something which senior members of the government in Australia are discussing amongst colleagues now. Asked if a full-scale invasion is inevitable, Marise Payne says she does not think so. I don’t agree there is no stopping a full-scale invasion. Russia still has, always has the option not to proceed. That’s what we’ve been calling for, that is what likemindeds have been calling for” But we do see an ongoing build-up that is concerning. And a range of activities. None of these things are contributing to security or stability in any way and with our partners we are identifying options that are available to us to address these. We strongly condemned those [actions]. Marise Payne is speaking on Radio National now. She is asked if Australians still in Ukraine are on their own and have to find their own way out: We will continue to provide as much support as we can for Australians … but we are of course limited and we’ve been very clear about that. Good morning everyone, this is Cait Kelly and I will be with you across the morning. It will no doubt be another big day of news – so let’s get into it. Australia is set to implement “swift and severe” sections against Russia over its aggression towards Ukraine, targeting people close to President Vladimir Putin. Foreign affairs minister Marise Payne has been working with international allies to formulate a plan to freeze the wealth of those in Putin’s inner circle. Yesterday the US announced it would impose sanctions that target two Russia-backed breakaway republics in eastern Ukraine. A $500,000 reward is being offered for information about the disappearance of Belgian backpacker Theo Hayez, who vanished on a night out in the northern NSW beach town of Byron Bay nearly three years ago. NSW police will announce the reward today in the popular tourist hamlet, in the hope it will lead to the discovery of Hayez’s whereabouts or disclose the circumstances of his disappearance. The 18-year-old was last seen at about 11pm on 31 May 2019 outside a nightclub on Jonson Street. NSW trains will again hit the tracks with a reduced capacity of 25% as the showdown between the rail union and the government continues, leaving commuters frustrated. Another day of commuter chaos comes after premier Dominic Perrottet ordered staff to investigate the timeline of events surrounding the Sydney train halt. There are still lingering questions about why exactly the rail network was shut down, and how much the government had a hand in it. Transport minister David Elliott has sought to distance himself from the decision, saying yesterday it was the agency’s responsibility to make the call. And torrential downpour has drenched Sydney and other parts of NSW with the rain expected to last throughout the week. A strong upper trough and associated cut-off low will move slowly eastward from central Australia towards the eastern seaboard into tomorrow. Flash floods have impacted many towns and city roads, the SES said yesterday afternoon. Those are the big headlines this morning – welcome to Wednesday’s blog!After months of troop buildups and escalating tensions, Vladimir Putin has made his move by ordering Russian forces over the Ukrainian border into the disputed Donbas region. Amid fears the situation could quickly lead to a calamitous war, attention turned to how Ukraine and the wider world would respond. Julian Borger, Andrew Roth and Shaun Walker lead our coverage of the fast-deteriorating picture (find all our latest coverage here). The Weekly’s cover story this week focuses on the murky world of Swiss banking, after a massive document leak shed light on the secret accounts held by Credit Suisse on behalf of convicted criminals, fraudsters and corrupt politicians. Our spotlight coverage offers just a taste of the huge Suisse secrets investigation, with much more on the website. Mazar-i-Sharif was the most secular and liberal of Afghan cities, but 20 years of corruption and misrule left it ripe for retaking by the Taliban. Ghaith Abdul-Ahad spoke to some of its residents and asked, will anything be different this time? In Culture, Hadley Freeman meets the indefatigable Margaret Atwood and finds the Canadian author as strident as ever in her views. Then, to coincide with a major new London exhibition about neolithic Britain, Charlotte Higgins travels to the Scottish island of Orkney to explore its beautiful, mysterious standing stones. Get the Guardian Weekly delivered to your home addressYou’re not meant to envy your parents, but Christina Patterson couldn’t help envying hers. A Swedish mum with a Mona Lisa smile and love of cakes, coffee and conversation; an English dad with matinee idol good looks and a prestigious Foreign Office career; their love-at-first-sight romance; their glamorous postings to Bangkok and Rome before they settled in Surrey, where Christina and her two older siblings, Tom and Caroline, grew up. They made life seem so easy, as if it were one long holiday and happiness came as naturally as leaves to a tree. As Patterson sorts through cine films and photo albums, the reader feels envious too – of the golden childhood she had, the magic shows put on in the front garden, the summer holidays in Sweden, the “warmth and love and laughter”. Then you realise that she’s remembering all this while clearing the family house. And that she’s having to learn to refer to Tom in the past tense. And that one reluctantly recalled aspect of childhood – the terrible scenes caused by her “skinny, sensitive, beautiful sister” Caroline – feels very ominous. The book is subtitled “a memoir of faith, hope and loss”. More poignantly, it’s a memoir about the loss of faith and hope. The Pattersons were a churchgoing family, but Christina upped the stakes when she joined the youth club in search of a boy and found Jesus instead. In no time she was speaking in tongues and telling her diary that Monty Python’s Life of Brian was unforgivably blasphemous. “You’re beginning to sound like a fanatic,” her mother said, even before she went off to Perugia to convert Muslims. Later she turned down an exciting job in Arezzo because Bev, from the Christian leadership team, got word from God that Christina should do His work in Tooting instead. By then she had graduated from Durham, after Jesus (the Oxford college, that is) turned her down. She’d have liked a boyfriend but only one who also “knew the Lord”. At 26, she was still a virgin. Her faith might have endured but for her constant struggles with ill health. First it was her acne, which Roaccutane made worse. Then she was diagnosed with lupus. Then polyarthralgia, “which really just means an awful lot of pain”. At times she had to use a wheelchair. Therapy helped; reiki and acupuncture too. But then she’d be laid low again. Later came breast cancer and a spectacularly unpleasant surgeon. Fellow Christians told her that God was leading her through the wilderness for her own good. It’s a glorious moment in the narrative when she finally says, “Fuck off, God. Go and inflict your poisonous blows on somebody else.” It’s not only she who has been in pain. Her sister Caroline experiences delusions and spends time in a mental hospital with schizophrenia. She recovers but despite a sweet demeanour is never deemed well enough (in the eyes of insensitive employers) to hold down a job. Tom struggles too, quitting his job as an actuary for less stressful work as a gardener. His solace is wine and music. Caroline’s is an obsession with the Romanovs and, late on in her short life, a boyfriend. Christina, by comparison, is a success story: publicity assistant at Faber, director of the Poetry Society, editor and columnist at the Independent. She’s attractive, vibrant, funny, loves parties and has lots of good friends. Yet as a childless woman who’s often ill and who has never found the kind of love her parents did, she feels a failure. Don’t despair, you want to tell her, things will work out. But as she faces a mastectomy in the final 50 pages, you start to wonder if they ever will. The book journeys to dark places – Four Funerals and a Wedding might have been the title – but it’s too honest and well written to be dispiriting. Christina’s search to understand what happened to Caroline is especially moving – at one point she comes across the words Caroline had written in a page (later sticky-taped over) of an old diary: “Let Christina die this year of cancer.” That might have killed off any compassion she felt. But she perseveres in her quest to understand . Back in the days of their Jesus worship, a fellow zealot told Christina that God had laid a curse on the Patterson family. The story of the book is how she came to see what rubbish that was – that she wasn’t being punished for some nameless sin; that bad things can happen to good people; and that human love is what counts, not subservience to a sadist in the sky. • Outside, the Sky Is Blue is published by Headline (£16.99). To support the Guardian and the Observer buy a copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.A barista course spruiked by the national disability insurance scheme and for which a company pocketed nearly $1m from the federal government lacked the most basic equipment, an inquiry has been told. Over a three-day hearing this week, the disability royal commission is investigating the troubled Disability Employment Services program, a $1.4bn a year federal government scheme that pays companies and non-profits to get hundreds of thousands of people with disability into work. On Wednesday, counsel assisting the commission, Kate Eastman SC, raised the case of BusyBeans, a barista training course for people with disability run by health services company Rehab Management and a connected employment service provider, AimBig. Despite a significant flow of taxpayer funds, the inquiry heard allegations at least one of the several BusyBeans training centres had “no established policies, procedures, safety measures or proper facilities to train the participants”. It also heard claims participants were referred to the training from its other employment services program, likely triggering a payment from the government for getting the person into work or training. Representatives from AimBig, Rehab Management and their holding company, Arriba Group, are yet to respond and will give evidence later this week. Mzia* is a former jobseeker in the disability employment services program who lives with ADHD. She had been working in retail since she was 14, and had experience as a barista, but no formal qualifications. She told the royal commission she found a job advertisement for a barista trainer and asked her AimBig consultant for help applying, only to learn the BusyBeans program was effectively run by the same company. Despite saying she found the job herself, she said she was asked to sign documents saying her employment consultant had found her the position. Mzia said she had high hopes for the new job, but these were not matched by the reality. Mzia claimed on her first day in May, 2019, she arrived to find the only equipment was a home coffee machine and a bottle of long life milk. She alleged that when she complained about the provisions, she was initially given a Coles petrol voucher to buy “proper milk, a jug and bucket”, before being told to buy the equipment herself, and she would be reimbursed. She says she felt forced to obtain an advance Centrelink payment to buy some of the equipment necessary for her work and there was no induction or training on the first day. She alleges she had to create the entire training program from scratch. “I thought it would be a lot more set up, a lot more supplies, like basic requirements,” she said. Throughout this period, Mzia was still receiving job advice from her AimBig consultant, which she believed was a “conflict of interest”. She says she was asked to assess AimBig’s jobseekers to see if they were suitable for BusyBeans. The inquiry heard Mzia’s own employment consultant would put participants from the disability employment services forward for BusyBeans. “Sometimes you decided that the participants [the consultant] put forward for the program were not suitable, or there was not enough space in the program, but you felt that [the consultant] was bullying and intimidating you,” Eastman said, summarising her statement to the inquiry. The inquiry heard the program began in March 2019 and had 167 paid participants and 38 unpaid work experience participants a year later, when it was suspended due to Covid. The inquiry heard AimBig received $874,832 in payments from the federal government for BusyBeans participants. Another company, TLH, received $111,000 in wage subsidies from AimBig as part of the program, the hearing was told. Mzia said she was never given training specific to working with people with disability or an adequate position description. She resigned in March 2020 after a period of sick leave due to the stress of the job between October 2019 and January 2020. She had been initially classified as having a “benchmark” of working 15 hours per week due to her disability, but had been working 30 hours a week with BusyBeans, initially at $25 an hour, though this was later increased to $30 per hour. Mzia said she started trying to find her students employment in hospitality, telling the commission: “I felt I had to do something because no one else was helping the participants.” Participants were supposed to be making coffee for Rehab Management staff, but the inquiry heard there were not enough employees so the jobseekers would be “stuck in the office five hours a day, three days a week, just standing in the front of the Breville machine”. Eastman said the inquiry would examine whether “AimBig provided adequate and appropriate post placement support to Mzia” and whether there was a conflict between its role as her employment consultant and her employer, among other issues. Last year, Guardian Australia revealed a damning consultants’ report that discovered myriad problems with the disability employment services program, including that providers were funnelling participants into courses rather than work in order to claim bonus payments. The inquiry continues. Mzia* is a pseudonym provided by the royal commission Do you have a story? luke.henriques-gomes@theguardian.comDesign sometimes feels like a constant search for a better, brighter way to live life. A quest for new and innovative alternatives to the status quo. But, increasingly, is is the past that is presenting solutions. Two of this month’s stories look at revival rather than invention. Industrial designer Souhaib Ghanmi is investigating new ways to use animal bone. Currently categorised as a waste product of animal farming, this traditional material can also be used as a electrical and thermal insulator that’s also biodegradable. A great alternative to plastic. The traditional water storage solutions of India are being similarly reappraised. Renovating historical wells and tanks may combat climate change and provide the solution to current water shortages. It looks like we’re finally learning, new isn’t always better. Innovative new uses for bone “Plastic is one of the world’s biggest pollutants,” says Swiss Tunisian industrial designer Souhaib Ghanmi. “So I was interested in finding a potential substitute. In the past, bone was used as an equivalent to plastic, so it seems obvious to return to it.” His father came from a family who worked with cattle and Ghanmi had grown up watching his uncle use cow bones to make knife handles. A far better fate for a slaughterhouse byproduct than incineration. “Bone is not exploited enough, in spite of its numerous properties. It’s an electrical and thermal insulator – and it’s biodegradable.” Ghanmi’s recycling research took beautiful shape for his diploma project, Elos, created during his time at the École cantonale d’art de Lausanne. The Elos range of light switches and plug sockets are made with bone powder, and the plug socket design is inspired by the articulated action of the femur bone rotating in the hip socket. This pivoting creation not only looks elegant, but the added flexibility stops cables stretching and fraying. “I’m questioning the use of bones which are currently just causing pollution when they’re burned,” explains Ghanmi. “We should make maximum use of these animals.” Celebrating Tatty Devine A new exhibition, Misshapes, celebrates the work of British jewellery label Tatty Devine. Next month, Hove Museum &amp; Art Gallery will host the touring retrospective of work by Harriet Vine and Rosie Wolfenden, whose laser-cut acrylic necklaces have been style staples since they started their label in 2001. Over the years, Tatty Devine has made eclectic pendants and earrings in the shape of zips, lobsters, melon slices, typewriters and almost anything else you can think of. The aesthetic is fun but powerful, with a feminist slant. The label tends to collaborate with organisations such as the Fawcett Society and Young Women’s Trust, rather than fashion labels. Vine and Wolfenden met and clicked while studying at Chelsea College of Art &amp; Design and then, in 1999, after graduation, Wolfenden was working at a vintage clothes shop when a browsing Vogue stylist asked where she got her headband. Wolfenden said it was from her own collection – and then had to design and make a collection, together with Vine, over the weekend when the stylist asked to see her work. This started a long collaboration with British Vogue, which frequently featured their accessories. A Tatty Devine cuff appeared on the magazine’s millennium cover, worn by Erin O’Connor. Misshapes will feature over 100 pieces from the 23 years of Tatty Devine, from leather cuffs to their most popular necklaces. Hedley Swain of Royal Pavilion &amp; Museums Trust said: “We are so thrilled to have Tatty Devine at Hove Museum. Its work matches Brighton and Hove style beautifully. We want to develop the museum as the local home for creativity and making, so this exhibition is a perfect match.” Misshapes is at Hove Museum from 5 March Looking for answers in the past While modernisation is often seen as a solution to infrastructure problems, the World Monuments Fund (WMF) is looking into India’s ingenious traditional water storage systems to see whether renovations could be a better answer to water access issues. WMF is an independent organisation dedicated to preserving cultural heritage in diverse communities around the world, and the historic water capture methods in India are unique. Saving everything from monsoon deluges to agricultural runoff was achieved through sophisticated reservoirs, tanks and ponds. Systems were often particular to each region, as drought and flood conditions varied so much. Some structures, such as jhalaras and bawaris, look as if they’re designed by Escher. Many have fallen into disrepair. During the Empire, the British replaced the local authorities with a pan-Indian, centrally organised water system. This was based on land ownership, rather than community needs, and took control of the water supply out of the hands of women who had collected and overseen these domestic arrangements. The WMF will assess whether the traditional structures, such as the Taj Bawdi water tank in Bijapur, can be renovated to fulfil local needs once more. “As climate change intensifies around the world, impacting our built environment, WMF India is committed to working with communities to develop solutions,” says Amita Baig, WMF India executive director. “We look forward to developing this important initiative aimed at increasing access to clean water for communities across India.” Sign up for the monthly Design Review newsletter London’s Collect fair celebrates the best of craft Collect, the Crafts Council’s fair, takes place at London’s Somerset House this week. As the Crafts Council celebrates its 50th anniversary, Collect consolidates its reputation as one of the leading international fairs for living makers. After going online for the last two years, 2022 promises some spectacles to see in person, such as Fung+Bedford’s glorious origami sculptures, as well as talks and events with textile artist Alice Kettle and Loewe Foundation Craft Prize finalists including jeweller Edu Tarin, embroidery expert Celia Pym and sculptor David Corvalán. Collect will also feature new artists, such as Amanda McCavour who is presenting a cascade of embroidered poppies. Jemma Gowland’s feminist porcelain figurines and Caron Penney’s tapestries will also be on show. The youngest exhibitor Jasmine Linington, showing with Craft Scotland, makes sustainable seaweed fibre textile pieces. “We’re delighted to be returning to a physical fair at Somerset House,’’ says fair director Isobel Dennis. “It’s an exceptional environment for contemporary craft.” The Collect Fair takes place 25-27 February at Somerset House and on Artsy.net until 6 March Design community contributes to LBGTQ+ pop-up When a new pop-up LBGTQ+ community centre opened in London last December, it was with an interior that was not only welcoming but extremely chic. The former shop in Southwark had been designed by queer architect Martha Rawlinson and fitted out by a crew of LBGTQ+ builders but, when it came to furniture, the team wanted to be sustainable while creating a welcoming environment. The centre was, after all, a sober sanctuary, a place for groups combating isolation in the queer community, bringing different generations together in a friendly setting and offering LGBTQ+-specific services, such as sexual health testing and mental health support. Communications agency Zetteler put out a call to the design industry and received an overwhelming response. Furniture maker Benchmark donated 10 bespoke café tables in solid oak. Eames chairs arrived from The Office Group and Anglepoise gave 10 lamps. Universal Design Studio provided 15 of Vitra’s colourful Tip Ton chairs. Many others gave very generously. “We wanted the space to be bright and homely, but to have as little impact on the planet as possible,” says Sarah Moore, volunteer director of the centre. “We wrote a sustainability statement along with our furniture call-out, and Zetteler’s clients and contacts helped us source the most amazing items.” The Southwark centre is a six-month pilot but there are hopes this will become a permanent project. The genius of Gérald Genta The watch industry is big business, but it is not one built on innovation. The famous Swiss brands release new watches on a weekly basis, but such newness typically amounts to little more than a different coloured dial or slightly smaller case. There was one freelance watch designer, though, who made innovation his business. Gérald Genta considered himself an artist before he considered himself a watch designer – he is said to have sketched out 100,000 ideas in his lifetime, and delighted in the nickname “the Picasso of watchmaking”. It’s no exaggeration to say some of Genta’s most celebrated designs from the mid-70s – the octagonal-shaped Royal Oak, for the brand Audemars Piguet; the steel Nautilus for Patek Philippe, the first “luxury sports watch” – remain cornerstones of those brand’s businesses today. Genta died in 2011 and his estate is overseen by Evelyne Genta, his widow, whose diplomatic day job has the unimprovable title of Ambassador of the Principality of Monaco to the Court of St James’s to the United Kingdom. There will be a lot of Genta activity this year, including an exhibition. It is also the 50th anniversary of his Royal Oak, something Audemars Piguet will be making noise about. First up, Evelyne is auctioning off a selection of her husband’s remarkable freehand paintings; first at Sotheby’s in Geneva until February 24, then Hong Kong in March and New York in April. In May, Genta’s own personal Royal Oak will go under the hammer. That has a pre-sale estimate of $300,000 to $500,000. Pictures of watches aren’t for everyone but we urge you to at least a look at Sotheby’s Gérald Genta: Icon of Time, if only to transport yourself back to a time of true watchmaking craftsmanship, an era before telling the time was just another app on the now ubiquitous Apple Watch.Neil Jenkins has cited criticism, both within the camp and from external sources, as a motivating factor for the Wales captain, Dan Biggar, as he led the team to a much-needed victory against Scotland which revived their defence of the Six Nations title. Biggar drop-kicked his team to a 20-17 win in Cardiff in their last match after a crescendo of criticism ensued from the champions’ crushing opening defeat by Ireland the week before. When asked to pinpoint some of the attributes that have contributed to Biggar’s longevity at the highest level in the buildup to the match against England at Twickenham this weekend, Jenkins was refreshingly forthright. “Sometimes you can use that as fuel,” the Wales kicking coach and former fly-half said of the judgments passed on the team. “No doubt Dan will use that to his advantage.” Jenkins’s reply was unusual in that athletes and coaches routinely roll out platitudes in modern press conferences centred on “processes” and “controllables”. The aim is to be like Teflon, repelling the outside world from the sanctimony of the inner circle. But after the 29-7 defeat in Dublin, the clamour beyond the gate filtered through. Much of the backlash focused on the apparent weakness of the tight five, particularly their inability to offer a threat while carrying. Speaking on the BBC’s Six Nations Special podcast, Sam Warburton, the former grand slam-winning captain,, was clear in his damnation. “Wales don’t have that front five who can carry and break the gainline,” he said. Of course the opposition played a role but Wales’s tight five made three more carries and nine more metres in Cardiff than they achieved in Dublin. They also secured clean ball from all 12 of their lineout throws with the tighthead Tomas Francis scoring from the back of a rolling maul. “It wasn’t the criticism from outside [that spurred the team on], it was criticism from ourselves as a pack,” was Francis’s view. “We hadn’t turned up [against Ireland]. You just have to get the mindset right. Everyone in the squad is a good player. It’s about trying to get that cohesion as a pack and get in the game.” Francis and Jenkins are aware of the cultural significance whenever Wales face England at Twickenham. But they have lost each of their past five games in south-west London. Their last win at the ground came in 2015, ending England’s run at their own World Cup at the group stage. “That was one of the best days of my career,” Francis said of his fourth international appearance. If they are to relive that glorious day, Wales will need to match England’s mongrel. The set-piece and maul look potent but questions remain at midfield. Jenkins was non‑committal about who might fill that channel but acknowledged that they would have a difficult job keeping Manu Tuilagi quiet. The Sale centre looks primed to start and will cause havoc if he gets front-foot ball from Marcus Smith inside him. This is why the performances of Francis and his meatier compatriots will be crucial. They will be bolstered by the likely return of Taulupe Faletau in the back row but, without ascendancy at the front line, the rest of the team may fold. “Whoever plays for Wales has to have the mindset that you’re going to go and dominate,” Francis said. “[England] will be a great test. They have great forwards.” He knows many of them well and has roots in England. Francis was born in York, attended the University of Leeds and represented Doncaster Knights, London Scottish and Exeter Chiefs before joining Ospreys last year. He referenced Ellis Genge’s fondness for “mind games” in the scrum and commended Joe Marler’s “resurgence”. He also expressed his sympathy for his old club-mate in Devon, Luke Cowan-Dickie, whose mistake under the high ball proved decisive in England’s loss at Murrayfield. Not that he will be concerned with that this week. As Jenkins stressed “you have to be incredibly physical” when playing at Twickenham. Having heard as much criticism as they can tolerate, Wales have all the fuel they need.Britain will stop Russia selling sovereign debt in London as part of a “very serious package” of sanctions that will “inflict pain” on Vladimir Putin, Liz Truss has said. As the Conservative party came under increasing pressure to sever links with wealthy Russian donors, the foreign secretary announced that a ban on the sale of sovereign debt, issued as bonds by governments in foreign currencies to finance growth and development, was part of a package of measures announced after Putin deployed military forces into two territories in eastern Ukraine on Tuesday. “We’ve been very clear that we’re going to limit Russian access to British markets,” Truss told Sky News. “We’re going to stop the Russian government with raising sovereign debt in the United Kingdom. “There will be even more tough sanctions on key oligarchs, on key organisations in Russia, limiting Russia’s access to the financial markets, if there is a full-scale invasion of Ukraine.” The prime minister and the Treasury had called in finance bosses and regulators to discuss how to ensure recently announced sanctions against Russia were effective, the BBC reported. In order to limit sovereign debt sales in London, Britain would need additional legislation, according to western officials. Boris Johnson revealed a package of asset freezes on five Russian banks and three wealthy people on Tuesday but faced criticism from Conservative MPs for not going further. Truss said the government was taking an “escalatory approach” with international allies, adding that she believed Putin was “hell-bent” on a full-scale invasion of Ukraine, including the capital, Kyiv. “We will agree a further package in the event, which we think is highly likely, of a full-scale invasion into Ukraine,” she told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. “We don’t want to be in the situation … where we’ve got nothing left in the locker. She added: “Nothing is off the table in terms of who we’re targeting.” The former foreign secretary Jeremy Hunt told the Today programme that if the UK was to avoid “being two steps behind in the diplomatic chess game” it had to take Putin by surprise. “The most important is to do sanctions – economic and financial sanctions – that are tough enough and last long enough to reduce the ability of the Russian state to finance the Russian military. And that means we have got to be prepared to dig in for the long term.” The Conservative party is also coming under increasing pressure to break links to Russian oligarchs who have donated more than £2m to the party. On Wednesday the shadow foreign secretary, David Lammy, said there was “too much connection between Russian oligarchs” and donations to the Conservative party. “Give it back [and] send a message that we’re serious,” Lammy told Kay Burley on Sky News. “It sends a statement. If the money is Russian-linked, if there’s any suggestion that some of it has come from oligarchs who might be close to Putin – give the money back.” But Truss told Today that the accusation the UK was not tougher on Russia because the Conservative party had taken donations from people close to the Putin regime was “completely wrong”. Asked by Burley on Sky News if the party would be returning the donations, Truss avoided the question and said all donations were made by British citizens and were properly declared. Pushed on whether the oligarch Roman Abramovich was facing sanctions, as Johnson stated in parliament, Truss said the prime minister “misspoke” and the record would be corrected. Asked whether the Champions League final – due to be held in St Petersburg on 10 June – should go ahead in Russia in light of the crisis in Ukraine, Truss said: “I’m very clear it shouldn’t be.”For a while, the four teenage boys, Alex, Filmon, Osman and Mulue, did a reasonably good job of looking after each other. Filmon and Mulue had met in Eritrea before they embarked on their long, dangerous journey to Britain; the others became friends en route or in London, in a park near a Home Office registration centre for unaccompanied child refugees. Their similar backgrounds drew them together, as did the shared experience of travelling 3,300 miles in search of safety. Mulue and Alex had both spent time in foster care before moving into independent accommodation; Osman and Filmon were living in a hostel in north London. They had all become used to surviving without parents, instead leaning on each other for support. All of them were also struggling with the unsettling reality of their precarious new lives, which was so different from the expectations they had clung to during their traumatic journeys. They battled against homesickness. Sometimes they would try to ward it off by cooking meals together, but having left home aged 13 or 14, their skills were basic. “Once Filmon got very hungry during the night and wanted some food. He had no idea how to cook, and neither did I, so we just boiled potatoes with salt and ate together,” another friend, Abel (not his real name), remembers. Sometimes they danced together. The young friends worried about each other, and tried to ensure they all remained on the straight and narrow – getting cross if they thought one of their group was drinking too much or behaving badly. Osman, who was Muslim, invited his friends to his house to celebrate Easter because they were Orthodox Eritrean Christians. “He did this for us, even though he didn’t celebrate Easter. I remember thinking how kind this was,” Abel said, in an inquest statement. “We all washed our clothes and dressed in some of Osman’s clothes. I still have some of Osman’s clothes now, which makes me very sad to think about.” But in the end, the stress of their experiences and the lack of consistent support in the UK proved too much. In the space of 16 months, all four of the boys killed themselves: first in November 2017, Filmon Yemane, 18; then a couple of weeks later, Alexander Tekle, 18; then in May 2018, Osman Ahmed Nur, 19; and finally, in February 2019, Mulubrhane Medhane Kfleyosus (Mulue), 19. Their deaths shone a spotlight on the systems Britain has in place for supporting vulnerable child refugees. A series of inquests, the last of which concluded last month, drew critical conclusions about failings in the care that the state provided to a group of boys who desperately needed help. Robel, 17, knew all four boys. He is also a refugee from Eritrea; the quartet treated him like their younger brother. He wants them to be remembered, he tells me, when we meet in a west London cafe – and he hopes their deaths will trigger change. Robel (who has asked for his full name not to be printed) was only 12 when he left his family in Eritrea. Like his four friends, he was fleeing Eritrea’s poverty, human rights abuses and its harsh conscription, which begins at 18 and is open-ended – it usually lasts for between five and 10 years, but can last up to 20. He met Alex at the refugee encampment in Calais; the older boy immediately took him under his wing. Robel keeps a photograph of the two of them eating together in a tent in the camp, both looking strikingly young. “He was kind to me. He teased me a bit, because he was three years older, but he was quite small too, a kid, like all of us,” Robel remembers. They spent an afternoon playing football with other teenagers near the slum-like settlement on the town’s outskirts. Neither of them was very good. “We lost, but we had a really good time. He made jokes that would make everyone laugh. He was a really caring person.” Alex’s father, Tecle Tesfamichel, told the inquest the same thing about his son, describing by phone how, when his son watched him work at his carpentry job, he would remind his father to wear gloves so he didn’t injure himself. Alex didn’t much like maths, but was good at geography; as a child he had dreamed of becoming a professional cyclist. Tecle knew that Alex’s journey to the UK had been really difficult, but also that his son had shielded his family from the most disturbing details. “When he was living in a tent [in France] he didn’t have enough food or warm clothing, and it was freezing. During one conversation he told me he had shaved his head because he had caught head lice … But he would tell us not to worry, that once he had got his papers and found a job, he would send money to help and support us.” Robel bumped into Alex again after they had both managed to make their way to London (Alex in a refrigerated lorry, Robel in the back of a van), and was delighted, and relieved, to see a familiar face. They would meet to play table football and listen to music together after school at a Refugee Council support group. Later Robel was introduced to Mulue, so they could attend the Eritrean Orthodox church together. He remembers Mulue sticking his head out of the window and throwing his keys down, so Robel could come up and join him; Robel was impressed by how relaxed and friendly he was. At that time Robel was being looked after by foster carers and had no pocket money, so was always hungry after school. “Mulue used to look after me; he’d buy me chicken wings,” he remembers. Robel met Filmon only a few times, in the park near the Home Office, but knew Osman better. Osman borrowed his hat, a black woollen number decorated with a star, and liked it. “I gave it to him.” He remembers that his friends were worried about Osman, who had become increasingly paranoid and was scared by the voices he heard in his head. “I didn’t feel I could ask him if he was OK; I didn’t know him well enough to talk to him about it,” he says. The four boys didn’t often talk about their experiences on their journeys, but details that came out at the inquests reveal some of their horrific ordeals: people traffickers attempting to kidnap them to sell them on, routine violence from rival smuggling gangs, travelling with 150 people in the back of one lorry, friends drowning in the Mediterranean, experiencing torture in a migrant holding camp in Libya, going for 11 days without food, contracting malaria, along with constant thirst and hunger. After surviving all this came the disappointment of arriving in the UK. “I had an idea we would come to a really good place, where people have everything,” Robel says, laughing at his naivety. “But you arrive here and it’s not what you imagined, and you can’t accept that. You don’t have a home. You’re worried about your family. It’s really difficult.” Abel echoed the point in the statement he gave at Alex’s inquest. “When we were travelling from Eritrea to the UK, we thought the UK was like heaven. We thought everything would be OK once we got here.” Swedish research suggests the risk of suicide among unaccompanied child refugees is nine times that of children of the same age in the Swedish population. There is no equivalent research in the UK, but campaigners are aware of at least 13 deaths of teenage refugees in the past five years. Most of them have been Eritrean, possibly because Eritreans and Ethiopians have together recently made up the largest nationality group of unaccompanied minors to arrive in the UK. About 80% of Eritrean asylum claims are granted – a reflection of the seriousness of the threats they face at home. But it takes, on average, 550 days for applications to be approved – a period of uncertainty that leads to heightened stress. The circumstances of each of the boys’ deaths are very different, but all fell through the cracks of the system, and the coroners acknowledged that none of them received the full care and attention they should have. A coroner noted that staff at the sheltered housing where Filmon was living were aware that his condition was deteriorating, but failed to escalate concerns about him being suicidal to the correct teams. When he died, Osman, who was learning English and training to be a carpenter, was known to be worried about whether his refugee status was going to be revoked. He had started to self-medicate with alcohol and cannabis, and the coroner found he had not received the support he should have done when he described feeling suicidal. The coroner at Mulue’s inquest said the seriousness of his mental health issues had not been recognised. Alex’s inquest concluded that he had wrongly been assessed as being an adult by Home Office staff. As a result, rather than being sent to live with a foster family, he was moved to accommodation for adult asylum seekers, where he was violently assaulted and began drinking heavily. The mistake was rectified but even then overworked social workers struggled to get him the help he urgently needed. His inquest noted that this mistake contributed to the “destructive spiral” that led to his death. Robel says there was a key difference between the way he and his four, now dead, friends were cared for on arrival in the UK. Robel, who was 13 when he arrived, was allocated foster parents. They kept a close eye on what he was doing – if on a school night he wanted to stay out late with his Eritrean friends, they would bombard him with anxious text messages, instructing him to come home immediately. If he ignored them, they said he wouldn’t be allowed to play football in the Sunday league. “They would tell the coach to keep me on the bench. I really loved football,” he says. He resented it at the time, but now recognises how important it was to be treated as a child who needed boundaries and support like any other. “I was being annoying, but they made me come back on time and go to school. It would have been helpful for the others to have someone like that in their lives.” Last year dozens of charities called on the government to make a string of policy changes to support young refugees, after these deaths and a number of others among teenage asylum seekers who fled persecution. But, given funding cuts to local authorities and the government’s determination to appear tough on asylum seekers, there is a weary recognition in the refugee sector that sweeping change looks unlikely. Campaigners would like the Home Office to be more sensitive in the way that age assessments are conducted on teenage asylum seekers when they arrive in the UK. Child refugee campaigners say the well-documented culture of disbelief within the Home Office means officials often launch age assessments with the premise “that this kid’s telling a lie, so we should work on the assumption that they’re probably an adult”. In December, the chief inspector of prisons expressed serious concerns about how staff at the Home Office reception facilities in Dover attempted to establish the age of new arrivals without professional interpreters. “We observed staff attempting to establish ages by use of hand signals,” he wrote. Instead the Home Office is planning to take an even tougher line on age assessments of refugees. In December the home secretary, Priti Patel, said the nationality and borders bill would put an end to the “appalling abuse” of “grown adult men masquerading as children” to claim asylum, and said new funding would be given to enable checks on teeth, fusion of bones in the wrist and MRI imaging to “stop these abuses”. Campaigners want child refugees to be housed away from hostels, and to get continued care when they turn 18 because, often, they are not yet equipped to live independent adult lives and the drop-off in support can be catastrophic. Better mental health provision should be given in recognition of the unimaginably difficult experiences they have endured during their journeys. Benny Hunter, a campaigner for migrant and refugee rights, met Alex as a volunteer refugee worker in Calais, and tried for months to get him help. He remembers that some social workers were very impressive, but says: “The logic of the hostile environment is so entrenched that some social workers feel it is their job to protect overstretched services rather than protect children from harm.” In a statement, the Home Office acknowledged that “unprecedented pressure” on asylum accommodation means that young refugees are being housed in hotels and hostels. It added: “We take the welfare of unaccompanied asylum-seeking children extremely seriously. These incidents are absolutely tragic, and our thoughts go out to all of their families.” But it is at the grassroots level that some positive action has stemmed from the boys’ deaths. Dehab Woldu, who has worked with child refugees for 20 years, met Alex and Mulue through her work, and liked them both. Mulue was shy and reserved with her initially, but came to treat her as a mother figure, delighted to find someone he could talk to freely in Tigrinya (the main language spoken in Eritrea). “He was ambitious, he wanted to learn, he talked about his education. I felt he was someone who was going to be OK here,” she says. She was equally fond of Alex. “I’d say: ‘Be a good boy, concentrate on your education.’ And he’d say: ‘Yes, I’ll make you proud!’ He was a really pleasant, likable young boy.” She remembers too the surge of frustration as she prepared food for one of the memorial services. “I thought: ‘What’s the point of doing the shopping for the wake if I can’t even help them before they die?’” she says. So she rallied the support of the older Eritrean community and, with Hunter, set up the Da’aro Youth project in south London. Every week, dozens of teenagers who have arrived from Eritrea (mostly boys, but a few girls) meet to eat a hot meal and play table football and three-a-side football. “I was very distressed by the deaths. I couldn’t sleep. We wanted to draw a line, and say this cannot be allowed to happen again,” Woldu says. She and a team of adult colleagues and volunteers are present to help teenagers discuss their asylum problems and college applications. Sometimes they help teenagers who have become homeless, or whose ages have been disputed by the Home Office, or who need extra mental health support. “The three hours every week is very useful. It gives them confidence. They leave the club with a swagger they don’t have when they arrive.” The group has been a huge success locally, but it’s clear that a national support programme is needed. Last September, Robel was horrified to discover another Eritrean teenager he had met, Ermias Brhane, 19, had killed himself, the fifth acquaintance to do so. “We’d played football together a few weeks earlier. I laughed when he turned up in jeans, and asked: ‘How are you going to play football dressed like that?’ That night I noticed he spent a long time sitting by himself, in deep thought. I remember an older man asking me if he was OK; I said I didn’t know. I should have asked him what the matter was. Maybe I could have helped,” he says, adding that the deaths make him feel sad and angry. “I don’t want to see this happen again.” There was no family at the one-hour inquest held into Ermias’s death in December. “These kids are just dying and no one is asking why or even how many,” Hunter says. “It’s horrendous.” In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.orgAmerican cowboy James Abbott McNeill Whistler and his flame-haired Irish lover Joanna Hiffernan go on a wild rampage and shoot the art world of Victorian Britain to bits in this hugely enjoyable artistic and biographical romp. It’s such a well-told story it will doubtless inspire a so-so film coming to a streaming service near you soon. Don’t wait for that; go to the Royal Academy and enjoy a life-affirming adventure with the mothers and fathers of modern art. To appreciate how new and subversive the double act of Hiffernan and Whistler were in 1860s London you have to realise how clogged Victorian art was. A wall of it suffices to set the airless scene. Dante Gabriel Rossetti’s Annunciation is claustrophobic, a narrow picture of a small room where the figures are bled of life in their pseudo-medieval aesthetic prison. Then you look at the opposite wall and a raw, boozy, sexual slice of real life startles you awake. Whistler’s painting Wapping is disorientating. We are in London’s docklands in the early 1860s. Charles Dickens had recently published Great Expectations. We picture Victorian London through a Dickensian gothic fog – but Wapping depicts it with harsh yet sensual realism. This is a modern city, where a group of bohemian types hang out at a riverside bar overlooking a grey and green vista of tangled sailing boats and clippers. In the middle of the party, Hiffernan throws back her hair. It’s as if she and Whistler think they are in the free and easy world of the Paris avant garde. That was where Whistler learned to see, when he lived in Paris in the 1850s and got to know such radical observers as Gustave Courbet, Édouard Manet and Charles Baudelaire, whose essay The Painter of Modern Life was published when Whistler was working on Wapping. The creamy palette and ironic accepting eye he brings to a modern moment by the Thames translates the feeling of Manet’s masterpieces Le Déjeuner sur l’Herbe and Olympia to London. All the fun of the French is transplanted to the England of Gladstone and Disraeli. What do we know of Hiffernan outside Whistler’s art? Born in Limerick in 1843, she was 17 when she met the dandified artist. She didn’t have much formal education but her reading was wide and her opinions astute, said contemporaries: she may have been an aspiring artist as well as model. The three scandalous celebrity paintings Whistler did of Hiffernan wearing a long white dress are all brought together here and they can be seen as a true collaboration. This is modelling as performance art. The pure white dress, you see, is a joke. There’s nothing virginal about Hiffernan in Whistler’s 1862 icon Symphony in White, No 1. She stands above you confidently, and Whistler makes the supposedly modest dress suggest her nakedness underneath. That’s because she is standing on a bearskin rug whose soft fur leads your eyes to the rim of the dress, to picture her naked feet nestling in it – a traditional image of sensuality in sculpture that goes back to Renaissance images of the triumphant David with his foot in Goliath’s hair. The painting’s first audience may not have been prepared to imagine this but were sufficiently shocked by Hiffernan’s loose red hair and relaxed manner. It flaunts a love all too ready to speak its name. Whistler wittily parodies the pre-Raphaelites with their “muses” and fetishistic allusions to repressed desire. He might as well have written on the canvas: “I’m sleeping with her.” The second Symphony in White shows her in a double image: she poses elegantly against a fireplace like a living decoration for the stylish bourgeois home – Japanese fan and all – yet we see her face, turned from us, meditating ambiguously in the mantlepiece mirror. This is a deepening effect Whistler gets from Velázquez’s Rokeby Venus. Whistler and Hiffernan set out for Madrid to study Velázquez together but got distracted when they found a love nest in the Pyrenees. Whistler watches Hiffernan naked in the studio in an unfinished scene. He shows her sleeping, and contemplating glistening Chinese porcelain while posing in a kimono. He imagines her as a woman from the “floating world”. His mother – as in Whistler’s Mother – urged him to make an “honest woman” of Hiffernan: his response was not to marry but to make a will in which he left her everything. In the event she died before him, in her mid-40s in 1886. The story this show tells, however, climaxes at Trouville in Normandy where they stayed with Courbet in autumn 1865. Eating seafood in a half-empty hotel, painting on the beach, listening to Hiffernan sing Irish songs at twilight – Courbet remembered it as a romantic time. This part of the story really would make a great little film, if François Truffaut was still around to direct it. Courbet painted Hiffernan, too. He kept the original with him always, painting replicas to sell. But which of the three versions on show is his treasured possession? It has to be Jo, the Beautiful Irish Girl from the Nationalmuseum, Stockholm, with its nostalgic passion. There are rumours it all went further: that Hiffernan might even have been the model for Courbet’s outrageous painting The Origin of the World. But the curators haven’t found any evidence that she was in Paris. Besides, Courbet was struck by her red hair. As a ginger, I can point out that she would also have had red pubic hair, which the model for The Origin of the World didn’t. In fact, the Jo Hiffernan who haunts this exhibition is never objectified, never a piece of artist’s meat. It’s a surprisingly tender love story that also brings to life one of the most revolutionary moments in the story of art, when cobwebs of hypocrisy and pretension were swept away by life itself. Whistler’s Woman in White: Joanna Hiffernan is at the Royal Academy, London, 26 February to 22 MayHere is a luxuriously sleazy-sentimental melodrama about the Mumbai underworld, directed with gusto by Sanjay Leela Bhansali, the powerhouse Bollywood film-maker who 20 years ago had a Bafta nomination for his mighty epic Devdas. It is an adaptation from a tale in the true-crime reportage bestseller Mafia Queens of Mumbai by Hussain Zaidi: the story of Gangubai Kathiawadi, who in the 60s was tricked and trafficked into prostitution in Mumbai’s Kamathipura red-light zone, but through her survivor’s ruthlessness and shrewd cultivation of political connections rose to become an underworld madam involved in drugs and violent crime. She then parlayed this gangland prestige into a media profile, campaigning for sex workers’ rights, even – according to legend – meeting to discuss these with India’s first prime minister Nehru himself. Alia Bhatt plays Gangubai, the innocent provincial girl who dreams of movie stardom and believes the sinister smoothie boyfriend luring her to the big city. Then she is imprisoned, raped and savagely brutalised in the brothel, but becomes a kind of unofficial union rep for the other women and pleads for justice from a local chieftain of city politics: Karim Lala (Ajay Devgn) to whom she extends the brothel’s onsite booze franchise in return. And so her upward climb begins, which involves a political duel with a rival, trans madam Raziabai, played by Vijay Raaz. This fictionalised version omits any violence in which Gangubai was reportedly involved and drugs are demurely replaced with alcohol being sold on the premises; when Gangubai finally evolves from being a mafia queen into a revered Mother India figure, blessed by smiling sex workers all around Mumbai, the movie loses a bit of its voltage. But there is terrific verve and audacity in this picture and some spectacular fantasy-musical setpieces. In fact, it is the streak of schmaltz within the gruesomeness which gives the story its outrageous energy. There is an entertainingly brazen quality to this movie, a brashness and recklessness to go with the mawkishness: it has a storytelling killer instinct. • Gangubai Kathiawadi is released on 25 February in cinemas.A mere 2,155 days after the US women’s soccer team filed a complaint with the USA’s Equal Employment Opportunity Commission and 1,082 days since the team filed a lawsuit against US Soccer, the team and the federation announced a settlement on Tuesday. Unusually for legal action, the terms of the settlement were immediately made public: $24m, with $2m of that money earmarked for “USWNT players in their post-career goals and charitable efforts related to women’s and girls’ soccer.” Now comes the hard part. The deal is contingent on the ratification of a new contract between the federation and the players. That new contract is tied up in part because US Soccer president Cindy Cone has insisted that the men’s and women’s national teams come together with the federation to figure out the pesky problem of how to pay both national teams equally when Fifa’s prize money for World Cups is hugely unequal – $440m for the men in 2022 against a proposed $60m for the women in 2023. On a related note, all parties that take women’s soccer seriously would very much like Fifa to even out that prize money. Today. Yesterday. It’s money Fifa could afford to, considering the organization made around $3.5bn in profit from the 2018 World Cup alone. “We’re not wondering if the women’s game can make money,” Megan Rapinoe said of Fifa on a Tuesday conference call. “It’s just willful discrimination and willful negligence.” Since 2018, the US men have been playing under the terms of an expired collective bargaining agreement. The women agreed in December to extend their current deal through March. Players on Tuesday’s conference call said they’ve been working with the men’s team on CBA talks, and Becky Sauerbrunn noted that lawyers have been coming up with creative proposals. But representatives for the men’s players association did not return a request for comment from the Guardian, nor has the association posted anything on its Twitter feed, which instead focused on the match-up of two USMNT stars in the Champions League tie between Chelsea (Christian Pulisic) and Lille (Timothy Weah). The lawsuit settlement seems rather generous given the team’s losses in court. Last year, US district judge R Gary Klausner granted a partial summary judgment in favor of the federation, accepting the argument that the women had actually been paid more than the men, albeit in a cycle in which the World Cup champion women were considerably more successful than their male counterparts, who failed to qualify for the 2018 World Cup. A more damning argument: In their 2017 collective bargaining agreement, the women had accepted not just a different pay scale but a completely different structure. Given the lack of professional opportunities throughout most of women’s soccer’s history, the federation has long paid salaries and benefits to most of the team’s most frequent players. Klausner wrote that the women’s team rejected an offer to go to the men’s “pay-to-play” structure and therefore couldn’t “retroactively deem their CBA worse.” And even if the men and women manage to coordinate on their CBAs, the teams will still have some differences. Sauerbrunn said on Tuesday that the team still wants to negotiate issues such as maternity leave, which will be tricky as coach Vlatko Andonovski expands the player pool rather than following the precedent of sticking with the same faces. On the other hand, from the federation’s point of view, $24m is certainly less than $67m, the figure cited by an economist filing a brief on behalf of the women’s team. Cone, herself a longtime player for the national team, argued that such a payout “would likely bankrupt the federation.” That dramatic statement might not be literally true. The pandemic and other factors brought the federation’s spending plans to a screeching halt and, paradoxically, resulted in a surplus in the fiscal year ending March 2021. The federation, which had previously planned to spend that pile of assets down to $42m by March 2023, is now targeting $102m by that date. But the federation has a lot on its plate, not the least of which is building up national teams that have either aged (women) or underachieved (men). Since landing a $50m windfall with the hosting of the Copa America Centenario in 2016, US Soccer has been under pressure to invest in many areas – coaching education, extended national teams (disability soccer, beach soccer, futsal), the US Open Cup (including a new competition for women) and grassroots grants programs. The settlement also surely removes a sizable chunk of legal fees from the budget, though the federation still faces interminable lawsuits from the NASL and sports promoter Relevent Sports – both represented by Jeffrey Kessler, who also represents the US women and once represented MLS players in an ill-fated legal action against the league and federation. Also still suing the federation – Hope Solo, the longtime US women’s goalkeeper who wound up going her own way in court. Perhaps most important of all for the federation is a rare bit of good PR, or at least an interruption in the drumbeat of bad PR. The women found little trouble attracting sympathetic reporters, influencers and documentarians who eschewed numbers and even touted “equal pay” deals in other countries that are, in fact, not equal and pay both men and women considerably less than US Soccer does. “Management,” even when it’s a volunteer-driven nonprofit, is never the popular side in a labor dispute. The federation’s former legal team and former president Carlos Cordeiro took that bad hand and made it worse. Cordeiro was tone-deaf in public statements, even at a parade for the women after their 2019 championship. The legal team argued that women lacked not just the speed and strength of men’s players but also the skill and effort, an argument that was all the more insulting because it was hardly necessary, given the strength of the federation’s other arguments. Cordeiro is running again for his old gig, and Rapinoe noted on Tuesday’s call that he didn’t have her vote. She doesn’t officially have a vote, but Sauerbrunn and Morgan do, along with several recent national team players who are part of the Athletes Council. The settlement surely bolsters Cone’s case for re-election. But she still has to deal with negotiations with men’s and women’s players who have grown accustomed to being paid more than their peers. Cone is hopeful things will be nailed down before the women’s extension expires on 31 March. “Are we close?” Cone said on Tuesday’s call. “It depends on your definition of close. Are we going in the right direction? Yes.”At some point half a decade ago I did the sensible thing: I packed away into boxes the dust-caked piles of CDs (largely unplayed for quite a while) that had followed me through various houseshares. In the following years I lugged those boxes to another rented home and on into storage as I moved to a different country. But I couldn’t truly let the CDs go, even though Spotify had been my main music source for at least 10 years. I no longer even own a fully functioning CD player. I sometimes half-joke that CDs are due a revival, largely to justify the above state of affairs. But it doesn’t seem to be beyond the realms of possibility, given 20-year nostalgia cycles and rolling waves of revivals for things from the 1990s and early 2000s; perhaps the CD could now be carried along in the flotsam. Cassettes and vinyl have been revived to varying degrees. The tape resurgence seems a perennial staple of the music press, but it remains a going, if minor, concern. The vinyl revival has been much more widespread (and extensively documented). When vinyl seemed dead in the water in the 1990s, many ditched extensive collections and let record players slide into obsolescence. But now interest in vinyl crosses several types: the serious crate-diggers seeking original pressings and obscure sounds; the audiophiles and gearheads happy to drop cash on Klipsch speakers; the casual buyer who likes to own a few records; the lifestyle collector tastefully pairing a record with a bottle of natural wine. All of these have combined to create a robust ongoing market for vinyl, as the increasing number of independent record shops in many towns and cities will attest to. Demand has even begun to outstrip supply, while UK sales last year were at the highest level in 30 years. Vinyl sales are now on course to overtake CD sales according to figures from the Entertainment Retailers Association. This would suggest the vital signs are not good for CDs, but buried within that report was a sliver of hope for the unloved disc: the decline in sales has slowed – well, OK, it’s not much, but it’s a start. And in the US, CD sales increased last year for the first time in 17 years, though this was almost entirely due to the Adele album. Pitchfork has also reported more anecdotal hints to a mild CD revival, while Discogs, the key resale market for music online, showed big leaps in the number of CDs sold over the past two years, with some younger fans gravitating to the format as well. All this, of course, doesn’t amount to a full-scale comeback of anything; proof of a revival for CDs may come merely in the shape of comment pieces wondering if CDs are due a revival. And yet I have taken some solace in the idea of reverting to physical music formats during the Neil Young/Joni Mitchell contretemps with Joe Rogan and Spotify. Though the former were just two figures in a losing battle with a streaming giant, it hinted at the unspoken precariousness of streaming music: you may not be a Neil Young fan but what if your favourite artist gets in a row with Spotify? What if Spotify gets in a fight with a record label? What if Spotify ever goes down, or goes under? Granted, it now seems to be in the “too big to fail” category, just as the major labels were, until they weren’t. (God help us all if Apple Music is the answer.) The music analyst Ted Gioia recently asked, “Is old music killing new music?” Most of the money made is in old songs, so all the energy of the music business is being directed there, at the expense of new music, with various other factors compounding the issue. I’ll throw another theory into the mix: often when listening to some new artist I am reminded of an older artist – as is often the nature of music – at which point I’ll think, “Why don’t I just listen to the older band instead?” and then find myself swiftly drawn away from the new to the comforts of the old without difficulty. In a previous era you probably didn’t have the privileged, easy access to an artist’s entire output, but there might be one cherished record you engaged with deeply. Back when I used to buy CDs there would be a single-minded focus on each album: it was less easy to click away if you didn’t like the first two songs. I would listen repeatedly to something because I’d spent money on the sucker. In the Spotify age, my easily distracted brain is unlikely to stick with new music that doesn’t immediately grab me. Streaming remains unrelentingly dominant, but vinyl shows there are still gaps to be filled. Last year, the “bicoastal elite” duo How Long Gone, who make a semi-winking podcast about culture with a contrarian eye on being ahead of the curve, signed to the independent label Jagjaguwar to release an album of sorts – a compilation of the label’s music interspersed with conversation from the pair. They released it solely as a double CD. “It’s just a fun thing to do,” co-host Chris Black told the New York Times. “Tapes are corny. Vinyl is corny. CDs are cool.” I took that to mean both tapes and vinyl require an amount of earnestness – tapes in DIY sensibility, vinyl in studied connoisseurship – and both are over-valorised to boot, whereas CDs may have a certain casualness that appeals. Perhaps this then points to a future for CDs: an occasional tangible object for people who don’t want to try all that hard. Maybe someone could start selling a small, elegant, cheap-ish CD player that connects to a Bluetooth speaker? Either that or I just need to admit defeat and finally get rid of those neglected boxes of musical relics. Larry Ryan is a freelance writer and editorLast week, Republican senator Ted Cruz posted a photo of himself alongside UFC legend Chuck Liddell. The photo, which showed the two men posing with raised fists, was the latest example of a politician using an athlete’s star power, in this case to pander to a younger demographic. It also underscored the American right’s ongoing love affair with the UFC. Over the past few years, UFC has become synonymous with rightwing politics due to its well-documented relationship with former president Donald Trump. As previously reported by the Guardian, the organization effectively became the sports arm of the Maga regime and was an ideal platform for Trump to espouse his political agenda. UFC president Dana White was among Trump’s most boisterous supporters, having campaigned for the former president as far back as 2016. White has since defended Trump’s policies, produced a documentary on him Combatant-in-Chief, and even used his relationship with the former president to defy government mandates at the start of the Covid-19 pandemic. During the 2020 presidential election, Trump deployed several UFC fighters as campaign surrogates, placing them in front of crowds at rallies in swing-states such as Florida in order to secure a key demographic that forms the majority of mixed martial arts’ fanbase: young men. And though Trump lost the election, Republicans continued to flirt with the UFC in order to benefit from the organization’s popularity. UFC fighters and executives have become regular guests on conservative shows such as those hosted by Sean Hannity and Candace Owens. Over the past few months, Owens has invited fighters like UFC lightweight Beneil Dariush to discuss the woes of communism while White was brought on to discuss the supposed importance of keeping politics out of sports. “It’s America,” White told Owens in April 2021 when asked about the UFC’s supposed political apathy. “That’s the way it’s supposed to be. And you shouldn’t have to go to work and listen to that shit.” While White’s assertion is tenuous at best due to his own history with Trump, his comments endeared him to conservative audiences dissatisfied with the rise of social justice narratives in leagues such as the NFL and NBA. By taking saying the UFC does not support so-called “woke politics,” White is essentially positioning the organization as a fitting alternative for the American right. This, in turn, has warmed conservative pundits and politicians to the organization, which they now view as a market for their ideology. Among the politicians who embraced the UFC over the past year is Florida’s governor, Ron DeSantis, who invited the organization to host UFC 261, a capacity-crowd event in Jacksonville, Florida, in April 2021. DeSantis, who is viewed as a contender for the Republican nomination in 2024, has been criticized for using his state’s limited Covid restrictions to increase his political clout. Hosting a capacity-crowd UFC show during a particularly difficult period during the pandemic was a clear show of defiance. “This is going to be the first [indoor] full-throttle sports event since Covid hit anywhere in the United States and I think it’s fitting,” DeSantis said to a cheering crowd at the UFC 261 pre-fight press conference. “Welcome to Florida. You guys aren’t the only ones looking to come to this oasis of freedom.” It is worth noting that UFC 261 was celebrated by the likes of Steve Bannon, as well as user wrote on a QAnon Telegram channel with more than 20,000 subscribers. “Watch UFC.” UFC fighters have also stepped into the political arena in recent months. In December 2021, lightweight contender Michael Chandler spoke at Turning Point USA’s Americafest event alongside conspiracy-monger Tucker Carlson, Donald Trump Jr, and alt-right personality Jack Posobiec. Chandler first made his political leanings clear when he questioned the results of the 2020 presidential election, tweeting at the time “is Joe Biden really just taking the mic to talk about how ‘patient’ we have to be and how ‘long’ we are going to have to wait AKA we are going to contest these results…hard #wakeupsheep.” The fighter deleted the tweet shortly thereafter. Other UFC fighters such as Colby Covington, whom the Guardian described as the athletic embodiment of Trump’s politics, continues to strengthen his ties to prominent conservatives such as Trump Jr and Owens. In fact, Owens revealed that it was Covington who helped her become a fan of the UFC and that she plans to attend his upcoming fight against fellow Trump loyalist Jorge Masvidal at UFC 272 next month. “I will definitely be there [at UFC 272],” Owens said on Full Send podcast. “100% will be there. I love Colby.” Owens previously called for the UFC to replace the NFL as America’s national pastime, a term that was once reserved for baseball. “[The UFC] is exploding right now and it’s because they do not get involved in politics. They are not woke and they do not bend the knee,” Owens said, adding that the UFC is the “only real sport left.” It is perhaps no surprise many on the right identify more with the UFC than the NFL. Although the league is currently being sued for racial discrimination in a high-profile lawsuit, it has at least paid lip service to social justice in recent years, particularly after the police murder of George Floyd. According to a recent survey, approximately one-third of those polled stated that they were less of a fan of the NFL now than they were five years ago. The poll found that those who did not approve of the NFL’s current stance on social justice were disproportionately Republican, and that 45% of those who identified themselves as Republican believed the NFL was doing “too much” to show respect for Black players. Whether this disapproval is actually making a difference to the NFL’s bottom line is debatable. Viewing figures for the 2021 regular season were up 7% on the year before, so some Republicans are clearly still tuning in. Nevertheless, since the NFL’s policies no longer coincide with Republican ideals, the American right has since shifted much of its attention to the UFC, a hyper-masculine sport that is popular among young men. As Republicans forge ahead with shaping the GOP’s post-Trump future, they will continue to rely on the UFC as an ideological incubator and a breeding ground for future supporters.Another day, another Yorkshire cricket story, only this time it has nothing to do with events at Headingley and everything to do with a very different type of dark cloud. Of the three storms to hit the UK over the past week – Dudley, Eunice and Franklin – it is Franklin that has done the most damage to clubs, due to the huge volume of rain that has barrelled down, especially in the north of the country, specifically in Yorkshire. Early Yorkshire club casualties include Bradford &amp; Bingley, Ilkley CC, Olicanian, Horbury Bridge, Mytholmroyd, Bridgeholme and Greetland. Horbury Bridge is entirely underwater, flooding on Sunday evening. The club president Danny Terry found out around midnight when the landlord of the pub that sits on the corner of the cricket field phoned him to say the River Calder had topped the bank and was flowing on to the field. “It currently looks like a reservoir,” he says, “a metre of water over the entire playing surface. And the square is what we’re worried about most of all – the outfield is not a real concern. We spend a lot of money at the end of each season to make the square ready for the next season, doing the prep work, and now all that work and money has been written off. When the flood water recedes we’ll have to look at a recovery plan which will cost a considerable amount of money. We’re particularly worried about invasive plants, like moss, that come with the flooding. “I’ve been involved in the club for more than 15 years and only in the last five years has the playing surface been underwater – this year and last year.” Last year’s flood happened at around the same time, but the club started the season on the button thanks to Wakefield Metropolitan District council pumping the water away. Terry hopes that the council will help them again. “We’re not allowed to pump the water out of the field ourselves and if we just have to wait for the sun to shine, that’s where the risk is, if it doesn’t recede enough for us to start the season in mid-April.” But whereas the Horbury Bridge clubhouse is safe because it is set on slightly higher ground, things are different at Ilkley, close to the River Wharfe. Henry Wilson, the first team captain, is down at the ground alongside Look North, who are filming the damage. “Obviously with the weather we had on Sunday, we were nervous,” he says, “with the River Wharfe rising. We’ve now been flooded four times in the last six years. Last year, after the flood, we built a perimeter wall around the clubhouse in the hope that it would avoid water getting in in the future. Unfortunately, you don’t know if it has worked until you’ve had another flood, and the water got over the wall and came through the drains. There’s probably three or four feet of water in the clubhouse: in the carpets, up the walls, in the fridges. The carpets will have to be taken up again and replaced.” “We are insured. We’re hopeful. Most of the water has drained away from the ground, leaving just large puddles. The ground needs clearing of debris and leaves, then hopefully nature will take its course. “ “Like lots of sports clubs, we rely on a willing team of volunteers, we’re very fortunate to have that at Ilkley. So as sad as it is, as heartbreaking as it is, we’ll band together and put the work in.” Edenfield in Lancashire and Hadleigh in Suffolk are also casualties and any clubs near the swollen Severn are at risk. Worcestershire CCC is under water again, 4.5 metres on Monday with levels expected to peak on Wednesday. After so many previous floods – nine in the past two winters – the club hadn’t been flooded during this off-season and the ground had been looking in spanking condition. Although no players’ cars have been washed away from the car park this time around – everyone has now learned their lesson once the flood warnings come – it is currently impossible to get into the pavilion. Kidderminster, Worcestershire’s reserve ground, will be on high alert, with that first game at HQ against Sussex less than nine weeks away. The England and Wales Cricket Board has been contacted by dozens of clubs who have been hit by flood and storm damage – with some unable to afford insurance after repeated flooding – and their flooding advice is now on the front page of their website. This is the eighth major flooding event to hit cricket in England and Wales since 2007. The most damaging storms were Desmond and Eva in 2015-16, which affected 58 clubs, and resulted in the ECB paying out £3m. Even last year, 38 clubs sought support from the ECB’s emergency pot. Other money is available through the County Grants Fund, which can help clubs become more flood resilient (as well as drought resilient and provide help with energy saving and water management) Although it is hard to link the frequency or intensity of storms to the climate crisis, the number of extreme weather events has increased and will continue to do so. As Dr Ella Gilbert from the University of Reading told BBC News: “We don’t know if we will see more storms in the future as the climate warms but what we do know is that climate change increases the impact of these sorts of storms, particularly when we get so many so close together … so they add up to be greater than the sum of their parts.” Cricket has been warned. Again. • This is an extract from the Guardian’s weekly cricket email, The Spin. To subscribe and get the full edition, visit this page and follow the instructions.Mark Lanegan, who died on Tuesday morning at the age of 57, was perhaps the greatest singer of his generation. His remarkable gift was apparent from his earliest work with Screaming Trees: a worn, soulful burr betraying heavy emotional and physical mileage, but possessed of considerable dignity, vulnerability and heroism. It only deepened as he pursued a lauded solo career, served as floating vocalist-in-residence with Queens of the Stone Age and engaged in collaborations with artists including Isobel Campbell, Greg Dulli, Martina Topley-Bird and Manic Street Preachers. A drug user and alcoholic for many years, Lanegan wove his agonising struggle with addiction into a grim, gripping memoir, 2020’s remarkably frank Sing Backwards and Weep, at the insistence of his late friend Anthony Bourdain. His 2021 bout of Covid-19 – which left him hospitalised for weeks – yielded a further tome, Devil in a Coma, published in December. The widespread acclaim Lanegan enjoyed through the latter half of his career seemed unimaginable during the years he toiled with Screaming Trees. Lanegan first met the group’s founders, brothers Gary Lee and Van Conner, in the early 80s while working for their parents, repossessing televisions from trailer park residents in his home town of Ellensburg, Washington. Signed to legendary underground label SST Records, and releasing several overlooked, undersold albums throughout the decade, Screaming Trees was fractious from the out, Lanegan resenting guitarist Gary Lee’s creative control of their output and penchant for acid-rock written in a register higher than Lanegan could comfortably sing. Lanegan wrested control for Sweet Oblivion, the Trees’ second album for Epic Records, penning the lyrics and singing them in the forbidding baritone that he’d begun developing on tracks such as Grey Diamond Desert from 1988’s Invisible Lantern, and that became his trademark. Sweet Oblivion arrived in 1992, just as the underground scene of the Pacific north-west suddenly went overground, thanks to the success of groups including Nirvana, Pearl Jam and Alice in Chains. These groups were Lanegan’s friends – “Kurt [Cobain] was like a little brother, [Alice in Chains frontman] Layne Staley was like a twin,” Lanegan told Spin last year – and Screaming Trees were tipped for similar stardom. But while Sweet Oblivion and its 1996 follow-up Dust were majestic records, matching the intensity of Lanegan’s vocals to high-impact heavy rock (grunge never burned with such eloquent, self-lacerating regret as on No One Knows) Screaming Trees seemed doomed by both their in-fighting and Lanegan’s snowballing taste for self-destruction. A fractious 1996 stint supporting Oasis on a high-profile US tour saw Lanegan tangle backstage with Liam Gallagher, an encounter recounted with scathing hilarity in Sing Backwards and Weep. Another Trees tour the following year was sidelined after Lanegan was arrested for possession of crack cocaine, a crack-pipe and a hypodermic needle. Dust was the final album the group would release in its lifetime. Lanegan had been boozing since he was 12 years old, and a doctor had told him at the age of 20 that he wouldn’t live to see another decade if he didn’t quit drinking; he initially turned to heroin “to save me from becoming an alcoholic”. His memoir offers harrowing accounts of the depths to which his addictions pushed him, ruining friendships and debasing himself physically and mentally in pursuit of a fix. His substance abuse accelerated following Cobain’s death, as Lanegan struggled with his guilt over scoring heroin for the Nirvana frontman and ignoring his phone calls in the days before his suicide. The intervention of Cobain’s widow Courtney Love – who once described Lanegan as “Seattle’s Nick Cave” and paid for him to enter rehab – helped save his life. “It was the end of a nightmare that had lasted for years and years,” he told me in 2004. “Nobody likes to believe they need anybody’s help in anything, and the smarter you are – and I’m not smart – or the tougher you are – and I thought I was pretty tough – the more trouble you have. The smartest guys I ever met are not around any more because they thought they could think their way out of an unthinkable situation, and the tough guys have to just be beaten up repeatedly. And some guys just never do make it out.” While living in a post-rehab halfway house, Lanegan recorded Scraps at Midnight, the third in a series of dark, mature solo albums he’d begun with 1990’s The Winding Sheet (on which he’d been backed by Nirvana for a chilling cover of Leadbelly’s Where Did You Sleep Last Night, years before Cobain’s own MTV Unplugged version). On these early solo records, Lanegan channelled his love for folk, country and blues, drawing inspiration from Van Morrison and Cormac McCarthy, and showcasing a complexity that had been overshadowed by the Conner brothers’ guitar heroics. He was at the halfway house when Josh Homme, who’d played second guitar on the final Screaming Trees tours, approached him to join his new band, Queens of the Stone Age. He had to turn the offer down, but later stepped aboard Homme’s unruly alt-rock pirate ship for their 2000 breakthrough Rated R, his weighty growl grounding the album’s abundant debauchery on comedown blues Into the Fade, and delivering highlights of 2002 follow-up Songs for the Deaf like the doomy thrash of Song for the Dead. While he subsequently exited the core group, he remained a member-at-large, guesting on later albums. With his solo work showcasing his skills as a singer and songwriter, and QOTSA scoring commercial success he’d never previously tasted, Lanegan cut loose over the last two decades of his life. He was prolific like never before, and shared his gifts with a list of collaborators both inspired and unexpected. With Belle and Sebastian’s Isobel Campbell, he cut three albums that brilliantly inverted the paradigm set by Lee Hazlewood and Nancy Sinatra decades earlier (“I write the songs and he’s the eye-candy,” Campbell told me. “Sometimes, we’ll be on stage, and he’s singing The Circus Is Leaving Town, and it sounds so sad, so true, I want to cry”). With longtime friend and kindred spirit Greg Dulli, he recorded a sublime album of soulful regret as the Gutter Twins. He worked alongside PJ Harvey and Slash, and undertook projects with lesser-known talents including Duke Garwood, Soulsavers and Joe Cardamone. His energy was fearsome, his approach fearless; his later albums embraced electronic music (2012’s Blues Funeral) and icy post-punk (2019’s Somebody’s Knocking), his final album, 2020’s Straight Songs of Sorrow, inspired by the experience of writing his memoir. Fifty-seven is no age to die, especially for a man with a voice that promised only to grow richer and more variegated with age, a voice that had earned a place alongside greats such as his beloved Johnny Cash. He’d outlived so many of his friends – Cobain, Staley, Bourdain – which is a curse all its own. But in those years his doctor had said he’d never get to taste, he created some of the greatest music of his career, found love with his second wife, Shelley Brien, located a unique voice as a prose writer, and lived long enough for his gifts to be recognised. “I feel that the fellas and myself didn’t get our due,” he told me in 2004, the ignominy suffered by Screaming Trees clearly still painful. Eighteen years later, Lanegan was finally accruing those dues, and it’s a tragedy his story ends so soon.Asked this week about whether his move to drop Covid isolation requirements would drive infectious workers into the office, Boris Johnson said UK workers should learn from their German counterparts and stay home when unwell. The prime minister did not mention the stark differences in the support available for British workers compared with Germany and the rest of the world, and whether this could explain their reluctance to take a sick day. Employers’ groups have warned that the UK’s statutory sick pay regime is among the least generous in Europe, and steps by the government to scale back support as part of the “living with Covid” approach, which Johnson announced on Monday, could discourage those who catch the virus from staying at home. Under the new strategy, support payments of £500 for people on low-incomes in England will end from Thursday when the legal requirement to self-isolate is scrapped. A month later, on 24 March, workers who are off sick will need to once again wait for four days of absence through illness to claim statutory sick pay, rather than from day one, reverting to pre-pandemic rules. Announcing the plan during a No 10 briefing, Johnson said: “I’ve often heard it said over the last couple of years that we have a habit of going back to work, or going into work, when we’re not well. And people contrast that with Germany for instance where, I’m told, they’re much more disciplined about not going to work if you’re sick.” Germany has one of the best sick pay packages among all of the OECD group of leading global economies, with laws requiring employers to pay staff 100% of wages for the first six weeks of sickness. By contrast the UK has one of the lowest – at just £96.35 a week it is worth less than a quarter of a typical salary. The proportion of a UK worker’s salary covered by sick pay is just 19%, according to the TUC. Rates are higher in Spain (42%), Sweden (64%) and Belgium (93%), with support only worse in South Korea and the US, where workers do not have a legal right to any sick pay at all. “This has been a thorn in our sides throughout this pandemic – undermining public health and pushing workers into hardship,” said Kate Bell, the head of economics and employment rights at the TUC. “But rather than learning this lesson, ministers are doubling down on their mistakes. “The decision to stop access to sick pay – from the first day of illness – will put millions of low-paid workers in an even tighter financial bind if they become sick.” Even before the changes announced this week, Britain’s lowest paid tended to miss out on the support altogether. Analysis from the Resolution Foundation shows as many as 2 million employees are ineligible for statutory sick pay because they earn less than the £120 lower earnings limit required for the benefit. This has meant one in six workers in customer-facing sectors – where the spread of Covid-19 is most probable – receive no statutory sick pay at all. Women are more likely to fall below the threshold, as well as workers on zero-hours contracts. According to the IPPR thinktank, households earning less than £25,000 are about twice as likely to lack access to any sick pay compared with households earning above £75,000. People working in outdoor trades, such as farming and construction, are five times more likely to lack access than managers and senior officials, while those working in manufacturing, manual trades, beauty, transportation and catering are also about twice as likely to lack access to sick pay. Early in the pandemic, the government moved to provide statutory sick pay from day one of illness, abolishing three waiting days required to receive the benefit. However, employment experts and unions warned the changes needed to go further. According to research in the British Medical Journal, those with the lowest household income were three times less likely to be able to work from home and less likely to be able to self-isolate. Johnson’s announcement comes after years of the benefit gradually being eroded to its lowest level since March 2003 after inflation is taken into account, while the soaring cost of living is expected to further damage the safety net this spring amid a huge hike in household energy bills. In the UK statutory sick pay is paid to employers for up to 28 weeks. Some staff benefit from their firm topping up closer to their full pay under occupational sick pay schemes. However, government estimates made before the pandemic suggested 26% of the workforce rely on statutory sick pay alone when ill. Business leaders have criticised the government for cutting back a rebate for firms, paid for by the state, when they are required to pay statutory sick pay to their staff during the pandemic. Mike Cherry, the national chair of the Federation of Small Businesses, said lasting reforms were vital. “Even before the pandemic hit, the government recognised the need for a sick pay rebate for smaller firms, so it’s surprising to see it taking this route forward when hundreds of thousands of people are still testing positive for Covid,” he said. A government spokesperson said: “The pandemic was an unprecedented situation. We needed people to self-isolate while protection was built up through our vaccination programme and we developed a range of new treatments. As a result, we made temporary changes to statutory sick pay (SSP) to support people to follow Covid rules and keep others safe. “It’s up to employers to determine their sick pay policies and many employers choose to pay more than the minimum level. But SSP should not be looked at in isolation. Government support through the welfare system, including universal credit, is also available for those on low incomes who need extra financial help when they are sick or incapable of work for longer periods.”Barclays has announced record profits and raised its bonus pool to nearly £2bn, in a high pay bonanza that the bank said was spurred by a battle for talented staff. The London-headquartered lender increased the bonus pool for its existing staff by more than 17% to £1.3bn, after annual profits more than doubled thanks to the release of cash originally put aside to cushion the blow of the Covid crisis. Including deferred bonuses, the total bonus pot grew 23% to £1.9bn. Barclays said it had 700 bankers on its payroll who were paid more than €1m a year (£834,365), 33 of which were paid more than €5m. One unidentified banker was paid over €11m, according to documents released alongside its annual report. That is more than the £2.2m that its former boss Jes Staley – who stepped down in November – earned for his role in 2021. The chief executive, C.S. Venkatakrishnan, said the decision to increase the bank’s bonus pool again this year was partly linked to a need to compete for staff, particularly those with skills in technology. “We pay great attention to paying competitively for everything, which we do,” he said. His comments echoed those of HSBC earlier this week, which raised its own pool by nearly a third to $3.5bn (£2.6bn) for 2021, marking its highest level since 2014. But the argument that a ramp in the bonus pool was needed to compete for the best staff was rejected by critics. Luke Hildyard, the director at thinktank High Pay Centre, said: “Six and seven figure bonuses for a tiny number of elite bankers are very hard to justify at a time when workers across the country including NHS staff, care workers and all the other people who have got us through the pandemic are feeling the full force of pay stagnation and price increases.” “Barclays and other banks have benefited because we are hopefully over the worst of the pandemic and financial activity is increasing”, said Hildyard. “The argument that bankers’ pay is necessary to attract or retain talent seems especially weak.” However, Barclays announced it had frozen about £22m worth of bonuses for Staley until there are further developments in a regulatory investigation into his links to Jeffrey Epstein. The bank said it had “exercised its discretion” to suspend share payouts related to his deferred bonus and long term incentive plan “pending further developments in respect of the regulatory and legal proceedings related to the ongoing FCA and [Prudential Regulation Authority] investigation regarding Mr Staley”. Staley unexpectedly stepped down in November after an investigation by City watchdogs over how the former chief executive described his links to the late sex offender and disgraced financier Epstein. It is understood that Staley plans to challenge the investigation’s findings. This could delay or ultimately block regulators from issuing potential fines and penalties, as well as releasing the investigation’s findings to the public. It came as the lender reported an annual pre-tax profit of £8.4bn, more than doubling the £3.1bn reported for the whole of 2020. The surge in profits was due to the improving economic outlook, which meant Barclays was able to release £653m from reserves originally set aside to offset a potential jump in loan defaults during the pandemic. That compares with the £4.8bn it was forced to put aside amid fears that customer debts would soar in 2020. Commenting on the potential risks of expanding western sanctions on Russia in retaliation to Moscow’s threat to Ukraine, Venkatakrishnan said the bank had “exercised a lot of care” when taking Russian clients in recent years. “It’s an unfortunate situation, but from a financial point of view, our exposures are limited.” When asked about the decision to take on Credit Suisse clients in Africa as part of a referral agreement with the Swiss bank, the chief executive said the deal was not under threat by the Suisse secrets revelations. The massive leak revealed that Credit Suisse harboured the hidden wealth of clients involved in torture, drug trafficking, money laundering, corruption and other serious crimes. “We have the right to refuse any clients,” Venkatakrishnan said, adding that all new customers would be subject to Barclays’ own checks.Aston Martin Lagonda cut its losses in 2021 as it reported surging sales amid disruption to its supply chain and a slow start to deliveries of its new “hypercar”, but said it expected its finances to improve this year thanks to strong demand. The luxury carmaker, best known for making James Bond’s vehicles, reported a £76.5m operating loss for 2021, compared with a loss of almost £323m a year earlier. Sales to dealers climbed by 82% during the year, after it was able to return to more normal operations following 2020’s Covid restrictions. The company began deliveries of its £2.5m Valkyrie hypercar in December, and shipped 10 vehicles to customers, however this was at a slower pace than originally expected. The company said in January the lower-than-anticipated number of Valkyrie deliveries would make it miss its annual profit target by £15m. Aston Martin expects to deliver between 75 and 90 Valkyrie vehicles in 2022, and said all of its Valkyrie coupes were sold out, with a waiting list. The carmarker delivered more than 3,000 of its DBX sports utility vehicles – on which the company is pinning its recovery – in 2021, accounting for half the vehicles sold through dealers. It is aiming to increase the number of cars it produces by about 8% in 2022, to 6,600 vehicles, which it hopes will enable it to improve its adjusted profit by half. It plans to sell about 10,000 cars a year by 2024-25. The company said the return of the Aston Martin name to Formula One in 2021 had increased its “brand exposure, desirability and global awareness”. Aston Martin’s chief executive, Tobias Moers, said it was seeing demand from customers for all models, with retail sales outstripping those from dealers. He added that the order book was filling up for its plug-in hybrid Valhalla supercar, which the company now expects to start delivering to customers in early 2024. The carmaker, which was saved from collapse in early 2020 in a £500m rescue deal by a consortium led by the Canadian billionaire Lawrence Stroll, said it had faced “new and old challenges” in 2021 amid supply chain constraints and the pandemic. Stroll, the firm’s executive chair, said that when he invested he expected the company’s transformation to take “four to five years”. “We have made very strong progress already and are well on plan to achieve our ambitious goal,” Stroll said. The average selling price of Aston Martin’s vehicles remained at about £150,000 in 2021, Moers said, calling this “a milestone in our turnaround and our movement forward”. The company’s average selling price will rise by approximately 10% in 2022, its chief financial officer, Kenneth Gregor, said, as a result of new vehicles including the DBX707, a higher-performance version of its SUV model, as well as its V12 Vantage sports car. Aston Martin said it was seeing increased raw material costs, including electronic parts, but that it was able to absorb them. Aston Martin’s shares, which have experienced a mostly downwards ride since its disastrous stock market flotation three years ago, briefly rose by as much as 5% on Wednesday morning before reversing their gains.If Abbott elementary were a real school, the online reviews would probably be brutal. The students are unruly. The principal’s out to lunch. One teacher even kicked a kid. You can imagine childless neighbors complaining about their property values, former teachers ranting about why they quit and school parents cautioning other families to stay away. Of course, Abbott Elementary isn’t a real school. It merely depicts a fictional one on ABC, and in the mockumentary style. The workplace under the microscope in this sitcom is a West Philadelphia public school that’s typical of its subject. Which is to say it’s overcrowded, underfunded and underserving its community. It’s too true to the woeful state of public education in America to seem like it could be funny. And yet it mines laughs, big ones, through its note-perfect imitations of life. After two years of Covid-related school closures, Zoom classes and critical race theory panic, it’s nice to be transported back to a simpler time when public schools were symbols of urban decay, and not the downfall of America. There’s a reason why teachers are the rarest television fodder; unlike doctors or lawyers or even journalists, their lives don’t appear to be especially cinematic. (Never mind the raft of headlines and cellphone videos that teachers attract for everything from breaking up hallway fights to entering into underaged affairs.) And when teachers are on screen, they mainly function as props for the angst-riddled teens or tweens really driving the story. (See NBC’s Saved By the Bell, HBO’s Euphoria, Netflix’s Sex Education, etc.) Glee and season four of The Wire are the rare shows that actually deem teachers worthy of genuine exploration. AP Bio, the NBCUniversal comedy that ran for four seasons, is a notable exception that foregrounds faculty – but even that sitcom is less a reflection on the seemingly impossible challenges of the job than one teacher’s unhinged fantasy of avenging the loss of a tenured professorship at Harvard. Even its fictional Whitlock high is a small-town, blue-sky idyll for the college-bound, majority white middle class. Abbott Elementary, though, keeps it real. It doesn’t shrink from urban public schools’ well-known occupational hazards – the metal detectors, the corroded infrastructure, the expired books, the broken families. (Not even West Philadelphia gets a Fresh Prince-like caricaturization.) Abbott’s comedy comes from teachers who are committed to solving these seemingly intractable problems, even when it would be easier – and smarter – to take the path of least resistance. None in the teachers lounge is more keen than Janine Teagues, whose dedication is driven by a desire to be remembered as that elementary school teacher we adults canonize long after the world turns us cynical. If that character sketch seems more grounded than “Harvard redundancy with an axe to grind”, it’s because Quinta Brunson – the A Black Lady Sketch Show alumna who stars on screen and as a writing executive producer – conceived of the ABC series in tribute to her mother, a near 40-year schoolteaching vet. And the show takes its name from Brunson’s actual sixth grade teacher, Joyce Abbott – still of West Philly’s Andrew Hamilton school. She even gets an onscreen avatar who is played to utmost primness by the Tony-nominated Sheryl Lee Ralph (of Moesha fame). As for the rest of Abbott’s core faculty, you’ve got the tough neighborhood broad (Lisa Ann Walter), the woke Teach for America type (Chris Perfetti), the blasé principal (the devastatingly charismatic Janelle James). And then there’s the substitute whose ambition and hotness keeps tongues wagging, played by Everybody Loves Chris’s Tyler James Williams, whose on-screen chemistry with Brunson dates to their Black Lady Romeo and Juliet spoof. Interestingly, Williams is inarguably the biggest name on the show. But for Abbott, the absence of celebrity actors is an asset, as it allows the story to be the star. And so far the story has resonated. After modest promotion and a launch in early December, ratings for the Abbott premiere quadrupled over the next 35 days, in an ABC first. Even more impressive: the series has avoided stigmatization as a Black show despite its overwhelmingly Black cast, a pitfall NBC’s excellent Grand Crew could not avoid. If anything, Abbott’s Black cast of teachers and students deepens its authenticity. In interviews, Brunson has spoken of her desire to create a show with heart. And there’s little doubt her success on that score has Abbott Elementary poised for a Ted Lasso-like breakout. But ultimately this show is a win for teachers, many of whom have contacted Brunson directly to say that, finally, they feel seen. It’s high praise; who knows if it’ll lead to any substantive reforms or even motivate viewers to shore up their public schools and advocate for those teachers. At the very least, Abbott offers a refresher on comedy’s golden rule: the truth is always funnier than fiction. Which is to say it’s not a school you want to skip.Around 1,300 workers at a Hershey’s candy manufacturing plant in Stuarts Draft, Virginia, are voting on whether to unionize, in a move organizers say is led by older workers seeking to ensure good benefits for newer employees. The ballots for the mail-in election to join the Bakery, Confectionery, Tobacco Workers and Grain Millers’ International Union will be sent to workers on 24 February, with results to be counted on 24 March. The Hershey Company is publicly opposing the effort, encouraging workers to vote against it and hiring the union-busting Labor Relations Institute to hold captive audience meetings with workers. The LRI has also created an anti-union website ahead of the election, and reportedly made “union-free” lawn signs to distribute throughout the community. Workers at two of seven Hershey plants in the US are currently represented by unions. A worker at the Virginia plant, who asked to remain anonymous for fear of retaliation, said the union organizing drive began in September. The worker said employees suffer from a lack of respect and dignity on the job, grueling work schedules and conditions, and a two-tier system in which younger and newer workers are paid less than previous groups of employees. The union drive is being led by longtime workers nearing retirement, who are trying to ensure incoming workers are afforded the same pay, benefits, and working conditions they received when they began. “When you work seven days a week and you don’t know when you’re getting a day off, you’re just living so you can go to work,” said the worker. “We’re not the happy place to work that you would think a chocolate plant would be right now.” The worker described a strict disciplinary attendance system that reprimands workers for taking sick days they have accrued or for leaving during a shift due to a medical emergency. The company then requires mandatory counseling and drug testing if workers accrue too many absences. The worker also criticized practices that kept employees at lower pay scales by restricting access to training programs, and modifications that reduced workers’ eligibility for premium pay on weekends. “It’s a broken system on training, attendance, and then we have the administration simply not listening to people and their concerns,” said the worker. “They don’t care about us. They look at us as robots.” A spokesperson for Hershey responded to the unionization drive and working condition complaints by saying the company is “proud to have created a culture that empowers our team members to speak openly and directly with leadership and ultimately drive change within the organization”. They added: “While we respect our team members’ right to make an educated decision on whether they want to be represented by a third-party like a union, we believe the insertion of a union would be counterproductive and undermine the open and collaborative environment that has allowed the Stuarts Draft plant to thrive for nearly 40 years.” The worker at Hershey emphasized the fear of retaliation for union activity that they and other workers have faced throughout the union drive, while being forced to attend meetings held by anti-union consultants. “I walk in every day expecting to be fired. That’s something I’ve carried with me over the months,” added the worker. “I just feel a sense of violation of being forced into these meetings and listen to what I call propaganda. I never dreamed that I would experience something so negative in my life as being forced to go to these meetings.” The BCTGM union has criticized Hershey’s conduct throughout the organizing drive, including the timing of a longtime plant manager’s departure. Hershey says he left due to a planned retirement. “They’ve given the impression of surveillance with union activity and they went out and hired the very notorious union-busting law firm, consultants at the Labor Relations Institute,” said John Price, the director of organizing at the BCTGM International Union. “They are going around soliciting grievances from the workers with the implied promise that they can fix them without a union, and they coerce workers by superficially fixing some of these problems.” Price explained some workers have gotten the hired consultants from the LRI confused with the National Labor Relations Board, and that workers have been questioned about union activity that was conducted in a private Facebook group for workers interested in unionizing. He expressed intent to file several unfair labor practice charges with the NLRB. A second worker at Hershey, who also asked to remain anonymous, said that Hershey’s workers were motivated to unionize after their breaks were reduced and their overtime pay cut. “They think of us as machines that just work seven days a week,” said the worker. “They can invest more money to have more capacity so we don’t have to do that all the time. That’s the biggest issue for most people, they’d like to have a life and see their family.” The worker also criticized Hershey’s move to reward growing profits during the pandemic with t-shirts instead of higher pay. In 2020, Hershey reported a revenue of nearly $8.15bn, up from $7.99bn in 2019, and a profit of about $1.28bn in 2020 compared to $1.15bn in 2019. In 2021, Hershey saw a record year of production and over $1.47bn in profits. “That kind of stuff just really bothers people, to know that all that profit is generated by us and here’s a T-shirt,” added the worker. “I’d like more compensation for the profits we generate.”We would like to hear about how television has helped people while shielding during the pandemic. If you shielded during the shielding program in 2020 or have continued to voluntarily since, how has television helped you? What programmes have you been watching? Tell us all about it below. Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.While billionaires are battling it out in a race to colonise the moon, mere stratospherically rich mortals on Earth were able to grab a small slice of space rock for themselves on Wednesday at Christie’s annual sale of rare and unusual meteorites. Star-gazers and meteorite enthusiasts bid frantically for fragments of the “oldest matter humankind can touch” – as the auction house put it – while other objects such as a comet-cracked kennel from Costa Rica sold for tens of thousands of dollars. A 15g fragment of the Winchcombe meteorite, which briefly became Britain’s most coveted rock after the bright fireball was seen blazing across the sky over the Cotswold town last year, sold for $30,200 (£22,300), while a smaller 1.7g fragment fetched $12,600. According to the Christie’s catalogue of the 66-lot “Deep Impact: Martian, Lunar and other Rare Meteorites” sale, only 602g of Winchcombe was ever found – with 90% of the material now housed in the UK’s national collection, curated by London’s Natural History Museum. Among the more usual items for sale was a dog house hit by a meteorite which crashed through the tin roof in April 2019 in Aguas Zarcas, Costa Rica. But while it was expected to sell for as much as $300,000, after all it boasted a seven-inch hole which “marks where the meteorite punctured the roof”, it finally sold for $44,100. Its resident, a German shepherd named Roky, survived unharmed, according to James Hyslop, head of the science and natural history department at Christie’s. “My first question when I was offered the dog shed for auction was, ‘Was Roky OK?’,” he told the BBC. “I’m pleased to report that other than now being ‘sans’ dog shed, he’s doing just fine.” The fragment that caused Roky to lose his home, a shard weighing 178.7g and “covered with fusion crust, the result of its fiery plunge through Earth’s atmosphere” sold for $21,420 – a snip for an item that consists of “calcium aluminium inclusions– the oldest matter humankind can touch”. Collecting fireballs from space has attracted the attention of celebrity collectors, who have pushed the price of the rocks tenfold over the past decade. Collectors are thought to include the film director Steven Spielberg; the actor Nicolas Cage; the illusionist Uri Geller; the cellist Yo-Yo Ma; and, inevitably, Elon Musk, the world’s richest person and chief executive of electric carmaker Tesla and rocket company SpaceX. A further lot included more than 100 tiny shards from a meteoroid that exploded over the Russian city of Chelyabinsk in 2013 with “an explosive yield estimated to rival that of an atomic bomb”, which sold for $4,788.Just after last week’s edition of this newsletter went out, Spotify bought two small technology companies. Chartable and Podsights, both founded and headquartered in New York, are hardly household names: with around 50 employees between them, according to estimates from analysts Crunchbase, they’re the sort of acquisitions that large companies make on a regular basis, and often go unnoticed by anyone but industry watchers. But the purchases, both made for undisclosed sums, help explain why the company is so eager to stand firm in the face of criticism from the likes of Neil Young and Joni Mitchell over its broader podcasting strategy – and, specifically, its spending of an estimated $200m on acquiring exclusive rights to the Joe Rogan podcast. First, the acquisitions themselves. The Verge’s Ashley Carman reports: Both Podsights and Chartable allow podcasters and networks to include tags in their shows that are used to track who listened, if they heard an ad, and whether they took action upon hearing it. Spotify says it plans to use Podsights’ technology outside podcasting and will bring it to the “full scope of the Spotify platform, including audio ads within music, video ads, and display ads.” The Chartable acquisition appears to be more directed toward podcasters themselves rather than advertisers, particularly because of its technology like SmartLinks [which tracks where clicks to podcasts have come from]. “These tools will make it easier for publishers to turn audience insights into action and expand their listenership while ultimately growing their businesses,” Spotify writes. In other words, both companies make tools that turn podcast advertising into something a bit more like web advertising. Podcast adverts are something of a cliche at this point: meal delivery kits, direct-to-consumer mattresses, and web hosting services abound. That’s not (just) because those companies are huge fans of supporting independent media, though. Instead, it’s because buying and running adverts on podcasts has historically been an expensive, analogue affair, that involves one-to-one relationships with a plethora of small publishers and creators, all to publish adverts with little-to-no ability to track anything beyond the absolute broadest metrics possible. That means the “customer acquisition cost” of podcast advertising is extraordinarily high, and so it has typically only paid off for those industries where it’s worth paying a lot of money for each new customer: ones with recurring revenue or big-ticket items. From an advertiser’s point of view, there are inefficiencies throughout the system. Buying adverts is hard, because of the fragmented nature of podcast production; targeting audiences is hard, because of the lack of meaningful analytics available through the decentralised ecosystem; and tracking purchases is hard, because of the difficulty of linking a particular call to action to any individual response. Enter Spotify. What the company is bringing to the table for advertisers is obvious enough. When you listen to a podcast on Spotify, you’re not just downloading an MP3 from a server and playing it on a generic app of your choice – you’re streaming straight from Spotify’s servers, with your listening linked directly to your account and all the commensurate profiling that brings with it. Spotify can sell ads on behalf of podcasters, target those ads in a far more granular way than most podcasting apps, and easily roll out technical features – “tap here to buy”, for instance – as advertisers see fit. But the company faces a chicken-and-egg problem. Audiences won’t switch to listening to podcasts on Spotify without a hefty push, and podcasters won’t switch if the audiences aren’t there. Which is why Spotify is willing to torch its relationships with some of the biggest names in music over Joe Rogan. A lot of musicians accurately described the conflict as one of money, not morals, but missed where the money really lies. Yes, every time you listen to a song on Spotify, you cost the company money: it pays royalties per stream, and the perfect Spotify music fan is someone who pays every month and never opens the app. And yes, every time you listen to Joe Rogan on Spotify, you make the company money: the podcast still has adverts in it, earning payments based on audience size, but Spotify’s deal with the former MMA commentator is reportedly a flat-fee deal. That trade-off is small-fry, though, compared to the long-term point of deals like Rogan’s, which is to turn the platform into the home of podcasts. By buying exclusives upfront, Spotify breaks the chicken-and-egg problem that hampers its efforts to turn podcast advertising from a profitable niche into a core tranche of the industry. The goal isn’t, as the New York Times puts it, to build Spotify into the Netflix of podcasts – it’s to build Spotify into the YouTube of podcasts. And bizarrely, the company is building towards that goal almost unopposed. Apple, whose built-in Podcasts app is still the market leader, has all but abandoned the medium it effectively created. Its desultory launch of paid-for podcasts in late 2021 was notable more for temporarily breaking its own podcast store than it is for the small number of shows that have taken it up on the offer. Amazon is building an impressive roster of audio exclusives at Audible, but its end goal is more clearly a Netflix-style model. And the roster of indie apps and networks that make up the long-tail of the podcasting industry lack the resources and coordination to put up much of a fight. There are exceptions. Spotify’s clear push for market dominance helps explain the BBC’s decision, earlier this month, to pull a number of its podcasts from public directories and make them available exclusively on the BBC Sounds app. “The world of audio listening is constantly changing, and the global tech giants are more routinely publishing content exclusively on their platforms”, the BBC said in a statement. “We want to make sure people can easily find new things from the BBC and can’t rely on other platforms, who have their own exclusive content and a global catalogue to promote, to do this for us.” The move was, and is, controversial. As former Guardian technology editor Charles Arthur put it, “you don’t need a special TV to watch BBC TV; you don’t need a special radio to listen to BBC radio”. And yet there is clearly a level of dominance at which it would be the right call: you don’t need a special TV to watch the BBC, but if the BBC ended up effectively exclusive to Sky through market concentration, something would have gone badly wrong. Regardless of whether Spotify succeeds or fails in its efforts, the push feels like the beginning of the end for one of the last sections of the internet to exist independently of the major technology platforms. Just as the rise of social media usurped blogging, the success of YouTube centralised video creation, and, yes, the creation of Spotify itself upended the MP3-based era of online music fandom, podcasts in their current form feel on the edge of an existential change. It’s hard to see how Spotify’s efforts can be successfully fought except through others, like the BBC, retrenching to their own walled gardens, and while a world with twenty podcasting apps is probably better than a world with just one, it would be the end of an era. The funny pages From one industry on the cusp of platform assimilation to another in its final throes. This week, Amazon completed its eight-year-long integration of digital comics platform Comixology, which it acquired in the heady days of 2014. By the time the acquisition was finalised, Comixology had already cemented its position as the market leader. A white-label app for Marvel Comics, launched alongside the iPad by Steve Jobs himself, had helped catapult it into the mainstream, and just three years later it boasted a selection that included all the major American publishers, and a wide and growing selection of European and Japanese comics as well. Initially, Amazon seemed content to run Comixology at arms length. Its one prominent intervention was an early salvo in the wars over Apple’s App Store monopoly, when Amazon removed the ability to buy comics in-app in order to avoid the 30% fee charged by the store. Now, though, that has changed. The “new” Comixology has launched, promising full integration with Amazon’s Kindle platform, and it has gone … poorly. The update removed the ability for international users to subscribe to titles (an important feature for a periodical medium), broke every historic link to store pages, cut royalty rates for self-publishers, deleted the ability to download copies of your purchased comics to read on other apps, broke the online comics reader, and replaced a store designed from the ground-up for comic books with a mildly edited version of the main Amazon website. The shift feels existential for digital comics: if Amazon doesn’t fix the glaring oversights rapidly, then consumers will likely turn to piracy, taking the industry right back to the status quo of a decade ago. And yet, the turnover for the entire North American comics industry was just north of $1bn last year – barely a fifth of a per cent of Amazon’s revenue for the same period. For digital comics creators, the day Comixology was shut down could be the most consequential moment of their careers; for Amazon, it was just Thursday. If you want to read the complete version of the newsletter please subscribe to receive TechScape in your inbox every Wednesday.Good morning. If Russian forces try to take new territory in Ukraine, they will face an army that is far smaller and less well equipped than their own but hardened by eight years of fighting, writes Emma Graham-Harrison in Kyiv. Nearly a decade of war has also left Ukraine with nearly half a million combat-experienced veterans, many now preparing to fight again, officially or unofficially. “The Russian army has better weapons and technical equipment than us, so we may lose battles or campaigns. But they can never win the country if the Ukrainian people are motivated,” said Serhiy Kryvonos, a retired special forces general and former deputy secretary of the national security and defence council. The likelihood of a larger war in the near future dramatically increased yesterday when Vladimir Putin said Russia would support the territorial claims of its proxy states in east Ukraine, in what Joe Biden denounced as an attempt to carve out “a big chunk” of the country. Is Russia invading Ukraine and what will happen next? Putin has sent soldiers on a “peacekeeping mission” but is likely to threaten Ukraine with a broader war. Here is an explainer on what could happen next. Is all hope for a diplomatic solution lost? Not necessarily. Putin said this morning: “Our country is always open for direct and honest dialogue, for the search for diplomatic solutions to the most complex problems.” However, he added Russia’s interests were “non-negotiable”. What is Biden doing to stop the crisis? The president has threatened tougher steps for further provocation, but some believe he is holding back in order to preserve the potency of sanctions as a deterrent. National guard troops to be deployed in DC as trucker convoy protests loom The Pentagon is expected to approve the deployment of 700 to 800 unarmed national guard troops to Washington DC, a US official said yesterday, in the face of trucker convoys that are planning protests against pandemic restrictions beginning next week. The District of Columbia government and the US Capitol police are requesting the national guard assistance. The troops would be used largely to help control traffic and were expected to come from the district’s national guard and three states, said the official, who spoke on condition of anonymity to discuss aid not yet formally approved. Modelled after recent trucker protests in Canada, separate truck convoys have been planned through online forums with names such as the People’s Convoy and the American Truckers Freedom Fund – all with different starting points, departure dates and routes. Some are scheduled to arrive in time for Joe Biden’s State of the Union address on 1 March, although others may arrive afterward. It remains to be seen if any of the US convoys would seek to actively shut down Washington’s streets, the way their Canadian counterparts did in Ottawa. Some convoy organisers have spoken of plans to briefly roll through the city, then focus on shutting down the Beltway, which encircles the capital. Rudy Giuliani poised to cooperate with 6 January committee Donald Trump’s former attorney Rudy Giuliani is expected to cooperate with the House select committee investigating 6 January, and reveal his contacts with Republican members of Congress involved in the former president’s effort to overturn the results of the 2020 election. The move by Giuliani to appear before the panel – in a cooperation deal that could be agreed within weeks, according to two sources briefed on negotiations – could mark a breakthrough moment for the inquiry as it seeks to interview key members of Trump’s inner circle. Even though Trump’s allies and Republican members of Congress already known to have been involved in such efforts have refused to help the panel, Giuliani is now in a position to inform House investigators about any possible culpability. What could he reveal? The former president’s attorney is prepared to reveal his contacts and the roles played by Republican members of Congress to have then vice-president Mike Pence stop the certification of Joe Biden’s election victory. What else? He is also prepared to divulge details about Trump’s pressure campaign on Pence to adopt the scheme, and the effort to have legislatures certify slates of electors for Trump in states actually won by Biden. In other news … A North Carolina motorcyclist is suing Amazon for $100m after his collision with a delivery driver resulted in the amputation of his left leg, claiming the company’s pressure on its employees rendered the driver distracted and caused the crash. The lawsuit claims Amazon’s “Flex app” creates “foreseeable risk”. The three men convicted of murdering Ahmaud Arbery were found guilty of federal hate crimes yesterday, for violating Arbery’s civil rights and targeting him because he was Black. The jury reached its decision after several hours on the charges against Greg and Travis McMichael and William “Roddie” Bryan. Four people have died in the crash of a contractor’s helicopter on the Hawaii island of Kauai, the US navy said yesterday. The Pacific missile range facility said the aircraft crashed on the north side of the installation shortly after 10am. There were no survivors. The names of those killed were not yet available. Japanese women have outperformed men in medical school entrance exams for the first time since universities admitted they had deliberately failed female applicants to inflate the number of male doctors. The schools said they had deliberately failed female candidates due to concerns that women were more likely to quit their medical careers to start families. Stat of the day: Wildfires likely to increase by a third by 2050, warns UN Wildfires that have devastated California, Australia and Siberia will become 50% more common by the end of the century, according to a report that warns of uncontrollable blazes ravaging previously unaffected parts of the planet. The escalating climate crisis and land-use change are driving a global increase in extreme wildfires, with a 14% increase predicted by 2030 and a 30% increase by 2050, according to a UN report involving more than 50 international researchers. Don’t miss this: David Mamet on free speech, gender politics and rigged elections Sex and sexual politics have long featured in David Mamet’s work. He has an immense, omnivorous oeuvre, from Hollywood hits to Broadway smashes as well as novels, children’s stories, essays, articles and cartoons, writes Arifa Akbar. His liberal-baiting plays have even caused punch-ups in the aisles and he hasn’t finished yet. As The Woods – his incendiary take on sexual politics – returns, the writer cuts loose, discussing how well Donald Trump did as president, as well as the art of writing and the death of free speech. Climate check: Oil and gas facilities could profit from plugging methane leaks, IEA says Plugging methane from leaky oil and gas facilities would be free of cost almost everywhere in the world, and in many cases would produce a significant profit, at today’s soaring gas prices, the International Energy Agency has found, suggesting that governments have few excuses for not taking action to curb emissions of the powerful greenhouse gas. Last year, leaks from fossil fuel operations amounted to as much gas as Europe burns for power in a year. If that methane had been captured and used, the current gas crisis could have been largely avoided, the IEA said. Last Thing: Bull survives being swept 80km down-river, over a waterfall and almost out to sea A young bull that was swept into a surging river during flooding on New Zealand’s west coast has miraculously survived, turning up unharmed a week later, 80km (50 miles) downstream, snuffling about in a blackberry bush. The bull’s owner said he would have to get a special welcome home party – most likely a paddock full of grass. The pressure is also building to give his celebrity bull a name, but what exactly was “still under discussion”. Sign up First Thing is delivered to thousands of inboxes every weekday. If you’re not already signed up, subscribe now. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.comPollo alla cacciatore, or huntsman’s chicken (let us gloss over what kind of hunter comes home with a chicken), is more of a general concept than a specific recipe; as Marcella Hazan explains: “Since there has always been a hunter in nearly every Italian household, every Italian cook prepares a dish with a claim to that description.” Nevertheless, it’s a classic whatever meat you use. Prep 25 min Cook 45 min Serves 4 Flour, to dust Salt and pepper 4 chicken legs, divided into thighs and drumsticks (see step 1) 1 knob butter 2 tbsp olive oil 2 whole garlic heads 1 carrot 1 stick celery 1 small bunch fresh rosemary ½ glass white wine (ie, about 75ml) 250ml decent chicken stock 100g tinned plum tomatoes in juice, roughly chopped (see step 6) 1 Choose your cut of chicken Though I like legs, you could use a whole chicken, jointed, or indeed just thighs or drumsticks, if you prefer; be warned, though, that breasts alone are likely to get quite dry. Remove the skin, if you dislike it, though if you’re substituting game bird pieces, which tend towards the lean, I’d suggest leaving it on and potentially adding a little more oil to the pan. 2 Flour the chicken Cover a small plate with flour (any sort will do) and season generously. Heat the butter and oil in a large, heavy-based casserole (for which you have a lid) on a medium-high heat. (Alternatively, use a frying pan and transfer the stew to a saucepan in step 7.) Roll the chicken in flour to coat. 3 Brown the chicken Fry the chicken in batches, being careful not to overcrowd the pan, because that will cause the meat to steam rather than fry, until nicely browned all over, then remove from the pan and set aside. While the chicken is cooking, cut the garlic heads in half horizontally and peel and cut the carrot and celery into fairly fine dice. 4 Brown the soffrito Put the diced vegetables, halved garlic heads (skin and all) and rosemary in the casserole, turn down the heat slightly and fry, stirring regularly, for a few minutes, until beginning to soften and colour; add a little more oil if the veg looks likely to catch and burn. 5 Add the wine and deglaze the pan Turn the heat back up a little, pour in the wine, then scrape the bottom of the pan to dislodge any crusty bits of flour. Bring to a simmer, then leave to bubble away until well reduced – there should be only a spoonful or two left. (Note: you can use red wine, vermouth or dry sherry, if you prefer.) 6 Pour in the stock and tomatoes Stir in the stock and tomatoes, and bring up to a simmer; if using whole tinned tomatoes, roughly mash them with a fork to break them up a bit. In summer, you could use good, ripe, fresh tomatoes instead, grated on the large holes of a box grater to remove the skins. 7 Return the chicken to the pot Put the chicken back in the pan, pushing the pieces down into the sauce. Once the sauce is bubbling away again, cover tightly, turn down the heat and leave to cook quietly for about 45 minutes, or until the meat is falling from the bone. (If using smaller birds, check after 30 minutes.) 8 Reduce the sauce, if need be If the sauce is still fairly liquid once the meat is done – which is likely if you’ve reduced the cooking time to account for smaller game birds – take out the meat, cover to keep warm, then turn up the heat and leave the sauce to bubble away until thickened. Either way, season to taste once you’re happy with the consistency. 9 Serve on polenta, mash or rice You may wish to strip the meat off the bones and stir it back into the sauce before serving to small children or the less dextrous, though otherwise I wouldn’t bother. I like this with polenta and a green salad, but mashed potato or buttered rice and steamed vegetables would also be fine accompaniments. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from OcadoIn 1997 Wales voted in favour of devolution by a margin of 50.3%, one of the narrowest victories in British electoral history. Two areas in the country that carried the yes vote were Carmarthenshire and the south Wales valleys, both locations with their own recognisable identities. Carmarthen was the first constituency in Wales to elect a Plaid Cymru MP, the party’s leader Gwynfor Evans, in 1966. Many of the county’s inhabitants regarded Carmarthenshire as part of Y Fro Cymraeg, the Welsh-speaking heartland. The valleys, with its historical tradition of workers’ institutes and mutualism was no less a heartland, one where English was spoken more frequently than the Welsh language, Cymraeg. In each instance a place strongly associated with a distinct form of Welshness voted in favour of devolution. My history of Wales, Brittle With Relics, concludes with the vote in favour of devolution and begins 35 years earlier, with a radio speech that warned Cymraeg would become extinct unless some form of radical, extra-parliamentary action was undertaken. It examines the tensions and arguments within Wales over what constituted Welsh identity during the period and the manner in which these arguments were buffeted by economic and political forces beyond the country’s control. Today in Wales we are again engaged in an involved conversation about our future. It is a conversation we are finally having on something approaching our own terms. The following books helped me understand how we might distinguish a Welsh form of self-determination. They would all generously oil the wheels of our current national debate. 1. Poems by Lynette Roberts (1944) Of Welsh descent, Roberts was born in Argentina and settled in the village of Llanybri at the age of 30. The years spent away from the country enabled Roberts to write poems steeped in Wales’s language and landscape, while imagining a new form of Welsh identity. Poem from Llanbryni was written in the style of the Welsh invitational poem to her fellow poet Alun Lewis, then serving and shortly to die in Burma. It describes the meal she will cook for Lewis using ingredients taken from the hedgerow and her garden: “At noon-day I will offer you a choice bowl of cawl Served with a ‘lover’s’ spoon and a chopped spray Of leeks or savori fach, not used now” Later in the poem, Roberts suggests she and Lewis should conclude their day by raising “our heritage”. It is a heritage composed equally of simple food and a national character that, Roberts implies, is hers and Lewis’s to determine. 2. An Acre of Land by RS Thomas (1952) The title of Brittle With Relics is taken from Thomas’s Welsh Landscape, which begins with the much-quoted lines: “To live in Wales is to be conscious At dusk of the spilled blood That went into the making of the wild sky.” Thomas’s greatest gift to Wales was this flint-eyed rejection of the self-deprecation with which the Welsh are still caricatured, in favour of an austere stoicism. As he writes in Welsh History: “We were a people, and are so yet. When we have finished quarrelling for crumbs Under the table, or gnawing the bones Of a dead culture, we will arise And greet each other in a new dawn.” 3. The Small Mine by Menna Gallie (1962) The Welsh Industrial Novel is frequently the Welsh Industrial Accident Novel. The plot of The Small Mine revolves around the death of a young man working in a private colliery in what was, in 1962, an otherwise nationalised industry. With little sentimentality, Gallie examines the effect of the tragedy on the valleys mining community of the fictitious village of Cilhendre, particularly on the lives and rigorously determined roles of the village’s women. Their resilience and survival skills anticipate the response of the support groups formed during the miners’ strike, two decades later. 4. Between Worlds: A Queer Boy from the Valleys by Jeffrey Weeks (2021) The south Wales valleys are also a location in Weeks’ memoir. As a child during the 1950s and 60s, he admires the supportive neighbourliness and tradition of radicalism in his native Rhondda. Weeks is also aware that his sexuality – “a deadly secret” – would inevitably render him an outcast and produce feelings of shame in himself and his family. Like many of his generation, his departure from Wales was facilitated by higher education: “I left the Rhondda just before my 19th birthday … as a queer boy from the Rhondda I had to flee its intense embrace in order to become myself.” By addressing the psychological boundaries placed around close-knit communities, Weeks made it less likely that young people would feel the necessity to leave areas such as the valleys due to their sexuality. 5. The Welsh Extremist by Ned Thomas (1971) Written in English, The Welsh Extremist examines the social energy animating the Cymraeg-speaking areas of Wales during the late 1960s and early 1970s that coalesced into a dynamic and committed protest movement. In 1971, Ned Thomas surveyed “a society that is drained of its own best talent (and) begins to resent every incursion … the land bought for the sake of the trout stream by the fishing syndicate from the Midland city, the buyers of holiday cottages who price the local young couples out.” Half a century later, Wales remains blighted by similar conditions, ill-informed opinions about Cymraeg and ever more powerful market forces. 6. When Was Wales? by Gwyn Alf Williams (1985) In Williams’ memorable phrase, Wales has “survived in crisis”. When Was Wales? detects in the nation a form of amnesia: “Half-memories, folklore … fantasy are rampant. We are a people with plenty of traditions but no historical memory.” Energetic, charismatic and popular, Williams died in 1995 and did not live to witness devolution. Should his doubtless sparkling-eyed ghost attend a Wales football match today, Williams would be greatly enamoured of the bilingual, socially progressive community that constitutes many contemporary Welsh football supporter networks. 7. The Owl Service by Alan Garner (1967) Garner stayed in a holiday home belonging to friends of his wife to research this magical and eerie book for young adults. The Owl Service is a reworking of the last episode of the Fourth Branch of the Mabinogi, Math fab Mathonwy, the story of Blodeuwedd – a girl made from flowers, condemned to participate in a love triangle, before undergoing transformation into an owl. Published coincidentally in the psychedelic summer of 1967, The Owl Service is a vivid and hallucinatory story, loyal to its roots among the darkness of Welsh mythology. 8. Sugar and Slate by Charlotte Williams (2002) In this memoir named after the two materials mined by the families of her Guyanese (father) and Welsh-speaking, Gwynedd (mother’s) heritage, Charlotte Williams examines her experience of being Black and Welsh. With great dexterity she also invites the reader to consider several of the received ideas about Wales’s role in colonialism, along with the tendency for Wales to be regarded as one of England’s first colonies. The result is a book that speaks to how a contemporary, multicultural Wales addresses its history. 9. I’r Gad edited by Arwel Vittle (2013) Named after a song by the protest singer and politician Dafydd Iwan, I’r Gad, is a collection of photographs that document the civil disobedience, initiated from the 1960s to the 1990s, to ensure the survival of Cymraeg and lives lived through Cymraeg in Wales. For the non-Welsh speaker, this book is the perfect introduction to the Welsh language movement. Much of the activity it captures was the work of Cymdeithas yr laith Gymraeg (The Welsh Language Society), whose successful campaigns for a Welsh television channel and a Welsh Language Act, among many others, secured and enriched the culture of Wales. 10. The Matter of Wales by Jan Morris (1984) Until her death in 2020, Morris was one of Wales’s greatest literary ambassadors. In this centuries-spanning overview of Welsh history, she is clear-sighted in her analysis – locating recurring faults in the country’s administration and a malevolent energy in the Black Mountains – but it is her boundless love for this small nation that illuminates the text. And Wales loved this generous, remarkable woman in return. Brittle With Relics: A History of Wales 1962-97 by Richard King is published by Faber. To help the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.For what has become his final feature film, director Roger Michell made this sweet-natured and genial comedy in the spirit of Ealing, which bobs up like a ping pong ball on a water-fountain. It is based on the true story of Kempton Bunton, the Newcastle cab driver who in 1965 appeared at the Old Bailey for stealing Goya’s portrait of the Duke of Wellington from London’s National Gallery. The mystery of its disappearance had so electrified the media that there was even a gag about it in the James Bond film Dr No, using a copy personally painted by the legendary production designer Ken Adam, which was itself stolen. Maybe there should be a film about that as well. The court heard this was Bunton’s protest at government misuse of taxpayers’ money (the painting had been saved for the nation at some cost) and to publicise his demand for pensioners to be given free TV licences. (This film features the usual “historical coda” sentences over the closing credits, and one sentimentally records that free TV licences for the over-75s were finally introduced in 2000. But no mention of these being taken away again in 2020.) If this was actually an Ealing picture, Stanley Holloway might have taken the lead role; as it is, Jim Broadbent plays the cussed and bloody-minded Bunton, a pipe-smoking individualist, autodidact and working man: JB Priestley without the establishment cachet or the university degree. He writes dozens of unpublished novels and unproduced plays, emotionally driven by the tragic death of his daughter, and is briefly imprisoned for refusing to pay for his licence on the grounds that he has removed the cathode that allows his set to receive the BBC. (It should be said that there is something a little bit Brexity about him.) His exasperated but loving wife Dorothy is played by Helen Mirren, who gives her all to this slightly underwritten role – at one stage knitting so fiercely that the needles clash like duellists’ sabres. His loyal, decent son Jackie is played by Fionn Whitehead and Jackie’s brother Kenny – imagined here as a bit of a ne’er-do-well – is played by Jack Bandeira. Finally, Bunton makes a trip to London to petition for his cause, a path that takes him to the National Gallery. The screenplay, co-written by Richard Bean and Clive Coleman, may not be 100% historically accurate – could you make a “food order” of fish and chips in a pub in the early 60s? – but it amusingly shows how the police and gallery authorities, anxious to minimise their embarrassment, insisted this audacious crime had to be the work of a sophisticated international criminal gang. And when Bunton’s flowery anonymous notes finally come to light revealing him to be the culprit, the Tory home secretary Rab Butler (robustly played by Richard McCabe) snorts at his rhyming of “fortitude” and “sportitude” and says: “The man’s a bloody poet! Perhaps we can lock WH Auden up at last!” The story of Bunton and the Duke’s portrait is very unusual for a high-concept Britpic in that the true story has a ready-made two-part plot, revealing a mystery you didn’t know was there. There is a second act still to come just before the end, a narrative sting in the tail that is adroitly concealed in the structuring and editing. Broadbent’s performance satisfyingly shows both the public and the private man to be the same: the stubborn eccentric and the individualist who drives Dorothy up the wall, and the born standup comic who in court gets laughs from the jury and the press gallery. There is a fair bit of sentimentality here, but an awful lot of affection and energy as well. • The Duke is released on 25 February in cinemas.A play that opens with a woman downing vodka from a Mooncup is hard to come by. Splintered, written and directed by Emily Aboud, is a fantastic night of festivity and foolery. A charismatic trio – Chanté Faucher, Melissa Saint and Alice Vilanculo – are our teachers. “Welcome to Splintered everyone,” they shout. “Are you ready to come out?” Collectively, they educate us on the life of queer women in the Caribbean, reasoning that the homophobia embedded in their culture is founded in the legacy of colonialism. A mix of cabaret, drama and verbatim interviews, this blazing hybrid-form introduces us to their real stories. “Everything you see will be truthful,” the emcees swear. Fast-paced and brimming with energy, this endlessly political show never stops being playful. In a gloriously queer twist on the song Cell Block Tango from Kander and Ebb’s Chicago, they click in time and whisper “relatable, gay, content”, while narrating the first moment they realised their sexualities. Even when their tales are stained by sadness and shame, it remains a comedy about joy. An expert in merging history lessons with humour, Aboud has created an audience-embracing celebration of the origins of Caribbean carnival. With the sequined costumes designed by Hazel Low and the dramatic accompaniment of the music from Who Wants to Be a Millionaire?, the defiantly flamboyant spirit of the festival is deeply woven into every directorial decision. A final voiceover of a queer woman, unable to come out of hiding in Trinidad and Tobago, hits us with a shot of reality. You have to resist and rebel, the emcees say. The spectacular party continues, in spite of oppression. • At Soho theatre, London, until 26 February.A court in Japan has awarded damages for the first time to people who were forcibly sterilised under a now-defunct eugenics law designed to prevent the births of “inferior children”. The Osaka high court overturned a lower court decision and ordered the government to pay a combined ¥27.5m (£175,600) to the three plaintiffs, who are in their 70s and 80s. It described the law, which was abolished in 1996, as “inhumane”. Courts hearing similar cases have declared that the practice was unconstitutional, but rejected damages claims, saying the 20-year statute of limitations had expired. A lower court had rejected the three plaintiffs’ demand for that reason in 2020 – a ruling the Osaka high court judge said “grossly violates the spirit of justice and fairness”. Japan’s government apologised and awarded compensation to thousands of people in 2019, but the victims’ lawyers said the one-off offer of ¥3.2m did not reflect the suffering the victims had experienced. To date, the government has compensated fewer than 1,000 victims under the scheme, according to the Kyodo news agency. The plaintiffs’ lawyer, Tamano Tsujikawa, said his clients – a married couple with hearing difficulties and a woman with an intellectual disability – had “moved mountains” by communicating their anguish to the judge. “I am happy our claim was accepted,” the woman, who was forcibly sterilised in 1965, said after the verdict, according to public broadcaster NHK, which did not name her. “But the sorrow of having to go through the operation is still with me even now,” she said. Victims and their families welcomed the verdict. “This ruling stands by the victims,” the sister-in-law of a plaintiff in a separate suit in Sendai, north-east Japan, told Kyodo. Saburo Kita, a representative of a group of victims and their families, told the news agency: “Our lives were completely destroyed. This is not about money. With this verdict, I want the government to bow in front of all of the victims and apologise.” Between 1948 and 1996, about 16,500 people, mostly women with disabilities, were operated on without their consent under the law, which aimed to “prevent the birth of poor-quality descendants … and to protect the life and health of the mother”. About 8,000 other people gave their consent – almost certainly under pressure – while almost 60,000 women had abortions because of hereditary illnesses, according to media reports. The eugenics law was abolished in 1996. The health ministry will review the case before deciding whether to appeal, government officials said. The health minister, Shigeyuki Goto, described the verdict as “very tough” for the government.We are a hardcore fundamentalist family on Pancake Day. For most of the year, fluffy American-style pancakes are our go-to five-minute weekend breakfast. But these do not pass muster on Pancake Day. In our house, Shrove Tuesday is a day of crepes, lemon and sugar and aggressively enforced applause whenever I successfully flip one. I don’t expect the whole world to adhere to my pancake orthodoxy, so here are 10 brazenly experimental pancakes for you to try out. Savoy pancakes You cannot make a savoury pancake half-heartedly. You must leap in with both feet. Especially if you cook up something like Joe Trivelli’s savoy pancakes. A conscious attempt to blend pancakes with bubble and squeak, they contain mashed potato and boiled cabbage. The end results are dangerously close to being farls but, eaten straight from the pan, are delicious enough to trounce such quibbling. Serve your stack topped with a fried egg. Cheese, thyme and pecan pancakes From a 2015 Guardian Readers’ Recipe Swap list, ElleZumbido’s recipe for cheese, thyme and pecan pancakes borders on the ridiculous. Containing an unholy mixture of cheddar, camembert and creme de Saint Agur, the combined cheesiness only slightly mitigated by the addition of honey and toasted pecans, these pancakes seem precision-honed to give you nightmares. As ElleZumbido puts it: “These pancakes are not for the faint-hearted.” Lamb broth with pancake ‘noodles’ As you might expect, Yotam Ottolenghi seizes the opportunity to turn the pancake concept on its head. Riffing on the German dish flaedlesuppe, his lamb broth with pancake “noodles” lets the crepes act as a bulking agent for soup. This is a very time-intensive recipe – to get the lamb to properly fall off the bone, you need to cook it for close to three hours – but the results are well worth the investment. Once the broth is ready, make some pancakes, roll them, slice them and chuck them in at the last minute. Pancakes stuffed with herring The greatest pancake restaurant in the world is, without question, Kompressor in Tallinn, Estonia. When the money is short and the mood is low, you’re guaranteed to leave full and happy. Kompressor’s menu ranges from the conventional (ham and cheese; cheese and tomato) but isn’t afraid to take risks. Enter the herring pancake: vast, thick and (at about £4.60) incredibly cheap. Kompressor keeps its recipes close to its chest, but Culinary Choice’s herring pancake recipe makes a good fist of it. The pancakes are filled with chopped herring, boiled egg and onion with sour creme and dill. You will love this or massively not love it. Japanese soufflé pancakes If I veer from my preference for flat, thin Pancake Day pancakes, I do so with as much panache as possible. Japanese soufflé pancakes are things of absolute wonder – soft, light and tall enough to give you vertigo. As the Kirbie’s Cravings recipe explains, they’re an awful lot of work – you have to make a meringue mixture, fold in your pancake mix, pour into a greased muffin ring and carefully steam under a lid. But if you use Pancake Day as an opportunity to impress people, this is your only serious option. Haemul pajeon When I lived in Seoul and found myself reluctantly dragged on hikes up Bukhansan, by far the best part of the day was eating the pajeon that greeted me at the bottom of the mountain. A ridiculously hearty pancake, made with corn flour, plain flour and sparkling water, pajeon have seafood and spring onions cooked through them and are best served with a soy and rice vinegar dipping sauce. Most Asian supermarkets will have packets of pre-mixed pajeon powder, but making it from scratch is more fun. Thai pancakes We’ll round off this Asian interlude with Good to Know’s recipe for Thai pancakes. They’re filled with a punchy mixture of noodles, curry paste, fish sauce, peanuts, prawns and lime juice, and are eaten dipped in sweet chilli sauce. The recipe stipulates readymade pancakes, but you know better than that. Prosecco pancakes About five years ago, there was a fad for prosecco pancakes which, in hindsight, seems like pre-catastrophe decadence. However, I would argue that they’re still worth a go. This is partly because they are crepes at heart, and thus adhere to my authoritarian stance on Pancake Day. Second, they’re not as ostentatious as they sound. As Bubble Club’s recipe shows, adding prosecco to the batter lightens it, while making a prosecco syrup adds subtle sophistication. Peanut butter pickle pancakes I’m not sure I can fully sanction Spoon University’s recipe for peanut butter pickle pancakes, but I’m going to share it. The base of the recipe is a fluffy American pancake. However, a disturbing combination of peanut butter, vanilla extract and a chopped gherkin is added to the mix. Is it good? I’m not brave enough to try, not least because it’s topped with a dribble of pickle juice. Jaffa cake pancake Finally, my God, there is the jaffa cake pancake. Another Good to Know idea, these are unbelievable. Make a fluffy pancake, spoon marmalade on top, then pour over melted dark chocolate and let it harden. You are left with something that looks like a jaffa cake, tastes a bit like a jaffa cake and defies all known Pancake Day conventions.As part of The Guardian’s “what we’re reading” series, we would like to hear about the books you’ve particularly enjoyed this month. Have you read a book in recent weeks – fiction or non-fiction – that you’d recommend? Tell us all about it below. Share your recommendations You can get in touch by filling in the form below. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.When Harry Stamper sets off a bomb to save planet Earth in the film Armageddon, his life flashes before his eyes. Now research has revealed tantalising clues that such recall may not be Hollywood hyperbole. An international team of scientists has reported an unexpected situation in which they recorded the brain activity of an 87-year-old patient as he died. The man had been admitted to a hospital emergency department after a fall that resulted in a bleed in the brain, and subsequently deteriorated. When doctors carried out an electroencephalography (EEG), they had discovered the patient had developed epilepsy. However, during the EEG recordings he had experienced a heart attack and died. The team says analysis of recordings of the 30 seconds before and after the man’s heart stopped beating suggest that in his final moments he experienced changes in different types of brain waves, including alpha and gamma brain waves. The study suggests that interactions between different types of brain wave continue after the blood stops flowing in the brain. But, the researchers add, it also raises an intriguing possibility. “Given that cross-coupling between alpha and gamma activity is involved in cognitive processes and memory recall in healthy subjects, it is intriguing to speculate that such activity could support a last ‘recall of life’ that may take place in the near-death state,” the team writes in the journal Frontiers in Ageing Neuroscience. However, the findings are based on the recordings from just one person, and the researchers urge caution, noting among other factors that traumatic brain injuries and white matter damage can affect brain waves, while activity of networks in the brain can be affected by anticonvulsant medication such as that given to the patient. Nonetheless, the researchers say the results could have important implications. “These findings challenge our understanding of when exactly life ends and generate important subsequent questions, such as those related to the timing of organ donation,” said Dr Ajmal Zemmar, a neurosurgeon at the University of Louisville, US, and a co-author of the study. Prof Anil Seth, a neuroscientist at the University of Sussex who was not involved in the research, said the data was “pretty unique”, noting ethically it was not possible to plan the collection of such recordings. But, he added, questions remained. “The study extends work from about 10 years ago showing characteristic ‘bursts’ of brain activity in rodents prior to death, with some brain activity persisting even after cardiac arrest – especially in the so-called ‘gamma’ frequency range,” he said “This study, showing similar findings in a dying human, is both moving and fascinating, but whether the recorded activity underlies any particular kind of subjective experience – whether so-called ‘near death experiences’, or impressions of life flashing before ones eyes – is impossible to say, and will likely remain so.” Dr Steve Taylor, a psychologist at Leeds Beckett University, agreed. “I don’t think we can assume this is a representative example of how the human brain behaves at the point of death,” he said, adding it was also a stretch to link an increase in gamma brain waves with flashbacks before death. “The life review can actually occur when people are not physiologically close to death – there are many cases of life reviews during falls, for instance,” he said.Further details of the animosity between Charlize Theron and Tom Hardy have been detailed in a new book about the making of George Miller’s 2015 action blockbuster Mad Max: Fury Road. The co-stars were known to have a frosty relationship through the lengthy shoot in the Namibian desert, but Kyle Buchanan’s new book Blood, Sweat &amp; Chrome: The Wild and True Story of Mad Max: Fury Road suggests Theron felt sufficiently threatened to require on-set protection from the “aggressive” Hardy. Hardy starred as the title character in the film, played by Mel Gibson in the original trilogy. Theron was newcomer Imperator Furiosa, a lieutenant to the villain Immortan Joe (Hugh Keays-Byrne) who turns against her leader to collaborate with Max while escorting young women to safety. Speaking to Buchanan, Theron and other crew members allege a litany of unprofessional behaviour on the part of Hardy, including persistent lateness causing his co-workers to wait for hours on set. In one instance, Hardy was due on set at 8am, along with the rest of the cast and crew required that day. They included Theron, then a new mother whose baby was in childcare nearby while she worked. Despite producers having made a “special request” for Hardy to be punctual, he was more than three hours late, during which time Theron remained in position, ready to shoot. “She was really going to make a point,” recalled camera operator Mark Goellnicht. “She didn’t go to the bathroom, didn’t do anything. She just sat in the War Rig.” When Hardy finally arrived, Theron asked Hardy: “How disrespectful are you?” and said the producers should “fine the fucking cunt a hundred thousand dollars for every minute that he’s held up this crew”. Hardy responded by “charging up to her” and saying: “What did you say to me?” Goellnicht said Hardy seemed “quite aggressive” and that Theron “really felt threatened.” “That was the turning point, because then she said, ‘I want someone as protection.’” Theron added: “It got to a place where it was kind of out of hand, and there was a sense that maybe sending a woman producer down could maybe equalise some of it, because I didn’t feel safe. “I don’t want to make excuses for bad behaviour, but it was a tough shoot. Now, I have a very clear perspective on what went down. I don’t think I had that clarity when we were making the movie. I was in survival mode; I was really scared shitless.” However, the producer assigned to Theron, Denise Di Novi, was barred from set by producer Doug Mitchell, meaning that Theron “still felt pretty naked and alone” on set. “You understand the needs of a director who wants to protect his set, but when push comes to shove and things get out of hand, you have to be able to think about that in a bigger sense,” Theron continued. “That’s where we could have done better, if George trusted that nobody was going to come and fuck with his vision but was just going to come and help mediate situations.” Miller’s actions led to “several weeks on that movie where I wouldn’t know what was going to come my way, and that’s not necessarily a nice thing to feel when you’re on your job. It was a little bit like walking on thin ice.” Miller said he felt “disappointment about the process” and added: “Looking back, if I had to do it again, I would probably be more mindful.” The contributors to Buchanan’s book broadly agree that the friction between Theron and Hardy might have perversely helped the on-screen tension, but was largely the product of bull-headedness on Hardy’s part. Assistant cameraman Ricky Schamburg called Hardy “very provocative” and Theron the opposite, while key second assistant director Samantha McGrady called Theron “the easiest person to deal with”. “Boy fucking howdy, was it clear that those two people hated each other,” said editor J Houston Yang. “They didn’t want to touch each other, they didn’t want to look at each other, they wouldn’t face each other if the camera wasn’t actively rolling.” Co-star Nicholas Hoult likened the on-set atmosphere to being “on your summer holidays and the adults in the front of the car are arguing”; a comparison Theron agreed with: “It was horrible! We should not have done that; we should have been better. I can own up to that.” Hardy responded by saying he was “in over my head in many ways”. “The pressure on both of us was overwhelming at times. What she needed was a better, perhaps more experienced partner in me. That’s something that can’t be faked. I’d like to think that now that I’m older and uglier, I could rise to that occasion.” The Guardian has contacted Hardy’s representatives for further comment. Relations between Theron and Hardy thawed slightly as the shoot progressed and the plot involved the pair becoming closer, with Goellnicht crediting the change to Hardy being “such a method actor that I think he took the arc in the literal sense.” Miller’s film won six awards at the 2016 Oscars. A further film in the series will explore the backstory of Furiosa with Anya Taylor-Joy taking over the role in place of Theron.Five years ago, this publication’s Sam Knight wrote a long read entitled ‘London Bridge is down’; a sombre, forensic examination of what will happen in the immediate aftermath of the death of Queen Elizabeth II. Knight explained that the news will break in an orderly, frictionless way. First to government officials via codeword, then to the BBC and the Press Association and finally a black-edged notice pinned to the gates of Buckingham Palace. When it happens, it will be well rehearsed and highly organised. What Sam Knight didn’t predict, however, was that the news of the Queen’s death would be exclusively leaked to a celebrity news blog run by a man best known for having a bit-part in a spin-off to a VH1 reality hip-hop dating show. But, hey, nobody gets everything right all the time. To be clear, as far as anyone in the world knows at the moment, the Queen hasn’t died. But that didn’t stop Hollywood Unlocked – a blog run by Love &amp; Hip Hop star Jason Lee (not to be confused with the Jason Lee from the Alvin and the Chipmunks movies) – from announcing it on Tuesday night. “Socialites,” the offending post began, “it is with our deepest regret to inform you that Britain’s Queen Elizabeth has died. Sources close to the Royal Kingdom notified us exclusively that Queen Elizabeth has passed away. She was scheduled to attend the wedding of British Vogue editor Edward Enninful, but was found dead”. Now, clearly, there’s a lot to unpack here. The claim that the Queen was “found dead”, as if she wandered off into Hyde Park to be discovered by a dog walker, suggests a lack of expertise on the subject. As does the phrase “sources close to the Royal Kingdom”, because that technically describes anyone who lives in or around the UK. Last, it seems fairly unlikely that the Queen was headed to Enninful’s wedding, since most reports claim that the guestlist for that event is reserved for all the myriad Beckhams and Delevingnes. Nevertheless, Lee is sticking to his guns. On Instagram, in the wake of Hollywood Unlocked’s post, he uploaded a note reading: “1. I’ve never lied. 2. I’ve never been wrong. 3. I trust my sources. 4. I have yet to see an official statement from the palace saying otherwise. 5. I’ll be at the Donda concert tonight with Ye.” And this sets up an extraordinary battle between the might of the British monarchy and a blogger who nobody knew about until 18 hours ago. If he’s wrong, his reputation will be in shreds. But if he happens to be right, an entire constitutional handover decades in the making will be derailed from the off. It will mean that the British population will have to entirely recalibrate its expectations for major events. If Queen Elizabeth’s death really was broken on a C-list celebrity blog, then what can we expect next? Will we learn about the death of Prince Charles through a sequence of emojis on Snapchat? Will it be exclusively revealed by a novelty cat account on TikTok? It doesn’t bear thinking about. And what of Buckingham Palace now? Does it have to officially deny a blogpost on the internet? Will we soon be greeted with the image of Queen Elizabeth doing a thumbs-up next to a copy of today’s newspaper to demonstrate that she’s alive and kicking? You’d think not, because that would set a ridiculous precedent. Anyone could claim that she had died, and the palace would be forced to deny everything. It isn’t a very dignified way to spend the winter of your years. In fairness to Lee, if you’re going to pick anyone to be the subject of a spurious death hoax, a nonagenarian with Covid does seem like the safest bet. However, all signs currently point to him being wrong. Which isn’t to say that should completely discount Hollywood Unlocked, of course. If you want to read stories about teachers who fed students cupcakes laced with semen, it remains a rock-solid news source.A man who stalked and harassed the British tennis star Emma Raducanu has been given a five-year restraining order and sentenced to community service. Amrit Magar, 35, who said he had walked 23 miles to the US Open champion’s home in London and then took her father’s shoe – thinking it belonged to Raducanu – as a souvenir, was found guilty of stalking at Bromley magistrates court last month. Magar, from Harrow in north-east London, turned up at the property on three separate occasions between 1 November and 4 December last year, the court heard. He loitered outside, left unwanted gifts and cards and stole items from the porch. A bouquet of flowers he left included a note that read: “Nothing to say but you deserve love.” There was also a self-drawn map to show the “23 miles” he had walked from his home. Magar was arrested after Raducanu’s father, Ian, was alerted by a doorbell camera, finding his trainer had been stolen from the porch. In a statement to the court, Raducanu, 19, said the ordeal had left her feeling afraid to go out alone. “Since all this has happened I have felt creeped out. I feel very apprehensive if I go out, especially if I am on my own,” the British No 1 said in a statement reported by the Mail. “Because of this I feel like my freedom has been taken away from me. I am constantly looking over my shoulder. I feel on edge and worried this could happen again. I don’t feel safe in my own home, which is where I should feel safest.” Magar found her address by travelling to the London suburb where she lives with her parents and asking people for directions. On his last visit to the property in early December, he decorated a tree in the front garden with Christmas lights. He was caught by Raducanu’s father, who recognised Magar from previous visits and followed him by car while calling the police. The tennis player told police: “I want to move to a new house with better security because I am worried he might come back as he knows where my home is.” Magar was given a five-year restraining order and an 18-month community order, including 200 hours of unpaid work and an eight-week curfew between 9pm and 6am monitored by an electronic tag.Since the annexation of Crimea in 2014, the western response to Vladimir Putin’s growing list of crimes has been to impose sanctions on his “cronies”. In recent years there have been particularly insistent demands for sanctions on rich Russian oligarchs resident in London. So the UK government’s response this week to Putin’s recognition of the separatist republics in Ukraine’s Donbas region took the usual form: sanctions against five Russian banks and three oligarchs. The cries went up at once: not enough! Why not Abramovich? What happened to the unexplained wealth orders, recent legal tools intended to expose and punish money-launderers? On this site the Labour MP Chris Bryant demanded much tougher action against the Russian oligarchs who abuse British laws to buy property here and hide their ill-gotten gains. Despite the furore, we rarely pause to ask some very simple questions: are these measures actually the right sanctions? Are they targeting the right people? And, crucially, have they ever had any effect on Putin’s behaviour? The answer to all three questions is no. First, imposing sanctions on oligarchs has little effect on Russian policy. Some Russian oligarchs are close to Putin, and some of them probably help hide his wealth in offshore accounts. Putin uses them to finance projects that he needs done quickly – infrastructure for the Sochi Olympics, a bridge to annexed Crimea. But it is an entirely one-way relationship. Putin allows them to prosper on two conditions: that they cough up the cash when he needs it, and that they stay out of politics. The idea that they influence his policies is pure fantasy. The proof of that is that sanctions regularly meted out on oligarchs since 2014 have made not one jot of difference to Putin’s policies. The west imposed sanctions over Crimea, the downing of a Malaysian passenger jet over Ukraine and the attempted murder of Sergei Skripal in Salisbury. None of them elicited so much as an expression of regret, far less a change of course. What they did do, of course, was deepen Putin’s already simmering hatred of the west. Of course, money launderers who profit from the UK’s lax regime should be exposed and prosecuted. But not all of them are Russian. And none of them have a say in Kremlin decision-making – certainly not in his foreign policies. You only had to look at the quaking members of Putin’s security council on Monday, as they were forced to stand one by one at a lectern and profess their support for his decision to recognise the Donbas republics, to understand that Putin takes orders from no one. Not from his closest political team, and certainly not from rich Russians based in London. The only real value in punishing oligarchs is that it makes the west feel and look good because it is doing something. Economic sanctions – cancelling the Nordstream II gas pipeline, or restricting Russia’s access to the Swift system – may have a greater effect, but they may also rebound on us in the form of higher energy prices. However, there is a much bolder and more imaginative approach. Russia’s ruling class – the members of the Duma, the Senate, the presidential council, the top echelons of the security and defence services, top state television employees – is several thousands strong. These men (and some women) draft, rubber-stamp, promote and carry out Putin’s decisions. Some of them also – unlike the oligarchs – actually advise him. Being a member of the Duma or Senate is a pretty cushy number – you are well-paid, you can make an occasional speech if you wish, but you are basically there to vote for the Kremlin’s decisions, and, above all, you can extort as many bribes as you can cope with. (For this reason they are detested by a majority of Russians.) Members of the presidential council are civil servants, essential for the preparation of legislation. The security services play crucial roles in executing Putin’s vision. And TV propagandists spread disinformation. These are the people to target – because when several thousand of the people Putin actually depends on begin to feel the consequences of his policies in their personal lives, there will be a groundswell of discontent. Most of these people love to travel to Europe and the US. They educate their children here. They own properties here. The members of the Russian elite, their families and children, love to swan around on yachts, ski slopes and fine hotels in the west, posting pictures of themselves on Instagram. If they are denied visas to travel to the west – if they are effectively imprisoned in Russia – it will not take long for the discontent to permeate the entire political class. The message to them will be clear: if you want to enjoy your western lifestyles, you need a new leader who respects western values; until then, you’re banned. The added value of this approach is that, unlike some economic sanctions, it will not harm ordinary Russians, in fact it will delight them. If any kind of sanctions are going to have an effect, it is these. Forget the oligarchs; go for the political elite. Angus Roxburgh is a former BBC Moscow correspondent and consultant to the Kremlin. He is the author of The Strongman: Vladimir Putin and the Struggle for Russia and Moscow Calling: Memoirs of a Foreign CorrespondentThe pandemic delayed a well-earned victory lap for Blondie. In 2020, Debbie Harry and Chris Stein were due to commence a speaking tour; there was also an archival box set of their complete discography due. But good things come to those who wait, and 2022 looks to be a banner year for the historic new wave group. The In Conversation tour is back on in November. The box set – with extensive new liner notes and essays – is coming soon, along with a graphic novel offering a unique retelling of the band’s storied history. Record Store Day brings an EP with previously unreleased tracks, and on 22 April, they commence the UK leg of their Against the Odds tour with special guest Johnny Marr. To tee up Blondie’s big year, Debbie Harry will be taking your questions for the Guardian Film &amp; Music reader interview. Anyone who has read her fantastic 2019 memoir, Face It, knows there’s no shortage of things to ask about: her status as one of the artists who defined punk and new wave; Blondie’s trailblazing social milieu in New York, including Andy Warhol; surviving the music business and the taxman; how she has maintained her uniquely resilient spirit and defied the nostalgia machine to remain creatively committed into her 70s. Post your questions about Harry’s long career in the comments below by noon GMT on Monday 28 February. Her answers will be published in the 4 March edition of the Guardian’s Film &amp; Music section, and online. • Blondie’s Against the Odds UK tour with special guest Johnny Marr runs from 22 April to 7 May. Visit blondie.net for more information.Passengers will no longer need to wear masks on the tube and other transport in the capital from Thursday, Transport for London has announced. TfL said it would continue to strongly recommend masks are worn but would no longer make them mandatory. The change comes into effect at the same time as laws requiring self-isolation for people with coronavirus are lifted in England by Boris Johnson. TfL has previously continued to make mask-wearing a “condition of carriage” on London Underground and other services, even when the government said they were no longer a legal requirement. However, compliance rates dropped without the threat of enforcement by police or fixed penalty notices. The legal requirement in England to wear masks on transport and other public settings, reimposed during the Omicron surge, was dropped in late January. TfL said that face coverings had been shown to reduce transmission of Covid and boost passenger confidence in using public transport. The tube was one of the most affected forms of transport at the start of the pandemic, with passenger numbers falling to as little as 4% of normal levels. By last week tube numbers had returned to about 60% of pre-pandemic levels on weekdays, and London bus ridership to about 75%. Lilli Matson, TfL’s chief safety, health and environment officer, said: “Following the government’s decision to lift coronavirus restrictions, and the falling infection rates in London, we will be removing the condition of carriage that requires customers to wear face coverings from 24 February, but will continue to strongly recommend that customers and staff wear them as they are proven to reduce the risk of transmission and we know they provide confidence to people using public transport.” TfL said independent testing by Imperial College London carried out monthly since September 2020 had no found traces of coronavirus on touch points in stations and on buses, and revealed that the whole transport network was well ventilated. London TravelWatch said its latest surveys showed 69% of people felt safer using public transport when passengers wore face coverings. Its chief executive, Emma Gibson, said: “We also know that this figure is even higher for older people and those who use public transport more regularly.” Mask-wearing in public indoor settings remains compulsory until late March in Scotland. It is also mandatory on public transport in Wales, while in Northern Ireland it is recommended. Airlines will continue to require masks.Leonardo DiCaprio has bought an equity stake in the French champagne house Telmont, its majority owner Rémy Cointreau has announced. The Hollywood A-lister and environmental activist, 47, said he was drawn to the 100-year-old brand based in Damery due to its ecological credentials. “From protecting biodiversity on its land, to using 100% renewable electricity, Champagne Telmont is determined to radically lower its environmental footprint, making me proud to join as an investor,” the star of Titanic, Inception and Don’t Look Up said. Telmont was founded in 1912 near Épernay in northern France by local winegrower Henri Lhôpital in the wake of the Champagne Riots – a series of disturbances caused by four years of bad harvests. In 1911, he wrote the song Gloire au Champagne, the lyrics of which urged winemakers to uphold the high standards of quality that went into making the sparkling beverage. His son, Andre Lhôpital, took over as cellar master following his father’s death in 1937. Two years later, he joined the second regiment of the Cuirassiers, the oldest surviving cavalry regiment in the French army, dating back to the 17th century. Telmont’s logo – a knight’s helmet – honours the Cuirassier insignia. The French drinks company Rémy Cointreau bought a majority stake in Telmont in October 2020. DiCaprio’s investment is the latest in a series of celebrity endorsements for luxury brands attempting to entice younger customers. In February 2021, LVMH’s Moët Hennessy bought a 50% stake in rap star Jay-Z’s Armand de Brignac champagne brand. Last year, Lady Gaga and Dom Pérignon teamed up to create The Queendom, a limited-edition rosé. She also designed 110 custom sculptures to be sold exclusively at the brand’s flagship stores. Fashion designer Vera Wang partnered with Chopin vodka to create a gluten-free version of the spirit in a uniquely designed bottle. Meanwhile, a growing number of A-list stars have turned to creating alcohol brands of their own. Brad Pitt released the second bottling of his rosé champagne, Fleur de Miraval, ahead of the festive season in 2021. The first bottles debuted in 2020 for about $400 (£295) a piece. Actor Jamie Foxx released his own Brown Sugar Bourbon spirit company to critical acclaim in 2018. Model Kendall Jenner spent four years working on her own tequila brand, 818, which debuted in May last year.The UK culture secretary has written to Ofcom asking it to look at whether the Russian TV station RT should be allowed to broadcast “harmful disinformation” in the UK, Boris Johnson told the Commons. Challenged by Keir Starmer at prime minister’s questions over a “limited sanctions response” to the arrival of Russian forces in Ukraine, Johnson said the culture secretary, Nadine Dorries, had contacted the broadcasting watchdog about RT. Dorries’ letter to the regulator said RT was “demonstrably part of Russia’s global disinformation campaign”, and that it appeared clear the channel would seek to continue this role amid events in Ukraine. “I have concerns that broadcasters such as RT, whom Ofcom have found to have repeatedly breached the broadcasting code in the past, will also look to spread harmful disinformation about the ongoing crisis in Ukraine here in the UK,” Dorries wrote. Johnson announced the review after being challenged by Starmer over RT. “We must also do more to defeat [Vladimir] Putin’s campaign of lies and disinformation,” Starmer said. “Russia Today is his personal propaganda tool. I can see no reason why it should be allowed to continue to broadcast in this country.” The decision to review RT’s licence was welcomed by Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland’s first minister, and other senior figures in the Scottish National party. Sturgeon said she was “appalled” her former mentor Alex Salmond, her predecessor as first minister, still hosted a weekly chat show on RT. She urged Salmond to quit and said no UK parliamentarian should appear on it. Stewart McDonald, the SNP’s defence spokesman at Westminster, agreed. “It is not a normal news service and we should stop treating it as such,” he said. The pressure on Salmond intensified after Alex Cole-Hamilton, the Scottish Liberal Democrat leader, called for him to be expelled from the privy council, a constitutional body which gets confidential intelligence briefings and advises the queen. Salmond was appointed a privy counsellor in 2007 but is no longer an MP. He has not responded to these criticisms. In PMQs the Labour leader also questioned Johnson over the extent of sanctions imposed on some Russian banks and a handful of individuals, announced on Tuesday. “The prime minister promised that in the event of an invasion, he would unleash a full package of sanctions. If not now, then when?” Starmer asked. Johnson responded by saying the UK was “out in front” on sanctions, saying that further measures would be taken but that it was also necessary to impose them in union with allies. Starmer called for the government’s delayed economic crime bill to be brought forward to help tackle complex networks of Russian money in the UK, and also demanded tougher rules on donations from shell companies. “As it stands, the bill would allow unfettered donations from overseas to be made to UK political parties from shell companies and individuals with no connections to the UK,” Starmer said, calling for the government to back amendments to the bill, currently in the Lords, to tighten this up. Johnson declined to do so, and instead mocked Starmer over the recent revelation that the Labour MP Barry Gardiner had received donations approaching £600,000 from a UK-based lawyer whom, it emerged, was working for the Chinese government. Starmer replied by saying that Putin feared “openness and democracy”, and that the UK response should not be partisan. “So will the prime minister work across the house to ensure that this is the end of the era of oligarch impunity by saying that this house and this country will no longer be home for their loot?” Johnson replied: “I don’t think that any government could conceivably be doing more to root out corrupt Russian money.”Social mobility experts have warned that government proposals to introduce minimum eligibility requirements for higher education loans in England will hit poorest students hardest, in effect “closing off university prospects at age three” for the most disadvantaged. On Thursday ministers are expected to outline plans that would prevent pupils from taking out student loans to study at university if they fail maths and English GCSEs, as part of its long-awaited response to the Augar review of post-18 higher education funding. Proposals to introduce a lifelong loan entitlement (LLE), worth the equivalent of four years of post-18 education to support students to train and study throughout their lives through flexible courses, are also expected to form part of the package of reforms, which are likely to be the subject of a lengthy consultation. Headlines, however, are likely to focus on any government proposals to limit student numbers and block candidates who fail to pass GCSE maths or English, which many see as a retrograde step to efforts to widen participation in higher education. Lee Elliot Major, a professor of social mobility at the University of Exeter, warned: “If this is implemented crudely it will effectively be closing off university prospects at age three for many poorer children. Our research shows the depressingly strong link between achieving poorly in early-age tests and failing to get passes in English and maths GCSEs at age 16. “Children from the lowest fifth of family income backgrounds are five times more likely to leave school without passes in English and maths GCSEs basic skills than those from the highest fifth of incomes,” he added. “We already label a third of pupils taking English and maths GCSEs as failures – this will only condemn them further.” About 71% of pupils in England achieve a grade 4 in GCSE English and maths, falling to 52% among disadvantaged households. Among English 18-year-olds accepted on university courses, 92% got grade 4 in English and maths in 2020, meaning the 8% who did not might not in future be able to access higher education. Sir Peter Lampl, the founder and executive chair of the Sutton Trust, warned: “Universities are the key route to social mobility, so it is crucial that young people who have the potential to benefit from higher education are able to do so, whatever their background. “The introduction of any minimum grade requirement is always going to have the biggest impact on the poorest young people, as they are more likely to have lower grades because of the disadvantages they have faced in their schooling.” Ryan Shorthouse, the chief executive of the centre-right thinktank Bright Blue and former adviser to the Conservative party on families and education, added: “Restricting access to student loans is not the right way to reduce the government’s subsidy on student loans. It penalises prospective students, disproportionately those from Britain’s poorest families.” Geoff Barton, the general secretary of the Association of School and College Leaders, said: “Those with the aspiration and commitment to access higher education should be helped to achieve that ambition. To do the opposite smacks of a lack of ambition on the part of the government. It seems more like a case of removing the ladder up, rather than levelling up.” Other headline measures likely to be announced include the freezing of the tuition fee at £9,250 for another two years, until the end of the current parliament. That will result in an effective cut in university incomes from teaching undergraduates, with the value of the tuition fee already considerably eroded by inflation. In real terms its value by 2024 is likely to be much less than £7,000, depending on the rate of inflation. The government is also expected to announce a similar freeze on the threshold earnings for student loan repayments, hitting recent graduates who will find themselves having to make higher repayments as their wages rise more quickly above the threshold.The deeply strange tragi-romantic farce of Cyrano de Bergerac has been adapted for the movies many times, with famous versions starring Gérard Depardieu and Steve Martin. Now it is revived again as a musical, with screenwriter Erica Schmidt adapting her hit stage version of Edmond Rostand’s 1897’s play, and Joe Wright directing. As in the stage show, this stars Schmidt’s husband Peter Dinklage (Tyrion Lannister from TV’s Game of Thrones), who brings a piercing commitment to the role and he is persuasive in the way that the likes of Depardieu and Martin weren’t. Dinklage takes the title role: the poet, soldier and poignantly insecure would-be lover, finessing the original by showing that the problem is society’s attitude to Cyrano’s restricted height, rather than the traditional silly and unfunnily phallic big nose. This Cyrano has a normal-sized schnoz and perhaps simply not having the tiresome fake prosthesis makes his performance more available and winning. It is set in 17th-century Paris, although Wright cheekily shows a theatre with an electric follow-spot light. France is at war with Spain, and Cyrano is the hot-headed soldier and swordsman (the script makes a lairy allusion to Cyrano’s, ahem, endowment) who is hopelessly in love with Roxanne (Haley Bennett), a friend since childhood, but too self-conscious about his appearance to say anything. She is being courted by the wealthy, cruel and charmless Duc de Guiche (Ben Mendelsohn), but Roxanne falls head-over-heels for Cyrano’s fellow officer Christian (Kelvin Harrison Jr) who is sweet-natured but hopelessly tongue-tied. So poor, self-effacing Cyrano, wanting nothing more than for his beloved to be happy, offers to ghostwrite Christian’s passionately eloquent love letters and coach him in the language of love. Interestingly, having been bowled over by Christian’s supposed love-rhetoric with all its extravagance, she teasingly tells Cyrano that his own language is “coded”, and there’s something here for literary theorists about Christian and Cyrano standing respectively for high-flown language and base reality. The result is not exactly the screwball comedy you might expect, but something slower and more solemn, which in its final act decelerates further into the heart-wrenching misery which has – for me bafflingly – made the Cyrano myth perennially popular and may yet make this a success to rival the film version of Les Misérables. Dinklage always holds the screen with his natural charisma. • Cyrano is released on 25 February in cinemas.Mad Season: Long Gone Day (1995) With a lineup featuring Alice in Chains vocalist Layne Staley, Pearl Jam guitarist Mike McCready and Screaming Trees drummer Barrett Martin, the supergroup Mad Season represented a who’s-who of Seattle’s 90s music scene. It’s only fitting that Mark Lanegan would join the fray. On the group’s 1995 debut Above, he co-wrote the bittersweet duet Long Gone Day with Staley. The pair passed a piece of paper back and forth between them, building the song’s evocative imagery (“Silver spoons affix the crown / The luckless ones are broken”) line by line. Accordingly, Long Gone Day is sombre and driven by acoustic instrumentation, namely Martin’s thrumming percussion, although there’s a distinct smoky jazz lounge vibe thanks to freewheeling saxophone from local legend Skerik. Long Gone Day is also an early, prominent example of the brittle, honeyed side of Lanegan’s voice; his meditative vulnerability stands in sharp contrast with Staley’s more extroverted, anguished yowl. Screaming Trees: All I Know (1996) Screaming Trees’ 80s albums for revered punk label SST sounded like grimier REM filtered through hissing 70s hard rock; the band’s later association with grunge was a fluke of geography and luck, after 1992’s thrashing Nearly Lost You landed on the soundtrack to Cameron Crowe’s Singles. By 1996’s underrated swansong Dust, Screaming Trees leaned back into their love of psychedelic rock and metal. The results were kinetic on the standout single All I Know: burned-out Beatles jangle warped by ferocious distortion, snarling guitars and pained lyrics describing the push-pull of a destructive relationship. Fittingly, the thematic distress translated into sonic tension: Delicious moments of delicacy emerge from the tornado-like noise in the form of classic pop harmonies and swirling organ and piano from Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers’ Benmont Tench. In the end, All I Know devolves into noisy chaos in parallel with the regret cresting in Lanegan’s voice: “Should’ve been, could’ve been mine.” Mark Lanegan Band: Hit the City ft PJ Harvey (2004) Lanegan initially launched a solo career while still with Screaming Trees. Among his early works: a 1990 collaboration with Nirvana’s Kurt Cobain on a cover of the folk standard Where Did You Sleep Last Night and acclaimed releases such as 1994’s Whiskey for the Holy Ghost. However, Lanegan’s solo commercial breakthrough came with 2004’s Bubblegum. A collaborative effort – guests included members of Guns N’ Roses and Queens of the Stone Age – Bubblegum also features his lone UK charting single, Hit the City, a duet with PJ Harvey that peaked at No 76. The pairing is inspired: Harvey and Lanegan are kindred spirits in abrasive distorted blues, with his weathered baritone growl a perfect foil for her keening, desperate voice. Accordingly, the urban landscape to which the duo refer is apocalyptic and desolate, devoid of hope and instead full of self-immolation (“I’m Babylon, burned inside out”) and lost souls. Queens of the Stone Age: Burn the Witch (2005) Lanegan joined Queens of the Stone Age during the first half of the 2000s and was an instrumental part of the stoner rock band’s commercial ascent. Among other things, he co-wrote the group’s biggest hit, No One Knows, and contributed lead and backing vocals to other songs from 2000’s Rated R onward. On Lullabies to Paralyze’s stomping Burn the Witch, Lanegan wasn’t necessarily the most prominent voice in the mix; that honour went to guest player Billy Gibbons from ZZ Top. But his shadowy, raspy vocals are the menacing id of the arid roadhouse blues song – a creepy role, given that the lyrics are a literal retelling of a witch trial that ends with innocents who “burn to ash and bone” after a mob “cries for blood to twist the tale into firewood”. Lanegan’s occasional whispering line serves as a potent reminder that even the truth won’t necessarily save you – or set you free. The Gutter Twins: Idle Hands (2008) Lanegan and Afghan Whigs frontman Greg Dulli had a long creative association throughout the 2000s. The pair linked up frequently in Dulli’s other band Twilight Singers, notably on 2003’s heartbreaking dirge Number Nine, and finally decided to formalise their own partnership as the Gutter Twins several years later. (Yes, the moniker is a self-deprecating reference to the Mick Jagger/Keith Richards union the Glimmer Twins.) The duo only released one album under the name, 2008’s Saturnalia, but the collection’s grinding gothic textures and hypnotic vocals sear like the pain of getting an intricate tattoo. One of the best moments here is the single Idle Hands, a haunted song about what happens when you finally give into darkness and drag someone else along with you in the process. The results, unsurprisingly, aren’t pretty: “There’s nothing I can do / But be the Devil’s plaything, baby / And know that I’ve been used.” Isobel Campbell &amp; Mark Lanegan: Snake Song (2010) Across multiple collaborations starting with 2004’s Time Is Just the Same EP, Lanegan and former Belle and Sebastian member Isobel Campbell established a bewitching vocal dynamic. At times, the pair’s music resembled that of country renegades Lee Hazlewood and Nancy Sinatra; at other moments, the contrast between gritty and sweet had far more in common with Nick Cave and Kylie Minogue. A twangy cover of Townes van Zandt’s Snake Song found on their last collaboration, 2010’s Hawk, appropriately enough has more bite than others. The song’s lyrics are an extended metaphor comparing the titular reptile to a seductive-but-sneaky partner who isn’t to be trusted. Campbell and Lanegan sing the song’s more piercing lines in unison (“I got poison / I just might bite you”), underscoring the idea that being deceitful can go both ways in a relationship – and people need to watch their back when dealing with someone so devious. Unkle: Another Night Out ft Mark Lanegan (2010) After departing the Queens of the Stone Age fold in a full-time capacity, Lanegan dived headfirst into two album collaborations with the dark electro troupe Soulsavers. They weren’t the only electronic act to request his services, however: enter producer James Lavelle, who recruited him to contribute lead vocals to Another Night Out, a standout track on Unkle’s 2010 full-length Where Did the Night Fall. The cinematic song feels like the denouement of a movie, between its dynamic, string-driven swells and pervasive sense of feeling emotionally bereft. Lanegan’s leathery voice chronicles what sounds to be the last moments of a life well lived (“Are those dead diamonds baby? / Or are they stars gone to sleep?”) with the gravitas and resignation of the protagonist from David Bowie’s Space Oddity. It’s one of his most stunning guest vocals, maybe because its clear-eyed take on mortality and the inevitability of endings came from experience. Mark Lanegan Band: Ode to Sad Disco (2012) Released in 2012 and produced by Alain Johannes, Blues Funeral is widely considered one of Lanegan’s very best solo albums. Not only does the LP make room for thunderous anthems (the slightly surreal The Gravedigger’s Song) but Blues Funeral contains one of his biggest sonic curveballs, Ode to Sad Disco. Inspired in part by the Pusher movie trilogy from Nicolas Winding Refn – and built up from a synthpop song called Sad Disco by the Danish musician Keli Hlodversson – Ode to Sad Disco is a soft-around-the-edges dance song with gently undulating beats and keyboards. As the title implies, the song honours the ecstatic dancefloor spirit of Hlodversson’s original. However, the vivid and macabre lyrical references (“a mountain of nails burn in your hands”) and references to seeking out redemption in unexpected places scan as a classic Lanegan spin on the familiar, with a healthy dose of skepticism thrown in for good measure. Martina Topley-Bird: Crystalised ft Mark Lanegan and Warpaint (2013) Although Lanegan possessed one of rock’s most distinctive vocal timbres, he also had a remarkable ability to mould his voice around the contours of anyone with whom he collaborated. That’s a testament to his acumen for working with other musicians – he intuitively understood what a song needed to succeed and when deferring to others made sense. For this funky and faithful 2013 cover of the xx’s Crystalised, recorded in conjunction with the propulsive Los Angeles rock band Warpaint, he and one-time Tricky collaborator Martina Topley-Bird are on equal footing as they engage in a conversation about resolving a tempestuous relationship. The vocal trade-offs are surprisingly even-keeled given the subject matter; at one point, Lanegan calmly notes, “Burn down our home, I won’t leave alive.” But even though the pair unite on certain phrases as the song unfolds (“You just keep on getting closer”) Topley-Bird is always clearly steering the ship. Mark Lanegan and Duke Garwood: With Animals (2018) Lanegan remained prolific in the years preceding his death, contributing guest vocals to songs by the Armed, Cult of Luna and Manic Street Preachers and releasing several solo albums. In 2018, he also released his second collaborative album with London-based Duke Garwood, known for work with Savages and Archie Bronson Outfit. The ascetic lead single (and title track) With Animals illuminated the rich nuances and emotional crevices of Lanegan’s voice. Although he sounded wearier than perhaps he had on recent albums, the strength of his lyrical wordplay – he cycles through calling someone a murderer, a sorcerer, a seraphim, and then a drug to him – emerged as subtle brilliance when paired with a solemn orchestral backdrop. Of course, even on songs where Lanegan sounded fragile, his delivery had quiet strength; discounting his ever-present resilience and steely resolve always tended to backfire.A rapist who abducted a young woman and was caught on CCTV carrying her through a deserted Leeds city centre has been jailed for life with a minimum term of 16 years. Austin Osayande raped his victim in an alleyway and laughed when the attack was over, telling her he was HIV positive. The crime took place seven years ago and the footage gained widespread coverage. But Osayande was only caught after being linked to it by DNA from a second sexual assault he committed last year while working as a Hermes delivery driver. A judge at Leeds crown court on Wednesday gave Osayande, 40, a life sentence, with a minimum term of 16 years, for the rape. He was jailed for 14 years for the second offence, sexual assault by penetration, to run concurrently. He will be allowed to be considered for parole after nine years and six months. The court heard that the victim had been on a night out with friends and was intoxicated. She was on her way to get a taxi home when Osayande approached her, gathered her up and carried her to a secluded area behind a Sainsbury’s supermarket where he raped her. The court heard harrowing victim statements from the two women. The 2015 rape victim, then aged 24, had not been able to work since the attack, she told the court. It drove her to drink, self-harm and a suicide attempt. She said she had lost her confidence, her ability to trust and would have to live with the memory every day of her life. “You took away my freedom of choice because of your selfish gratification, which has since left me numb, degraded and hurt both mentally and physically,” she said. “I’ve endured so much pain over the years and will never fully overcome the torture you’ve put me through. No matter how much therapy I’ve had, it will never fully take it away.” The court heard Osayande delivered parcels to his second victim on a number of occasions. He made a delivery on the day of the attack and said he would come round later for a coffee. She let him in but didn’t have the confidence to ask him to leave when she then realised she did not want him to stay. She tried to push him away during the assault but Osayange was much bigger and stronger. She said in a statement read to the court that she now suffered anxiety going out alone. Her daughter picked up on this and was more clingy. She had separated from her long-term partner because she struggled to trust men and had lost friends. “I just feel like everything is on top of me. And I’m blaming myself. As a result of the attack I’ve pushed everyone away, especially the people close to me. “I am not sure I will be able to be emotional or physical with anyone ever again, and most of all I hate myself for making a stupid choice.” The defence barrister Robert Mochrie said his client wanted, through him, to express “his genuine remorse” for the crimes, which Osayande initially denied before changing his pleas to guilty last month. Jailing Osayande, the recorder of Leeds, Judge Guy Kearl QC, said: “I find you are a sexual predator – you are a danger to women. That danger continued for at least six years – there is no reason to think it will not continue.” After the hearing Pat Twiggs, temporary assistant chief constable of West Yorkshire police, said: “Osayande is the absolute embodiment of a dangerous sexual predator. The CCTV footage from 2015 shows him prowling the streets in the early hours, hunting for a woman to sexually attack for his own twisted gratification. “The traumatic impact that his appalling actions have caused to the victims of both these offences [should not be] underestimated.” In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org.When Ben Youngs got married, in 2015, his best man, Tom Croft, pulled together a collection of his favourite things Youngs had come out with in the years they’d been playing together and published them in a book called … Stuff Ben Said. There was the time Youngs asked if Danny DeVito and Arnold Schwarzenegger “were really twins”, when he said he “had only just learned he had two lungs”, asked whether the “place with all the stone heads was called Easter Egg Island” and the one when he called his brother Tom to ask why his stew was so dry. “Did you add stock?” Tom asked: “Yes, two cubes.” “And did you add water to the cubes?” Pause. “Do I need to?” Youngs has reached another landmark this week. If all goes as it should do, he’ll play his 115th game for England on Saturday and break the England men’s caps record set by Jason Leonard in 2004 (although he is a way off the 137 games Rocky Clark played for England women). Youngs isn’t saying so much this time, he did a podcast with the RFU, and an interview on behalf of one of his sponsors, but otherwise he’s not talking to the press before the game. He does not want to make too much of it when a match against Wales awaits and the title is still on the line. Which fits. Youngs has never demanded attention, has never been in running for World Rugby’s Player of the Year award, has never been picked as the Player of the Six Nations. He doesn’t have Aaron Smith’s pass or Antoine Dupont’s strength, he wasn’t ever as imposing as Conor Murray or as much of a menace as Faf de Klerk. For long stretches of his career there have been plenty of people who would argue with you whether he was the best scrum-half in the country. Danny Care scored and set up more tries, Richard Wigglesworth was a better kicker. Even now there are plenty of people who wish Eddie Jones would unleash Raffi Quirke or Harry Randall to quicken England up. Youngs used to be pretty sharp. He may have a steady and deliberate way with a pass, marked by those two or three steps he often takes before he throws them, but he has a turn of pace. He has scored 20 tries for England and the only men who have scored more played in the centres or back three. The best, the most memorable of them, may have been the first, against Australia in 2010, when he beat three men with a dummy and a swerve. That was a demonstration of the raw talent that made him the youngest man to play for Leicester in the league and won him an England call-up soon after. He still has that in him, but you don’t see it quite so often. It is just one skill, now, in what’s become a complete set. Over the years he has grown into a player who does everything well without doing any one thing spectacularly. This means it’s easy to see what he lacks in comparison to some of his rivals, and easy, too, to overlook how good he is. That’s one reason he gets so much stick. Like Owen Farrell, Youngs cops criticism simply because he’s held on to one of England’s pivotal play-making positions for so long, when there are so many untested players to choose from. What he does have, and has always had, is the faith of his coaches. By the end of his run, Leonard, a cult hero and crowd favourite, had become a specialist replacement, the old head on the bench England would bring on to shore up their scrum. Youngs, though, is one of the first names on the teamsheet. He was on the bench against Italy last time out, but it was the first time he had been there in the past two years, when he started every time he was fit to play. He is a key player in Jones’s new England, was a key player in Jones’s old England, just like he was in Stuart Lancaster’s side, and, way back before that, in Martin Johnson’s. England have, by my count, tried 12 others in his position since he made his debut. There have been Care, Quirke, Randall, Wigglesworth, Willi Heinz for a time, Dan Robson, Ben Spencer, Jack Maunder and Alex Mitchell. Before them were Lee Dickson, Paul Hodgson and Joe Simpson, who used to play ahead of Youngs in the England age groups because they thought he was the better prospect. Simpson, who is at Bath, ended up winning one cap, a reminder of how unpredictable a business it is and all the many things that can go wrong along the way – the injuries, the arguments with coaches, the loss of form, the lack of favour. Youngs has been through all that, has suffered with depression, and fatigue after he toured with the Lions in 2013 (he twice decided to sit out later tours to spend time with his family). He was dropped by Johnson, Lancaster and Jones but came back, suffered bad injuries in 2012, 2018 and 2019, then came back from those too. He has been in teams that took some beatings: the defeat by Wales in 2013, by them again, and Australia, in the World Cup in 2015, and the loss to South Africa in the final four years later. And here he is at the end of it, about to have more England caps than any man and, more importantly, a lot of respect and affection from the people he works with. He’s a man coaches trust and one who players like and look up to. “He is the squadfather,” says Ellis Genge. “If you need some advice, you need some advice.” Just so long as it’s not about geography, anatomy or stew.The governor of the Bank of England has called on businesses to show restraint when raising their prices, after he came under heavy criticism for saying workers should not demand big pay rises to help manage inflation. Andrew Bailey said that he recognised his call for workers to show restraint in the annual wage-bargaining process was unpopular, but warned that there were risks of an upward spiral for inflation taking hold. However, in a conciliatory response to questions from MPs on the Commons Treasury committee, he said the same point also held true for firms planning price hikes to protect their profit margins. “I’m not saying people should not take pay rises. I did make the point it was in the context of large pay rises. And my concern is the second-round effects. If everybody tries to get ahead of the shock we’ve had from outside, then we’ll get the second-round effects and it will get worse. That’s the problem,” he said. Asked by the Labour MP Angela Eagle whether big companies and City bankers should exercise similar restraint, Bailey said: “The same point holds on restraint. [It] holds for everybody.” The Bank’s governor said he was worried that current high rates of inflation, caused by soaring energy prices, could persist for longer if workers and firms tried to offset the shock by significantly raising their incomes. This could create “second-round effects” to the initial shock from higher energy costs. However, Bailey struggled to answer when asked how much he was personally paid, compared with the median UK wage of £31,285. “[It’s] substantially higher. It’s somewhere over £500,000, I can’t tell you exactly what it was. I don’t carry that around in my head,” he told Eagle. The Bank’s governor was paid £575,538 including pension in his first year in the job from March 2020. This is more than 18 times the UK average pay, which remains below the 2008 financial crisis peak once inflation is taken into account, making this the weakest period for wage growth in 200 years. Bailey’s comments earlier this month earned him a rebuke from No 10 and drew a furious response from trade unions. Bailey told MPs he would agree to visit a care home to see how low-paid workers were managing with the rising cost of living. “I don’t think it’s appropriate for me as governor of the Bank of England to make an observation about the pay level of a particular group in society. [But] I will take my governor’s hat off for a moment. My mother was in a care home for several years, I have close experience. I have enormous respect for people who work in care homes. It is a very, very difficult environment for people to work in,” he said. Britain’s biggest banks have reported a bumper bonus season fuelled by a rise in profits, while several companies have said they will push up the price of their goods and services due to higher costs. The Bank’s governor said he was most concerned that poorer households would bear the brunt of persistently high rates of inflation. “It’s those with the least bargaining power in the labour market that lose out in this situation,” he said. “In a process where there are people trying to offset the shock to real income, some people will be better able to do it than others.” Asked by the Labour MP Rushanara Ali about the risks to higher levels of inflation, Bailey said that rising tensions between Russia and the west over Ukraine had pushed up global gas prices – which risked feeding through into the cost of living.Scotland Yard’s leadership has attacked the ousting of Cressida Dick, claiming “due process” was ignored by the mayor of London, Sadiq Khan, and demanding that the home secretary reviews the Metropolitan police commissioner’s alleged unfair treatment. Sir Stephen House, the Met deputy commissioner and a close ally of Dick, hit out at Khan, who publicly clashed with Dick this month, leading her to announce her resignation as head of Britain’s biggest police force. The Met on Wednesday declined to say what it was hoped any review would achieve or to comment on whether Dick hoped to stay on if any review found she had been unfairly treated. The row followed revelations about hate messages circulating among officers at Charing Cross police station from 2016 to 2018. The mayor was angered that nine of them were still serving in the Met, with two promoted. Dick had been pressed to come up with a plan to deal with the huge problems facing the Met, and in the mayor’s view failed to do so. Dick then decided to resign as commissioner ahead of a scheduled meeting with Khan. On Wednesday morning House told the London assembly’s police and crime committee that the mayor played to the media rather than following a process set out in law. He said: “I feel deeply disappointed. There’s a clear procedure in statute laid down to allow the removal of a police chief officer. It’s not been followed in this instance; it’s not even been initiated in this instance. “Due process has not been followed, and instead we’ve seen matters played out in the media. Because of this, I’ve written to the home secretary to ask her to have a review carried out of the events that have taken place.” House’s comments make public the simmering anger of Dick and her allies at the mayor’s rejections of her reassurances that she was doing enough to tackle the Met’s confidence crisis. One senior policing source said House’s demand was likely to be in the hope that a review finds in the commissioner’s favour so her resignation can be “rescinded”. The Home Office confirmed receipt of House’s letter and said it “will respond in due course”. The removal of the commissioner is set out by law but Khan’s aides believe Dick’s decision to resign means it will not be reversed. House said Khan had recently been a “strong advocate” for Dick, believing she should have a three-year extension to her term in office, not the two years the home secretary granted in September 2021. House said Dick was “the outstanding police officer of her generation”. A spokesperson for Khan said his actions were entirely proper. “The commissioner took the decision to step aside having failed to come up with a substantive plan that gave the mayor confidence she could root out the serious cultural issues in the Met, and regain the trust of Londoners,” they said. “Her decision removed the need for the mayor to follow the statutory process. There is a precedent for this series of events. Ian Blair resigned as commissioner in 2008 following the loss of confidence in him by the mayor at the time.” This was Boris Johnson. Dick’s departure date is still to be announced. The turmoil at the Met comes as it investigates the prime minister and others over parties breaching lockdown rules. House said the Partygate investigation was expected to take weeks not months, and added that questionnaires sent to those believed to have attended rule-breaking parties were now being sent back to detectives and assessed to see if fines were merited.Pop music moved at high speed in the 1960s, but even so the story behind the song for which Gary Brooker was always going to be remembered almost beggars belief. It was taped in April 1967, the same month that the band who recorded it formed: they hadn’t even got around to recruiting a drummer yet and had to use a jazz player moonlighting as a session musician. A couple of weeks later, Paul McCartney was interrupting his first date with his future wife Linda in order to rush to the DJ booth at Soho’s Bag O’Nails club, demanding to know what the hell he was playing (“God, what an incredible record,” he subsequently enthused) and John Lennon was informing a journalist friend that all current pop music was “crap” except for “that dope song, A Whiter Shade of Pale – you hear it when you take some acid and wooooh!” A few weeks after that, it was No 1, a position it held until the middle of July. You do wonder how incredulous Brooker must have felt. He had only started Procol Harum as a last resort. He had left the minor R&amp;B band the Paramounts with the intention of becoming a full-time songwriter, only to discover that no one wanted to buy the songs he had written with lyricist Keith Reid, so he would have to sing them himself. And now here he was less than two months later, on Top of the Pops and feted by the Beatles as the vanguard of pop. A Whiter Shade of Pale caused so much commotion that the effect was discombobulating: Procol Harum organist Matthew Fisher once recalled being mortified after they were parachuted into a headlining slot over the Jimi Hendrix Experience when “we weren’t one 10th as good as him”. Perhaps it was just as well he didn’t know that on the other side of the Atlantic, Brian Wilson of the Beach Boys – in the throes of mental collapse and on the verge of abandoning his latest opus, Smile – had taken A Whiter Shade of Pale as another signal that he was finished: “I was so sensitive for the dramatic organ sound that I thought it was my funeral tune,” Wilson later recalled. It was one of rock history’s great lightning-in-a-bottle moments. A Whiter Shade of Pale was completely of the moment – the psychedelic era was all about opening new vistas in pop music, and if there’s one thing everyone agreed on, it was that they had never heard anything like it before – while also harking to pop’s recent past and pointing towards its future. Brooker’s vocal spoke loudly of the hours he had put in touring the R&amp;B clubs, belting out covers of Solomon Burke and the Impressions for the nation’s mods; the tune’s allusions to Bach and its dense, elusive lyrics – open to wild interpretation – presaged the arrival of progressive rock. It spawned hundreds of covers by everyone from Joe Cocker to Jackie Mittoo – soul versions, reggae versions, jazz interpretations, disco versions, mock-Gregorian chant versions – as well as a little subgenre of British psychedelia populated by obscure bands trying to make records that sounded like it: Meditations by Felius Andromeda and Reputation by Shy Limbs are two examples prized by psych collectors. The chances of a band walking into a studio for the first time and immediately recording one of rock’s impermeable classics – 10m copies sold – are incredibly slim: the chances of them subsequently repeating that feat are almost nonexistent. Procol Harum certainly didn’t, which isn’t to say that the rest of their oeuvre – sorry – pales in comparison. Their follow-up Homburg was a fantastic song in its own right, which pulled off being audibly cut from similar cloth to their first hit – stately paced, similarly haunting, more imponderable lyrics – without sounding like a craven imitation. Their eponymous debut album was impressively varied, leaping from the southern soul-infused Something Following Me to the epic closer Repent Walpurgis: if they had included its accompanying singles in place of some more whimsical filler tracks, it might have been more regularly hailed as one of the great albums of the psychedelic era. Shine on Brightly, from 1968 was patchier – if the side-long suite In Held ’Twas in I saw them pressing relentlessly forward into the prog rock era, its faux-music hall interludes, bass solos and ridiculous sitar-accompanied spoken word passes suggested a band trying a bit too hard – and it failed to even make the UK charts. But the following year’s A Salty Dog was fantastic. Prog that kept its pretensions in check, it was filled with superb songs, not least the beautiful title track. They proved surprisingly adaptable: Matthew Fisher’s organ was obviously a key part of their sound, but when he left the band – he subsequently sued for a songwriting credit on A Whiter Shade of Pale – they pivoted to a tougher, harder rock sound, leaning more on the talents of guitarist Robin Trower. It was a move that suited Brooker’s voice: on Whiskey Train or Memorial Drive, Procol Harum were unrecognisable as the band who made A Whiter Shade of Pale. When Trower left, they pivoted back to ornate grandeur: their last consistently great album, 1973’s Grand Hotel, was a heavily orchestrated exploration of decay and ennui. Thereafter, diminishing returns set in, although Brooker and Reid were still perfectly capable of writing genuinely striking songs: As Strong as Samson, from 1974’s Exotic Birds and Fruit; 1975’s late period hit Pandora’s Box. But they didn’t seem to know what to do when the musical climate changed with the advent of punk. Whatever the answer was, it definitely wasn’t Brooker’s idea to resurrect the spirit of Held ’Twas in I and record a side-long, three-part poetry recitation set to music called The Worm and the Tree on 1977’s Something Magic. Procol Harum broke up shortly after its release. That said, the changing musical climate didn’t do much to dent Brooker’s musical career. His playing had always been revered by fellow musicians – a pre-fame Elton John never missed an appearance by the Paramounts at his local venue in Harrow Weald, gawping at Brooker’s prowess on the electric piano; George Harrison got him to contribute to a succession of his post-Beatles albums – and he shifted neatly into a career as a blue-chip sideman, playing with Eric Clapton and Kate Bush, Ringo Starr and Bill Wyman. He reformed Procol Harum in 1991 and toured with them until 2019, releasing three warmly received reunion albums. Throughout it all, Brooker never escaped A Whiter Shade of Pale. No matter how loudly aficionados rightly pointed out the greatness of less well-known Procol Harum songs, it never quite drowned out the sound of Brooker skipping the light fandango and watching vestal virgins catch the last train for the coast. At one point, Procol Harum stopped performing it altogether – it’s noticeably absent from their 1972 live album – but that did no good whatsoever: the same year said live album was released, a reissue of A Whiter Shade Of Pale was back in the Top 20. Nor did splitting up. Months after announcing their dissolution, Procol Harum had to reform specifically in order to play it: A Whiter Shade of Pale had been voted the best British pop single of all time at the inaugural Brit awards. Perhaps A Whiter Shade captured its era so perfectly that it succeeded in transcending it. None of 1967’s other big songs, not even All You Need Is Love or Pink Floyd’s See Emily Play, feels quite so evocative of a mythic, idealised version of the British Summer of Love – of what the press took to calling “the beautiful people” drifting through London on a warm evening in a stoned, optimistic haze – which meant that whenever a film director or a radio DJ wanted a surefire burst of beatific nostalgia, they invariably reached for it. It turned up on umpteen soundtracks – everywhere from The Big Chill to Breaking the Waves – and in 2004 was named the most-played song on British radio over the last 70 years. Or maybe it was just a completely fantastic song, of the kind that takes an inordinate combination of talent and luck to come up with even once in a career. You could argue it’s unfair that Gary Brooker’s musical legacy hinges on one song in the popular imagination. On the other hand, if you’re going to be largely remembered for one song, it might as well be one like that. This article was amended on Wednesday 23 February 2022 to correct the spelling of the song title As Strong as Samson.Donald Trump has said that Vladimir Putin is “very savvy” and made a “genius” move by declaring two regions of eastern Ukraine as independent states and moving Russian armed forces to them. Trump said he saw the escalation of the Ukrainian crisis on TV “and I said: ‘This is genius.’ Putin declares a big portion of the Ukraine … Putin declares it as independent. Oh, that’s wonderful.” The former US president said that the Russian president had made a “smart move” by sending “the strongest peace force I’ve ever seen” to the area. Trump, a long-term admirer of Putin who was impeached over allegations he threatened to withhold aid to Ukraine unless it could help damage the reputation of Joe Biden, praised the Russian president’s moves while also claiming that they would not have happened if he was still president. “Here’s a guy who’s very savvy … I know him very well,” Trump said of Putin while talking to the The Clay Travis &amp; Buck Sexton Show. “Very, very well. By the way, this never would have happened with us. Had I been in office, not even thinkable. This would never have happened. “But here’s a guy that says, you know, ‘I’m gonna declare a big portion of Ukraine independent’ – he used the word ‘independent’ – ‘and we’re gonna go out and we’re gonna go in and we’re gonna help keep peace.’ You gotta say that’s pretty savvy.” Trump’s intervention was criticized by the two Republicans serving on the House select committee investigating the January 6 Capitol riot, who are among the few Republicans who have been critical of the former president. Liz Cheney tweeted that Trump’s statement “aids our enemies. Trump’s interests don’t seem to align with the interests of the United States of America.” Adam Kinzinger, meanwhile, retweeted a screenshot from the House Republicans that showed Biden walking away – which was captioned with the comment: “This is what weakness on the world stage looks like” – to denounce it in fiery terms. Kinzinger wrote: “As still ‘technically’ a member of house Republicans, let me, with all my might, condemn this damn awful tweet during this crisis. You can criticize policy but this is insane and feeds into Putins narrative. But hey, retweets amirite?” During a lengthy speech on Monday that questioned Ukraine’s right to exist, Putin said he recognized the independence of two breakaway regions in Ukraine’s east – the Donetsk People’s Republic (DNR) and the Luhansk People’s Republic (LNR) – and that Russian troops will be sent there for “peacekeeping operations”. The move has been roundly condemned by western leaders as a dangerous escalation of the tense situation at the border between the two countries and a violation of Ukraine’s sovereignty. Linda Thomas-Greenfield, the US ambassador to the United Nations, said that Putin’s declaration was “nonsense” and that Russia was “creating a pretext for war”. Boris Johnson, the British prime minister, said that Russia was “plainly in breach of international law” by trying to break off the two territories. Other than Cheney and Kinzinger, most other Republicans and leading conservative figures have vacillated between condemning Biden as being weak in his response to the situation and claiming that Putin is being vilified in a conflict that should not interest the US. “Hating Putin has become the central purpose of America’s foreign policy,” said Tucker Carlson, the rightwing Fox News host on Tuesday. “It’s the main thing that we talk about. Entire cable channels are now devoted to it. Very soon, that hatred of Vladimir Putin could bring the United States into a conflict in eastern Europe.”Under a butter-yellow sky, high up on the Altus Plain, driving my horse at full gallop, I spied a group of peasant women dancing. They hopped between feet, as if on scorching ground, twirling in unison beneath the sails of a neglected windmill. It is a mesmerising scene – one of hundreds you will happen upon while exploring the relentlessly beautiful, relentlessly hostile expanse of Elden Ring’s fantasy world, the Lands Between – but its rustic appeal is not to be trusted. I learned that lesson several hours earlier, when I caught the strains of a melancholic song carried by the wind. I rode toward the sound, hoping to meet someone who might offer support in my journey. The singer, however, was no friendly merchant or cooperative knight, but a grotesque siren, with beating leather wings and foot-long claws. The song was a ploy, and I was the prey. The dangers posed by director Hidetaka Miyazaki’s games have been notorious since 2009’s Demon’s Souls: these are challenging works, filled with eldritch monsters, where even apparent allies are not to be fully trusted. Every danger must, eventually, be confronted. But Elden Ring differs from its predecessors in its expanse: every hillcrest represents a fresh opportunity. If one path seems too foreboding, one dragon too fearsome, one group of cackling dancers too disconcerting, you can simply ride off in another direction. The rhythms of struggle, setback, perseverance and, finally, triumph familiar to any player of Miyazaki’s work are present here, and exquisitely refined. But the frustrations have been eased; there is always another alluring path wending into the horizon, another cave entrance hidden in the bushes, another mineshaft down to a subterranean cathedral city. This is an ancient world. Old battles have left scars on the earth: toppled statues, rotting fortifications, charred ground where the grass is yet to regrow. Game of Thrones’s creator George RR Martin provided Elden Ring’s history, a narrative foundation on which Miyazaki and his team have carefully built. But don’t expect House Lannister-style intrigue; this is not a story game in any traditional sense. There are no tedious cinematics to endure. Any character you meet who wants to talk, rather than fight, will offer only fragments of clues about the world and your purpose within it. What is clear, however, is that Elden Ring wants you dead or banished, and you must scavenge whatever resources and alliances you can to resist extinction. Newcomers have much to learn, but Elden Ring is a more welcoming game than its predecessors. While there are hundreds of different weapons to find and forge, even your chosen character’s starting arsenal, once improved by the relevant blacksmith, will remain workable for dozens of hours. Provided you’ve wooed them correctly, friendly characters or other players can be summoned to provide support during the most challenging battles with the game’s hellish monstrosities, and it’s now possible to conjure a variety of spectral warriors to provide additional backup. As in Miyazaki’s previous games, you are never entirely alone in Elden Ring. The ghostly outlines of other players occasionally flicker on-screen as you roam its world. Later, hostile players may enter to hunt you – and others can be summoned to your defence. Combat in Elden Ring is unmatched by any other game, with a sense of heft and precision that rewards patience and learning, whether battling with weapons or spells. You can fight on the ground or, if you prefer, on horseback, galloping around a foe before retreating to a safe distance. Your steed, Torrent, is a revelatory introduction, clambering sheer rockfaces like a mountain goat, enabling thrilling getaways with his pace and nimbleness. It is possible to gallop across a misted lake, wake and draw a dragon from the mouth of the cave it guards, then dip inside, loot the treasure from horseback, and make your escape. Miyazaki and his team prize secrets, and opening up the world has multiplied the possibility for riddles, conundrums and treasure hunts. There is a deep sense of wonder and excitement whenever you happen upon a cave mouth on some out-of-the-way shoreline that leads to a warren of trinkets – and the ghostly graffiti that other players can leave to point others toward these points of interest has never been more useful. Miyazaki’s worlds have always felt like elegant contraptions, with secret passages and delicious shortcuts that provide “ah-ha” moments as the architectural logic is revealed. That sense of watchmaker’s vision is only heightened by Elden Ring’s expanded scale, and minute details (the skeletons who, once reformed from a pile of bones, tap their heads down into place) ensure Elden Ring delights from every angle. It is not an accomplishment in itself for a game to be large, or long. An algorithm could theoretically toss off a virtual universe, and another could fill it with busywork. It is inane to equate scale with value and enrichment. Elden Ring’s hills, valleys, mountaintop settlements and underground palaces offer something far rarer: true texture, variety, and long-term intrigue. This is a massive world, astonishingly rendered (the sun and moon wheel in the sky, casting each scene anew) and seemingly limitless in its creative diversity. It is an unrivalled feat of design and inventiveness. For Miyazaki, Elden Ring represents the actualisation of a vision he and his team have refined for more than a decade. Technology has finally provided the power to meet their expansive imaginations. Video games can be all kinds of different things, representing all manner of artistic ambitions. Most, however, share a common goal: to conjure a compelling fictional reality, filled with beckoning mysteries, enchanting secrets, and enriching opportunities to compete and collaborate. They aim to provide a liminal space in which a determined player can fix that which is broken, order that which is chaotic. By this definition, at least, Elden Ring is the finest video game yet made. Its final gift is the assurance that, whatever monsters lurk in a broken world, with perseverance and cooperation, they too can be overcome – all without losing the mystery and wonder that makes our existence beguiling, infuriating, and fascinating. Elden Ring is released on 25 February; £49.99.Ministers are preparing tougher sanctions against Russia, which officials said would target UK-based oligarchs, tech exports and sovereign debt. The move follows Boris Johnson’s measures, which were criticised by Conservative MPs for failing to hit Vladimir Putin’s power base hard enough. The measures have been deemed weaker than those announced by the US and EU, though No 10 said the packages had been coordinated. How do Britain’s sanctions compare with the EU and US? Some MPs and analysts said the UK sanctions did not match the hardline rhetoric of the prime minister, Boris Johnson. But the conciliatory efforts of some European countries such as France and Germany were followed by more sweeping sanctions, including a pause made by the German chancellor to the €10bn Nord Stream 2 pipeline. EU foreign ministers agreed sanctions to target banks financing the military operations. These are understood to include Promsvyazbank, a defence sector funder, which has also been sanctioned by the UK. Three “high net worth” individuals were sanctioned by the UK, though all three had been on US sanctions lists since 2018. The EU is to impose travel bans and asset seizures on 27 individuals and entities who played a role in “undermining Ukrainian sovereignty”, including the Russian defence minister, Sergei Shoigu, and the commanders of the Russian air force and Black Sea fleet. That will also apply to the 351 members of the Duma who voted in favour of Russia’s recognition of the self-proclaimed republics in Luhansk and Donetsk – a step the UK is also expected to take. Joe Biden, the US president, also imposed severe sanctions on Promsvyazbank and against Russia’s sovereign debt, which he said meant the Russian government being cut off from western financing. As yet there have been no sanctions over big state-owned commercial banks. Individuals and their relatives have also been targeted by US sanctions; those people include Aleksandr Bortnikov, the director of the Federal Security Service, and Sergei Kiriyenko, a former prime minister of Russia. What is the trigger for new UK sanctions? The UK is expected to impose sanctions on Duma members in the coming days. Sources said there were still legal issues to be finalised though it would not require new legislation. Beyond that, officials were reluctant to spell out what would trigger the next full round of sanctions. “We don’t think it would be helpful to identify specific trigger points for action,” Johnson’s spokesperson said. “We don’t want to give them any advantage on that front. We are not going to get overly prescriptive.” But No 10 stressed it expects those sanctions will be triggered within days, saying: “We have set out our intention if there is further escalation; it certainly appears Russia is intent on escalating this.” The key question is how far Russian troops will advance into territory not already under de-facto control of Russian-backed separatists. So far the advances appear to only formalise Russian presence; in practice that has been the case for eight years. Putin said that Russia recognised the borders of Luhansk and Donetsk claimed by the self-proclaimed “people’s republics”. It could mean an advance well beyond the current frontline of conflict, in areas still under the control of the Ukrainian governments and including significant towns and cities, such as Mariupol and Kharkiv. What sanctions are on the table and how would they work? Planned measures would have an impact on the banking and finance sectors, ban hi-tech exports, and sanction a wider range of people and companies in the defence and energy sectors and other areas of strategic significance to Russia. Stopping Russia selling sovereign debt in UK Liz Truss, the foreign secretary, said Britain would stop Russia selling sovereign debt in London, which is issued as bonds in foreign currencies to finance growth and development. To limit sovereign debt sales in London, Britain would need additional legislation, according to officials. Banning Russia from the Swift payments system Banks, mostly in France, Italy and Austria, are concerned about Russia, lent an estimated $30bn, being banned from the global payment system Swift; that would hit Russian banks hard but also make it tough for European creditors to get their money back. Russia has been building up an alternative payment system. Blocking hi-tech exports One proposal is to stop shipments to Russia of computers, chips, consumer electronics, telecoms equipment and other items made anywhere in the world but produced using US, UK or EU technology. A similar measure was deployed against the Chinese technology firm Huawei. Targeting more oligarchs Officials say there is a longer list of Russian oligarchs and other allies of Putin who will be sanctioned, including people in the UK. Those targeted in the first tranche of sanctions were the billionaire Gennady Timchenko, and Boris and Igor Rotenberg, though all were already under American sanctions. What are other parties calling for? Labour’s leader, Keir Starmer, has said the UK could exclude Russia from the Swift payments system. It would cut Russia off from a global network used by almost all financial institutions worldwide. The US and Germany are said to be worried about the potential economic shock it could cause. Labour has also called for the UK to ban the Russian TV channel RT, by getting Ofcom to review its licence. Johnson confirmed on Wednesday that the culture secretary, Nadine Dorries, had written to the broadcasting watchdog, Ofcom, asking for a review. He previously said politicians should not determine which media organisations to ban. There are also concerns about retaliations that could be taken against UK media organisations in Russia, including the BBC. The Liberal Democrat foreign affairs spokeswoman, Layla Moran, said the UK government should heed the call of Russian’s key opposition figure, Alexei Navalny, and sanction the 35 individuals he had named, using parliamentary privilege to list them in the Commons. The Conservative party is also coming under pressure to break links with Russian oligarchs who have donated more than £2m to the party. Why hasn’t Britain gone further? Truss said the government was taking an “escalatory approach” with international allies. She said she thought Putin was “hell-bent” on a full-scale invasion of Ukraine, including the capital, Kyiv. “We will agree a further package in the event, which we think is highly likely, of a full-scale invasion into Ukraine,” she told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. “We don’t want to be in the situation … where we’ve got nothing left in the locker. Nothing is off the table in terms of who we’re targeting.”A room swarming with thousands of giant, exotic creepy-crawlies may sound like your worst nightmare (or one of Ant and Dec’s Bushtucker Trials on I’m a Celebrity). It is also the starting point for Bug Out, the latest bizarre true-crime documentary series, which is set in the US’s first bug zoo, the Philadelphia Insectarium &amp; Butterfly Pavilion. Prepare for a mystery with more twists than a worm colony. The show focuses on the moment in August 2018 when the museum’s boss, Dr John Cambridge, arrived at work and did a double take when he realised his room, that ought to have been full of critters, was suddenly empty. Glass tanks were upended, shelves bare, displays cleared out. Thousands of live bugs, worth an estimated $50,000 (£38,000), had been stolen. It was the biggest insect heist in history. Many of the missing animals were rare, large or potentially deadly – in some cases, all three. The thieves’ haul included scorpions, tarantulas, rhinoceros cockroaches and a six-eyed sand spider. That spider is one of the world’s most venomous arachnids, with a bite akin to that of a rattlesnake. There is no known antidote. The aspiring director Ben Feldman – not to be confused with his namesake actor, AKA Jonah from Superstore (“One of my interviewees was so disappointed,” he laughs) – was working as a lawyer in Philadelphia, his home town, when the heist news broke. Its value as a story that he could film made his ears prick up. “I’d heard of the museum,” the 37-year-old says via video call. “Lots of school trips go there. It was set up by this ex-cop called Steve Kanya. Back in 1975, he had a pest-control company called Bug Off. As a publicity stunt, he’d put his ‘Catch of the Day’ in the store window – a huge cockroach, a termite colony or whatever. He noticed that cars kept pulling over to look at it and thought: ‘Huh, there’s something here.’ That developed into the first insectarium in the country.” When Feldman heard about the theft, he contacted Cambridge. “He immediately said: ‘There’s so much more to this story.’ So I just kept pulling at strings. I figured it was just a clickbaity headline. I never expected such a crazy rollercoaster.” The case became nationwide news to such an extent that Jimmy Kimmel and Amy Poehler joked about it on late-night TV. The FBI set up a hotline for tip-offs. The museum received thousands of dollars in donations from sympathetic citizens. In the process of investigating this one-of-a-kind robbery, the Philadelphia police lifted the rock to find a seedy subculture of bug poachers, obsessive collectors and illicit smugglers. They soon surmised that, like half of workplace robberies, this was probably an inside job. But which of the museum’s eccentric staff was responsible? And where were the 7,000 bugs? Those under the magnifying glass included Kanya, who claimed Cambridge had swindled him out of ownership. The documentary also reveals that the museum’s entomology expert, Wlodek Lapkiewicz, had a lucrative sideline trading illegal species via mail. Another employee, Michael Kinzler, had a criminal record that included theft from an employer. Chris Tomasetto and Alison Mumper, a sweet couple covered in insect tattoos, were also under suspicion, having led a staff mutiny. Their colleague Kelvin Wiley was big on social media for letting bugs crawl over his face – and quit his job immediately after the heist. In one scene, Wiley casually opens his mouth and a huge, hairy tarantula crawls out. It provides one of Bug Out’s many “WTF?” moments. “There was an audible gasp from the camera crew,” says Feldman. “I showed that episode to a friend last week and as soon as the spider came out, he was like: ‘This is going to be a hit.’ He was so repulsed.” Another memorable scene shows a panicking employee disposing of a giant African snail – illegal in the US – in grisly style. “It’s the size of a dog,” says Feldman. “Like something out of Star Wars.” Cambridge, meanwhile, has a delicious turn of phrase. He describes one ex-colleague as “a tremendous ding-a-ling of a human” and another as “an enormous bag of assholes”. The surprise-laden saga takes in death threats, embezzlement and organised crime. Feldman follows the money from bug-runners in Australia to criminal cartels in Mexico. There is a botched police raid. Giant millipedes and poisonous scorpions, mailed illegally from Africa, escape inside a post van. At one point, a federal agent – the excellently named Ed Newcomer – catches the world’s most wanted butterfly smuggler, the notoriously elusive Yoshi Kojima, in a honey trap – despite Newcomer being straight and married. Bug Out took three years to make and led Feldman to quit his legal career to become a full-time film-maker. Like an off-kilter whodunit, it untangles a spider’s web of lies and exposes bitter feuds behind the scenes of a seemingly wholesome museum. Feldman tells the extraordinary story over four pacy 35-minute episodes that beggar belief and are eminently bingeable. Bug Out continues the trend away from “murdery” crime documentaries towards con-based yarns, be it online-dating scams (The Tinder Swindler, Sweet Bobby) or identity fraud (Inventing Anna, The Puppet Master). They are just as compellingly voyeuristic and equally revealing about human nature, but without the unpleasant aftertaste. “This isn’t the kind of murder-based true crime we’ve all seen a hundred times,” agrees Feldman. “I’d put Bug Out in a category of its own. It’s Tiger King meets Ace Ventura.” The story has several scorpion-like stings in its tail, and Feldman believes the full extent of the scandal still hasn’t emerged: “I think there’s more to come.” No spoilers, but the climactic episode has a dizzying rug-pull and a couple of very tense confrontations. “There was definitely an atmosphere during those conversations,” he says. “That’s where my legal training came in handy.” Bug Out is on IMDb TV, Amazon’s free streaming service, from 4 MarchThe Biden administration has halted a Trump-era plan to approve a mining road in Alaska that would cut through indigenous land and alter one of the last roadless wildernesses in the US. The construction of the Ambler Road in northwest Alaska was permitted under Donald Trump over the objections from some native American groups, allowing the laying of 211 miles of road through the traditional homelands of the Koyukon, Tanana Athabascans and Iñupiat peoples. The department of interior has now asked a federal court in Alaska to send the permit back to the department as there are “significant deficiencies we have identified” in the decision-making that led to the approval. The department said it would conduct a new environmental analysis to determine the impact of the road, which critics said will disturb pristine tundra, rivers and wildlife. The road “represents a fundamental threat to our people, our subsistence way of life and our cultural resources,” said Brian Ridley, president of the Tanana Chiefs Conference, which represents 42 tribes in Alaska. “We appreciate that the federal government recognized the flaws in the previous administration’s decisions to permit the road.” Trustees for Alaska, an environment group that sued to stop the road, said that the Biden administration should’ve gone further by fully revoking the permit. “This project never should have been authorized in the first place, and the agencies can’t fix their broken analysis by papering over their mistakes after the fact,” said Suzanne Bostrom, senior staff attorney with the group. Approved in July 2020, the road is seen by proponents as an essential link to access valuable deposits in the area such as copper, cobalt, zinc, silver and gold. Senator Lisa Murkowski, a Republican representing Alaska, said that the reversal is “stunning” and will threaten “this crucial project, which will enable Alaska to responsibly produce a range of needed minerals.” An assortment of Australian and Canadian mining companies, and Alaska’s industrial development and export authority, planned to spend $60m this year for the road and associated mines in the area, before lawsuits from native and environmental groups sought to stymie the project.Global stocks have staged a recovery today, with the FTSE 100 index in London 0.4% ahead while France’s stock market has gained 1%. Wall Street has also opened higher. The Russian miner Evraz is the top faller in London, down 10.5%, while Barclays is the top riser after bumper results. The UK lender paid out more bonuses to its investment bankers and traders, but froze £22m of bonuses for former boss Jes Staley until there are further developments in a regulatory investigation into his links to Jeffrey Epstein. The Russian rouble has fallen back towards 80 to the dollar today, trading down 1.2% at 79.74. Here is a handy explainer on western sanctions: And the Ukraine-Russia crisis explained: a complete visual guide: Final data from Eurostat showed eurozone inflation rose to an all-time high of 5.1% in January, while a separate survey from GfK showed an unexpected drop in consumer confidence, because of rising Covid-19 infections and high inflation. Our other main stories today: The governor of the Bank of England has called on businesses to show restraint when raising their prices, after he came under heavy criticism for saying workers should not demand big pay rises to help manage inflation. Andrew Bailey said that he recognised his call for workers to show restraint in the annual wage-bargaining process was unpopular, but warned that there were risks of an upward spiral for inflation taking hold. Thank you for reading. We’ll be back tomorrow. Take care. -JK Analysts at ING have looked at the market reaction to the western sanction so far, which is limited as today is a public holiday (Defender of the Fatherland Day) in Russia. Russia’s recognition of the Donetsk and Lugansk People’s Republics (DLPR) has sparked global outrage and triggered the first tranche of sanctions. Although Russian markets are closed for a public holiday, offshore trading shows a continued sell-off in Russian USD debt. There has been no trading of local currency OFZ Russian sovereign bonds today, but the more liquid 2047 dollar Eurobond has sold off further, with yields another 50bp higher near 6.00%. In light of new prohibitions to trade Russian sovereign bonds in the secondary market, for new debt issued from 1 March onwards, investors will watch carefully for the performance of OFZs when they re-open tomorrow. Prior to the sovereign debt sanction announcement, non-residents held RUB2.8 tr ($35.3 bn), or around 18% of the overall OFZ market. Russia is now experiencing the fifth consecutive month of foreign portfolio outflows from OFZ. The rouble initially took the new sanctions in its stride but remains vulnerable. Commodities have been pricing in a fairly large risk premium as tensions between Russia and Ukraine escalate. This is not a surprise, given the powerhouse that Russia is when it comes to commodities. This is particularly the case for crude oil, natural gas, palladium, platinum, nickel, aluminium and wheat. The concern has been that any sanctions from the West could potentially disrupt export flows of these commodities, at a time when a number of these markets are already tight and trading near multi-year highs. However, sanctions announced so far should have little to no impact on most of these key commodities. Therefore, it is not surprising that we have seen oil and some metal markets (aluminium and nickel) trading lower from their recent highs. But, given that there is still plenty of uncertainty over how the situation will evolve, we would expect markets to continue to price in a fairly large risk premium, particularly given that the current tightness in a number of these markets leaves them more vulnerable to supply shocks. Here’s a longer take on the Andrew Bailey testimony to the Treasury select committee: The governor of the Bank of England has called on businesses to show restraint when raising their prices, after he came under heavy criticism for saying workers should not demand big pay rises to help manage inflation, writes our economics correspondent Richard Partington. Andrew Bailey said that he recognised his call for workers to show restraint in the annual wage-bargaining process was unpopular, but warned that there were risks of an upward spiral for inflation taking hold. However, in a conciliatory response to questions from MPs on the Commons Treasury committee, he said the same point also held true for firms planning price hikes to protect their profit margins. “I’m not saying people should not take pay rises. I did make the point it was in the context of large pay rises. And my concern is the second-round effects. If everybody tries to get ahead of the shock we’ve had from outside, then we’ll get the second-round effects and it will get worse. That’s the problem,” he said. Asked by the Labour MP Angela Eagle whether big companies and City bankers should exercise similar restraint, Bailey said: “The same point holds on restraint. [It] holds for everybody.” The Bank’s governor said he was worried that current high rates of inflation, caused by soaring energy prices, could persist for longer if workers and firms tried to offset the shock by significantly raising their incomes. This could create so-called “second round effects” to the initial shock from higher energy costs. Britain’s culture minister Nadine Dorries has asked the media regulator, Ofcom, to look at the Russian news channel RT and take action if it is found to have breached broadcasting rules, according to a spokesman for Boris Johnson. Several MPs have called on the prime minister to censure state-sponsored RT (Russia Today), after Vladimir Putin’s formal recognition of two separatist regions in eastern Ukraine and the ordering of Russian troops into the area. While Johnson had suggested that Dorries had asked the regulator to review RT’s broadcast licence, his spokesman said she had written “to express her concerns about Russia’s ability to spread their propaganda in the UK”. All the culture secretary is asking Ofcom is to take any appropriate action should there be any attempt to use Russia Today to spread disinformation. Never mind the sanctions. Bloomberg’s energy and commodities columnist Javier Blas has looked at what’s not covered by them. He writes: In the 24 hours after Vladimir Putin signed a decree recognizing two breakaway Ukrainian territories, the European Union, the U.K., and the U.S. bought a combined 3.5 million barrels of Russian oil and refined products, worth more than $350 million at current prices. On top of that, the West probably bought another $250 million worth of Russian natural gas, plus tens of millions dollars of aluminum, coal, nickel, titanium, gold and other commodities. In total, the bill likely topped $700 million. And that’s the way it’s going to be — at least for now. The U.S. and its European allies will continue buying Russian natural resources and Moscow will continue shipping them, despite the biggest political crisis between the former Cold War warriors since the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991. Both sides are aware of the contradictions. The West knows that commodities are a cash cow for Putin, fueling his imperial ambitions thanks, in great part, to ultra-high oil and gas prices, but the allies are also aware of the economic self-harm of cutting imports to zero. For its part, the Kremlin may be tempted to weaponize its natural resources — which could trigger blackouts in Europe. But it also knows commodity exports are its own economic lifeline. It’s the commodities market version of the Cold War doctrine of mutual assurance destruction, or MAD. With other adversaries — say Iran or Venezuela — the White House has been quicker to use oil as a geopolitical tool. As a result, both Tehran and Caracas cannot sell oil legally in world markets, not just into the U.S. However, Russia remains free to ship its oil into America; and the U.K. continues to buy Russian diesel, too. Leonardo DiCaprio has bought an equity stake in the French champagne house Telmont, its majority owner Rémy Cointreau has announced, writes Jenn Selby in the Guardian. The Hollywood A-lister and environmental activist, 47, said he was drawn to the 100-year-old brand based in Damery due to its ecological credentials. “From protecting biodiversity on its land, to using 100% renewable electricity, Champagne Telmont is determined to radically lower its environmental footprint, making me proud to join as an investor,” the star of Titanic, Inception and Don’t Look Up said. Telmont was founded in 1912 near Épernay in northern France by local winegrower Henri Lhôpital in the wake of the Champagne Riots – a series of disturbances caused by four years of bad harvests. In 1911, he wrote the song Gloire au Champagne, the lyrics of which urged winemakers to uphold the high standards of quality that went into making the sparkling beverage. Inflation in the eurozone ticked up to 5.1% in January, from 5% in December, according to final figures from Eurostat, the European Union’s statistics office, released today. The lowest annual rates were registered in France (3.3%), Portugal (3.4%) and Sweden (3.9%). The highest annual rates were recorded in Lithuania (12.3%), Estonia (11.0%) and Czechia (8.8%). Compared with December, annual inflation fell in eight member states and rose in 19. In Germany, inflation slowed to 5.1% from 5.7% while France recorded a much lower rate of 3.3%, down from 3.4%. Spain’s rate also slowed, to 6.2% from 6.6%, while Italian inflation picked up to 5.1% from 4.2%. Separately, consumer confidence in Germany showed an unexpected drop, because of high inflation and high Covid-19 infection rates. The firm compiling the survey, GfK, is forecasting -8.1 points in consumer sentiment for March, down 1.4 points from February (-6.7 points). However, there was a slight increase in the measure for economic expectations. Rolf Bürkl, GfK consumer expert, said: Above all, expectations of a significant easing in price trends at the beginning of the year have been shattered for the time being, as inflation rates continue to hover at a high level. Nevertheless, the outlook for the coming months is quite positive: Only recently it was decided to lift profound pandemic restrictions. This gives cause for hope that consumer spending will also return as a result. If this were to be supported by moderate price inflation, consumer sentiment could finally recover in the long term as well. To sum up what we reported earlier: The governor of the Bank of England promised to visit a care home after angering low paid workers by suggesting they help bring inflation down by refraining from making wage demands. He said he was concerned about “second round” effects from rising inflation, i.e. higher wages. Care workers who on average earn £9.01 an hour called for him to work a day in their shoes, and today Andrew Bailey told MPs he would “certainly go to a care home”. He told the Treasury select committee he didn’t know what care workers earned, and said his own salary was somewhere over £500,000. In fact, including pension payments, his pay package amounts to more than £575,000 a year. Meanwhile, 77% of care workers are paid below the living wage foundation rate. The GMB trade union welcomed his promise to see care work in person but said: “Members working in care homes will want to know why he thinks they shouldn’t ask for a big pay rise, when monstrous bonuses are once again being enjoyed by bankers”. In fairness, Bailey repeatedly expressed concern for the “least well-off” today, and suggested that banks should exercise restraint when paying out bonuses. Here’s a round-up of today’s main stories. Let’s have a quick look at the markets. Russia’s rouble has weakened again, reversing gains made yesterday (which came after Monday’s hefty 3.3% drop), heading back towards 80 to the dollar, as investors digested sanction packages imposed on Russia by western governments. The rouble is trading at 79.75 to the dollar, down 1.2%, and at 90.4 against the euro, down 1%. Russia is celebrating the Defender of the Fatherland public holiday today, which means many traders are away from their desks. Russian dollar bonds have extended their losses on news of sanctions, with longer-dated ones dropping more than 4 cents. On the commodities markets, crude oil has retreated. Brent, the global benchmark, has slipped 0.2% to $96.65 a barrel while US light crude is trading down 0.3% at $91.66 a barrel. Brent crude went over $99 a barrel yesterday, the highest since early September 2014, and approaching the $100 mark. Some experts say it is only a matter of time until it breaches this level, and could push higher to $120 a barrel. European stock markets have followed Asian shares higher and notched up chunky gains of more than 1% earlier. They have given up some of those gains, and the German and Italian markets are now now up 0.6%, while the French exchange is still close to a 1% gain. London’s FTSE 100 is 0.4% ahead at 7,526. Here is our full story on the UK’s plans to stop Russia selling sovereign debt in London as part of its sanctions package, similar to moves by the US and Canada. The Treasury select committee hearing has now ended. The hearing has moved on to the subject of sanctions against Russia and how that will affect London’s standing as a financial centre. Liz Truss, the foreign secretary, talked this morning about blocking Russia from selling sovereign debt in London. Bank of England governor Andrew Bailey said the central bank fully supported the government’s sanctions and would give any help required. These sanctions are very important. It is absolutely important that these sanctions are applied with rigour. It is clear they’ve got to be applied with rigour. The situation is so serious... I don’t think that saying ‘well this could be a bit damaging to London as a financial centre’ is just really an argument that holds water. Clearing transactions will also be affected, and asked about the impact, Baily replied: Obviously rigorously applied sanctions would have a substantial impact. Asked about any risks to UK banks, Bailey said: The UK banks’ exposure to Russia is very low. I don’t see a systemic risk to the UK banking system. Haskel, who also sits on the board of the UK Statistics Authority, said the Office for National Statistics had met with the food writer and activist Jack Monroe to discuss ways of measuring food price inflation accurately. She has exposed how prices for cheaper food products have soared as availability fell –– with some supermarkets ditching basic pasta, for example –– contributing to rising hunger and poverty. But changes to ‘basic’ products are not captured in the official inflation figures. Haskel said the ONS used to publish different inflation indices before the pandemic, and that’s going to be restored. The statistics office has already provided a more detailed breakdown of changes in the cost of living, which was welcomed by Monroe last month. Returning to the Treasury select committee hearing, Bank of England policymaker Jonathan Haskel said the tight labour market is actually a good thing for people. Before the pandemic, roughly two unemployed people were chasing every vacancy; now it’s one worker chasing every vacancy, he said. The French and British drugmakers Sanofi and GSK will seek approval from regulators, including in the US and the European Union, for their Covid-19 vaccine, after reporting positive results from late-stage clinical trials. The companies said the phase 3 efficacy trials showed that two doses of the jab provided: 100% efficacy against severe Covid-19 disease and hospitalisations 75% efficacy against moderate or severe Covid-19 disease 57.9% efficacy against any symptomatic Covid-19 disease, in line with expected vaccine effectiveness in today’s environment dominated by variants of concern The vaccine, which had been delayed by an initial dosing error and early disappointing results in older people, can also be used as a booster. A separate booster trial showed that it led to a “significant increase in neutralising antibodies of 18- to 30-fold” across all age groups, when used in people who had doses of mRNA vaccines (from Pfizer/BioNTech and Moderna) and other jabs such as the Oxford/AstraZeneca one. Thomas Triomphe, executive vice president of Sanofi Vaccines, said: We’re very pleased with these data, which confirm our strong science and the benefits of our Covid-19 vaccine. The Sanofi-GSK vaccine demonstrates a universal ability to boost all platforms and across all ages. We also observed robust efficacy of the vaccine as a primary series in today’s challenging epidemiological environment. No other global Phase 3 efficacy study has been undertaken during this period with so many variants of concern, including Omicron, and these efficacy data are similar to the recent clinical data from authorised vaccines. GSK is providing an adjuvant to the vaccine that boosts the body’s immunity response. Roger Connor, president of GSK Vaccines, said: The evolving epidemiology of Covid-19 demonstrates the need for a variety of vaccines. Our adjuvanted protein-based vaccine candidate uses a well-established approach that has been applied widely to prevent infection with other viruses including pandemic flu. We are confident that this vaccine can play an important role as we continue to address this pandemic and prepare for the post-pandemic period. Broadbent said the increase in UK energy bills this year is twice as big as any single year in the 1970s. And Bailey said there is no public policy response that can limit the impact of this. Household energy bills are going up by 54% in April under the price cap set out by the regulator Ofgem. You can watch the hearing live here. Hinting at further interest rate hikes, Bailey sees a clear risk of inflation sticking at a high level. He said that there is “very clearly” a risk that high inflation gets embedded in Britain if there is a cycle of higher prices pushing up wages. It’s not just wage setting, it’s also price setting... it’s both. There is very clearly an upside risk there. The upside risk .... comes through from the second-round effects. He also mentioned the high energy prices, and the Ukraine crisis, while saying that “energy prices tend to revert to mean”. The Bank of England has already raised interest rates twice since December, from 0.1% to 0.5% this month, and is expected to move again in March. Four of its nine monetary policymakers voted for a bigger, half-point increase to 0.75% this month. Bailey promised to visit a care home on one of his regional visits, to assess the situation of care home workers, when asked by Labour MP Angela Eagle on the Treasury select committee. There was also this slightly uncomfortable exchange: Bailey urged banks to exercise restraint when paying out bonuses. When asked what he thought of banks paying out bumper bonuses –- HSBC yesterday and Barclays today –– he said, in a message to the banks: Please reflect on the economic situation we are in. There is a very big shock coming from outside. This [the inflation shock from soaring gas, oil and food prices] hits the least well off hardest. My concern is that the least well-off will come off worst. Bank of England governor Andrew Bailey said that if we get second-round effects from higher inflation (such as rising wages and higher inflation expectations among the public), the central bank will need to respond by raising interest rates. I’m not saying people should not take pay rises. My concern is the second-round effects If everybody tries to get ahead of the [inflation] shock we’ve had from outside ... it gets worse. The real risk that worries me here is the ones with the least bargaining power ... get the worst outcome ...and end up absorbing the worst of the external shock. The Treasury select committee is quizzing Bank of England governor Andrew Bailey, deputy governor Ben Broadbent, as well as Jonathan Haskel and Professor Silvana Tenreyro, both external members of the monetary policy committee. Haskel, a professor of economics at Imperial College London, just said that the Bank doesn’t want the “blip” of soaring gas and oil prices to become permanently embedded inflation. Britain’s foreign secretary Liz Truss has been talking about how Britain will stop Russia selling sovereign debt in London. She told Sky News: We’ve been very clear that we’re going to limit Russian access to British markets. We’re going to stop the Russian government with raising sovereign debt in the United Kingdom. She added that there would be even more tough sanctions on key oligarchs, on key organisations in Russia, limiting Russia’s access to the financial markets, if there is a full-scale invasion of Ukraine. Limiting sovereign debt sales in London will require additional legislation, Reuters said, citing Western officials. Clearing transactions would also be affected by the sanctions. However, armed with the world’s fourth-largest foreign exchange reserves of more than $630bn, and Brent crude trading close to $97 a barrel, Russia probably won’t need to sell large amounts of foreign-denominated debt in future. Truss did not discuss whether Britain would also stop the trade inn sovereign debt that has already been issued. The US government broadened restrictions on trading of Russian government debt yesterday, banning trade in bonds issued after 1 March in the secondary market. US investors have been banned from buying new dollar-denominated Russian debt since 2014, when Russia annexed Crimea. US banks have also been barred form participating in the primary market for foreign-denominated government bonds since 2019. Vladimir Putin said today that Moscow is ready to look for “diplomatic solutions” over Ukraine -- but stressed that the country’s interests were non-negotiable. The comments came amid fresh shelling in east Ukraine. More on our Ukraine crisis live blog here. In Ukraine, Serhiy Kryvonos, a retired special forces general and former deputy secretary of the national security and defence council, said “the whole country will be fighting back” if there is a full-blown invasion. He predicted that this could lead to 5 to 10 million people leaving Ukraine and fleeing to the west and elsewhere. Boris Johnson’s office and the Treasury are calling in finance bosses and regulators to discuss how to ensure the sanctions on Russia are effective, the BBC’s political editor Laura Kuenssberg has tweeted. European shares are up more strongly now. UK’s FTSE 100 up 32 points, or 0.4%, at 7,526 Germany’s Dax up nearly 1% at 14,839 France’s CAC up 1% at 6,855 Italy’s FTSE MiB up 0.8% at 26,258 Barclays has also appointed its first female finance director. As Tushar Morzaria is stepping down as group finance director, the bank promoted Anna Cross, currently his deputy. Cross, a qualified chartered accountant, joined Barclays in 2013, and previously worked in finance roles at Lloyds Banking Group, Halifax Bank of Scotland, and Asda. The Barclays chairman, Nigel Higgins said: The board is delighted to have, in Anna Cross, such a strong internal successor. Anna was identified over a year ago as the board’s preferred successor, following a review of potential internal and external candidates. European markets have edged up at the open, with the UK’s FTSE 100 trading 40 points higher at 7,532, a 0.5% gain, while France’s CAC and Spain’s Ibex rose 0.3%. Italy’s FTSE MiB has recorded a chunky gain of 1.16%. Barclays is the top riser on the FTSE 100 in London, up 2.7% to 195.3p, after more than doubling pre-tax profits to £8.4bn thanks to a boom in deal-making. It has also frozen its former boss Jes Staley’s share awards. More on that soon. Barclays is the latest UK bank to boost bonuses following a surge in annual profits linked to the release of cash originally put aside to cushion the blow of the Covid crisis, reports our banking correspondent Kalyeena Makortoff. The lender confirmed it had increased its staff bonus pool by more than 17% to £1.3bn for 2021, having paid out nearly £1.1bn a year earlier even as the pandemic raged. However, it has frozen share awards for its former chief executive Jes Staley, who stepped down in November after an investigation by the City watchdog, the Financial Conduct Authority, over how he described his links to the sex offender and disgraced financier Jeffrey Epstein. Staley received millions of pounds worth of shares that will not vest as scheduled. He was replaced as CEO by CS Venkatakrishnan. The findings of the investigation have not yet been made public. The news came as the bank reported an annual pre-tax profit of £8.4bn, more than doubling the £3.1bn reported for the whole of 2020. The surge in profits was due to the improving economic outlook, which meant Barclays was able to release £653m from reserves originally set aside to offset a potential jump in loan defaults during the pandemic. That compares with the £4.8bn it was forced to put aside amid fears that customer debts would sour in 2020. Aluminium prices are holding near their highest levels in more than 13 years, as sanctions on Russia have raised fears over supply disruptions. The chief executive of the London-listed mining group Rio Tinto, Jakob Stausholm, said US sanctions could affect Russia’s aluminium industry. He told reporters: It’s a very difficult situation... Specifically in our business, there could be disruptions primarily in the aluminium industry if we are going to see sanctions. You could also see disruptions in the steel industry, but probably less so. Three-month aluminium on the London Metal Exchange is trading broadly unchanged at $3,302.5 a tonne. Prices hit $3,380 yesterday, a tad below the record set in 2008 of $3,380.15. Nickel prices eased 0.1% to $24,525 a tonne, after hitting the highest level since August 2011 yesterday. Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. The mission of the International Monetary Fund is starting discussions in Ukraine for the second review of the Fund-supported programme, the global lender said today. (The meetings will be conducted virtually.) Ukraine hopes that the talks will result in disbursement of $700m under the $5bn IMF programme, and reassure markets that have been rattled by the deepening crisis. Western nations and Japan unveiled new sanctions yesterday in response to Vladimir Putin’s decision to order troops into separate regions of Eastern Ukraine and to formally recognise them as independent states. The United States, European Union, UK, Australia, Canada and Japan announced sanctions targeting banks and Russian elites, while the German chancellor Olaf Scholz halted the Nord Stream 2 pipeline, a major gas project from Russia. Britain will also stop Russia selling sovereign debt in London, with similar moves by the US and Canada. Asian stock markets edged cautiously higher after yesterday’s losses, with the exception of Japan’s Nikkei, which fell 1.7%. Hong Kong’s Hang Seng rose 0.67%, the Shanghai Composite index gained almost 1% and the South Korean Kospi rose 0.47%. European markets are expected to follow suit when they open. Ipek Ozkardeskaya, senior analyst at the bank Swissquote, said: More sanctions are expected in the coming days, but the measures that have been announced so far are not as heavy as feared. Market mood is not cheerful but the softer-than-feared sanctions somewhat help lifting the mood. The risk appetite is limited, of course, except in some key assets including oil and commodities. European natural gas futures jumped 8% yesterday, the barrel of Brent crude flirted with the $100 mark, as the US crude spiked above $96 before easing back to the $93 level this morning. Although we had news that oil prices are high enough to boost the US production throughout the year, Iraq and Nigeria are apparently not willing to pump faster, even the prices hit three-digit numbers. Price pullbacks are seen as interesting buy opportunities as the trend remains comfortably positive. This morning we get to hear from Bank of England Governor Andrew Bailey, as well as monetary policy committee members Ben Broadbent, Jonathan Haskel and Silvana Tenreyro, when they are quizzed by MPs on the Treasury Select Committee, on interest rates, and the cost of living. The Agenda 7.45am GMT: French business confidence 9.30am GMT: Treasury Select Committee quizzes Bank of England governor Andrew Bailey and other policymakers 10am GMT: Eurozone inflation final for January (forecast: 5.1%)This was taken in May last year in Myrnohrad, an industrial town 50 miles from Donetsk, a stronghold of the illegal Russian occupation in eastern Ukraine. Then, as now, fears of a Russian invasion were high. While much of the west thinks the threat of conflict started only a few weeks ago, it’s been the reality for Ukrainians for almost a decade. I was walking around Myrnohrad taking photos with a big portable flash and a plate camera when I saw this woman sit down and light a cigarette. She looked so confident and self-absorbed. I speak a little Russian, so I told her I was taking pictures of ordinary life across Ukraine and asked if she would pose. She agreed without hesitation. Normally, when you ask people to pose they do just that – pose – and become self-conscious. But for this woman, it was as if I wasn’t there. It was perfect: she was completely in her thoughts. I love the blue case in her lap, though I never found out what was in it. Maybe it’s a lease for an apartment. Maybe it’s divorce papers. Whatever it is, it felt like she was on a mission. To me, she is a great symbol for Ukraine, a country that is now my home. I suspected that she had been through some tough journeys but remained resilient, brave and generous. It’s difficult to get shots this candid and the photograph was nearly used as the cover of my new book, Stop Tanks With Books. It’s a series of photographs from across the country intended to help westerners empathise with Ukrainians. Falsehoods propagated by the Kremlin have come to define how the rest of the world sees Ukraine. The idea that all Ukrainians are fascists is complete nonsense. Those myths only exist to help foment the inertia that has left the country abandoned in the face of Russian aggression for years. My own relationship with Ukraine began in 2015 when I was invited to visit by a military hospital in Kyiv. They had heard about my book Battle Against Stigma, which documented war trauma and the mental health struggles of veterans. The hospital was dealing with troops returning from the war in Donbas in the east and requested a Ukrainian-language version for its patients. I was amazed: in Britain, 500 copies of the book had been impounded on arrival in the UK at the request of the Ministry of Defence, but here was a post-Soviet country thinking so progressively about how to treat their veterans. As soon as I arrived in Ukraine I fell in love – with the people, the food, the culture and the history. I took every opportunity to come back. When the New York Times asked me to shoot people on holiday in their own country, I could’ve gone anywhere and I think the editors were surprised when I decided on Odessa. Eventually, I couldn’t shake the thought: “Why am I living in London when I could be living in Kyiv?” So a year and a half ago, I took the plunge and moved. I don’t have a second home in London. Ukraine is my home and this work is deeply personal. The British government, like others, has advised all its subjects to leave immediately, and to my mind this has fanned the flames of panic. I, like many others, am staying put. I do not want to lose my adopted home, nor see my friends and their families lose their lives defending the country’s rightful independence. Ukrainians are a proud, brave people; they won’t run away. If Russian forces invade further it will be a bloodbath. Ukrainians aren’t asking for British soldiers to come and lay down their lives. But they do want the support of western powers in repelling a Russian invasion. I hope Stop Tanks With Books adds weight to those calls. It is not a neutral work, I have picked a side. I’m pro-Russian but anti-Kremlin. Throughout my career, I have seen the role of the artist as one of counteracting state propaganda. When I embedded with the paras in Afghanistan in 2010, I found the gap between what I saw and what was reported mind-blowing. What changes people’s minds about a conflict is a poem, a song, or a photograph. It’s people’s feelings that need to be changed. To my mind, that’s the role of the artist. Mark Neville CV Born: London, 1966. Studied: MA in fine art at Goldsmiths College, University of London. Influences: Hans Haacke, John Berger. High point: “Posting 750 free copies of Stop Tanks With Books this week to policy-makers, ambassadors, members of the international community, politicians and those involved in peace talks.” Low point: “The British PM visiting Ukraine last week.” Top tip: “Don’t concern yourself with what others are making.” • Stop Tanks With Books is available to preorder via Setanta Books (UK and Europe) and Nazraeli Press (US).“Crude” computer programs that prioritise new road building should be banned from the design of new housing because they cause billions to be diverted to roads that could be used for creating more compact communities, campaigners claim. Traffic modelling spreadsheets that “almost always tell us that ‘computer says road’” should no longer be used by planners and more money should be spent on building places geared for walking, cycling and public transport, according to a report by the Create Streets campaign. It has been endorsed by Rory Stewart, a former Conservative leadership candidate; Toby Lloyd, a former Downing Street housing adviser and the Royal Town Planning Institute. The attack on “big road urbanism” argues that the Department for Transport cost-benefit modelling tools for new roads fail to “properly capture non-travel-time benefits, such as health, wellbeing and the environment … so the answer will always be to build more or bigger roads”. The Department for Transport strongly denied any bias towards road-building in its modelling, and a spokesperson said: “The environment is at the heart of our proposed transport schemes, and we always encourage sustainable options such as public transport, cycling and walking.” The Create Streets thinktank is led by Nicholas Boys Smith, a former adviser to George Osborne, and has worked with architects and urban designers close to Prince Charles to argue for more human-scale planning. It believes billions in taxpayers’ money could be saved by changing decision-making on road building, with smaller sums instead spent on placing shops, gyms and other social infrastructure closer to homes linked by buses, cycle paths and walkways. The result would also be healthier and greener, it argues. As an example of what it believes is going wrong, it is highlighting plans to spend £1.4bn building one roundabout and 10 miles of new road near Bedford. The 2km-wide Black Cat interchange covers a space bigger than York city centre, which is one of the UK’s most walkable cities. But transport planners say the project will relieve heavy congestion and save drivers an hour and a half on their journeys every week. Traffic delays in England were at close to their highest level since 2015 just before the pandemic, but almost halved during the first lockdown. They have since been rising again towards peak levels. The government is pressing ahead with a £24bn road-building and renewal plan announced in 2020. Several road projects were announced last year as recipients of the £1.7bn “levelling up fund”. Road building is already the single biggest annual outlay for councils, which last year allocated £7.5bn, or 29%, of their total capital expenditure to highways and transport services. They spent £6.1bn on housing. Create Streets highlights how scores of streets and squares in a popular medieval city like Siena in Tuscany can fit into the space taken by a motorway interchange in Houston, Texas. “Instead of spending tens of millions of pounds on one junction or on widening a few miles of road, we should instead design better places where more journeys are by foot, bike or public transport,” said David Milner, Create Streets’ deputy director. “We can do this by siting amenities we want to visit in the heart of new developments, not their perimeters.” Planners and developers have for decades used computer models to determine transport plans that tend to put the needs of rush hour traffic first. The impact of the pandemic, which has led to widespread remote working, and the pressing need to slash carbon emissions from domestic transport, which emits 27% of all of the UK’s CO2, are increasing calls for change. “We are seeing e-bikes being a car killer,” he added. “They increase the range and the frequency of bike riding.” The study is also being endorsed by CPRE, the countryside charity, and warns that good design principles for new and regenerated communities are being “cast aside”. “We are told the ‘infrastructure won’t cope’ or ‘the junction can’t take it’,” said Milner. “Almost every traffic model tells us that ‘computer says road’.” Andrew Taylor, the planning director of Countryside Properties, one of the UK’s largest housebuilders, is also backing the call for change. “This is not about avoiding investing in necessary junctions and improvements but about trying to refocus our energies and money on placemaking, 15-minute communities and foot and cycle connectivity within developments to reduce the need for these other physical interventions,” he said A DfT spokesperson said: “Our modelling works alongside our £5bn transport decarbonisation plan, £2bn of which is specifically invested to encourage active travel.”One day, nearly six years ago, I had to sit completely still for several hours at a time. I was having my portrait painted, you see, by three artists for the Sky programme Portrait Artist of the Year. As far back as primary school, I was diagnosed by several adults as having ants in my pants. I am afraid those ants are still there, poor things. What lives they have led. I find keeping still even for a few minutes a real challenge at the best of times. For two two-hour sessions, under the close scrutiny of the artists and several television cameras, it was nothing short of traumatic. I can only compare the feeling to the odd occasions when I’ve experienced claustrophobia, trapped in a lift or a jam-packed aircraft cabin on a long flight. When the ordeal came to an end, I was invited to view the likenesses these artists had created. One was the work of a woman from the West Country. I will not name her, because I can’t imagine this was the proudest hour of her artistic career and doubtless she doesn’t want to be reminded of it. In her portrait, I looked like how I might appear after a heavy night out, if viewed through some misshaped glass. I’ve never been a great admirer of my face, but this was a picture that even my fiercest critic would acknowledge didn’t flatter me. To put it another way: even when my self-esteem has hit rock bottom, I never think of myself as looking quite this bad. The other two portraits were really good. One was a colourful affair featuring me looking thoughtfully, but amiably, into the middle distance. I’ll be honest with you: I quite fancied myself (and I don’t say that very often). Ooh, I thought: that’s caught the blue in my eyes just right. The third portrait was an altogether more severe creation, in charcoal and chalk. It was plainly a very skilful piece of work, but there was something about it I couldn’t love. It looked to me like the kind of portrait an eastern European dictator might have commissioned to convey a benevolent but not-to-be-trifled-with authority. There was a subtle but unmistakeable air of menace about me. It reminded me of the images of President Tito I used to see as a kid adorning a wall in every shop, office, bar and restaurant of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. The deal with the show was that I was allowed to keep one of the three portraits. A friend who worked on the programme advised me to go for the severe one. But because I found it so much more pleasant to look at, I went for the colourful one. My friend told me I was an idiot. Although the Titoesque portrait was judged the winner of this episode of the show, I went away happy. Even when the chap who painted it, Gareth Reid, went on to win the whole competition (for his picture of Graham Norton), I still preferred the colourful one. I still preferred it even when the work of the newly crowned portrait artist of the year shot up in value and I was offered the Tito-style one for £15,000. The more people told me I had made an idiotic decision, the more I preferred the one I had chosen. And I still bloody well prefer it, even though that confounded winning portrait is now featuring at an exhibition of the show’s best art at a gallery in Warwickshire and worth even more. My beloved colourful one, however, hangs unloved in my mum’s bedroom. She is open to offers in excess of £15,000, if you’re interested. Adrian Chiles is a broadcaster, writer and Guardian columnist This article was amended on 24 February 2022 because captions of earlier versions, owing to incorrect information supplied to us by Sky Arts, attributed Corinne Young’s painting to another artist. This has been corrected.British officials are concerned about “spillover” from any heightened Russian cyber-activity in Ukraine, as demonstrated by last week’s attack on two banks by hackers linked to the GRU spy agency. Although there have been no Ukraine-related Russian attacks on the UK since the start of the crisis, cyber-specialists have been holding meetings with key companies to discuss the possible threat and how it could be tackled. “Organisations need to understand there is a heightened risk,” said one official, with a particular focus on monitoring whether an intense Russian cyber-attack on Ukrainian targets could have wider consequences. Jeremy Fleming, the head of the spy agency GCHQ, held a roundtable last week to discuss the threat with organisations responsible for Britain’s “critical national infrastructure”, which includes the communications, energy, food, health and transport sectors. Ukraine has been a target for regular Russian cyber-attacks since the start of the war in 2014 and last week was hit with a “sophisticated” attack that tried to disrupt customer services at two Ukrainian banks and the website of the defence ministry. On Friday, the NCSC, Britain’s cybersecurity agency, said it believed Russia’s GRU military intelligence was behind the “denial of service” attack. But although relatively serious, officials believe it was “not necessarily a precursor” for a military offensive or enhanced cyber-action. A recent NCSC briefing, which is considered still valid, said: “While the NCSC is not aware of any current specific threats to UK organisations in relation to events in and around Ukraine, there has been an historical pattern of cyber-attacks on Ukraine with international consequences.” In 2017, Russian state actors launched the NotPetya malware against Ukrainian companies, but it spread indiscriminately around the world, affecting a string of western companies and even some Russian corporations. Western spy agencies have previously said that attack was also conducted by GRU operatives. Ukraine’s long experience in dealing with cyber-attacks – two of which, in 2015 and 2016, briefly disrupted some power supplies – means that western officials believe Kyiv is relatively experienced at picking up the pieces after a damaging attack. Nevertheless, the UK and the US have been helping the country’s cybersecurity agencies, as the crisis has intensified. On Tuesday, six EU countries said they, too, would offer further assistance. A western official said: “We share our understanding of the threats and we have and continue to make them aware of threats.”The best free streaming service for cinephiles is the Korean Film Archive’s YouTube channel. It hosts an ever-expanding collection of restored and subtitled films that have been chosen for their outstanding quality and their significance to the history of Korean cinema. Imagine a free US film archive that made available Citizen Kane, Casablanca, Gone With The Wind and The Godfather, as well as a hundred other classics, and you start to see what a gift KOFA’s YouTube channel is to the world. Among the many great films it offers, one stands out above them all: Obaltan, Yu Hyun-mok’s 1961 masterpiece about life in Seoul in the aftermath of the Korean war. The best way to understand the difference between how Obaltan is regarded in South Korea and how it is regarded in the west is to consider the results of three polls. In a poll of film-makers held in 1999 by the South Korean newspaper the Chosun Ilbo, Obaltan was voted the best Korean movie ever made. In a 2014 poll of experts organised by the Korean Film Archive itself, the title of greatest Korean film was shared by three movies. They were Ha Gil-jong’s bittersweet campus comedy The March of Fools; Kim Ki-young’s satirical horror movie The Housemaid (which is a favourite of Martin Scorsese’s and the acknowledged inspiration for Bong Joon-ho’s Oscar-winning Parasite); and, once again, Obaltan. In contrast, when the British Film Institute’s Sight and Sound magazine held the 2012 edition of its prestigious Greatest Films of All Time poll, Obaltan did not receive a single vote from any of the 846 participants. Other Korean classics got votes. Ed Wood’s Plan 9 From Outer Space got a vote. But Obaltan got none. Clearly, this is a film that most audiences in the Anglosphere have yet to discover. And what a film they will find when they do. Obaltan – often translated as “Stray Bullet” or, perhaps more accurately, as “Aimless Bullet” – is as desolate and atmospheric as any American film noir. It sits alongside The Third Man and some of the major classics of Italian neorealism as one of the great films about peacetime in a city still disfigured by war. The brilliance of Obaltan’s narrative is that the film focuses on whichever character is most important to the action for as long as they remain important to the action, and then withdraws from them almost completely. Consequently, it takes a while to work out which is the central character. At first, it seems as if it could be Gyeongsik (Yoon Il-bong), a disabled veteran who now walks with crutches and feels he has lost his place in the world as surely as if he had never returned from the war. Then it appears to be Gyeongsik’s former army comrade, Yeongho (Choi Moo-ryong), who is finding it similarly difficult to fit into civilian society. Eventually, we see that the character around whom all the others are in orbit is in fact Yeongho’s brother, Cheolho (Kim Jin-kyu), a quiet, dedicated accountant on whose small salary an entire extended family depends. The family lives in Haebangchon (“Liberation Village”), a hillside shanty town filled with families that lost their homes in the war and / or defected from North Korea. Cheolho’s wife is nine months pregnant. His brother is a liability. His sister is soon to be arrested for prostitution. And his bedridden mother, who has post-traumatic stress disorder or dementia or both, believes bombs are still dropping and repeatedly moans “Let’s go!” or “Let’s get out of here!” – by far the most famous lines in the script – to relatives who have nowhere to go and no way of getting there if they did. On top of that, he has an incessant toothache he can’t afford to fix. Kim Jin-kyu’s performance is so effective that the pain seeps out of Cheolho’s teeth and into our own. Watching events wear him down is like watching waves relentlessly eroding a precarious cliff. The most haunting image in Obaltan is one of the most haunting images I’ve ever seen. Driven to crime, Yeongho botches a bank robbery. Chased by the police, he flees through a sewer, where he hears a baby’s cry. The baby, he sees, is bound to its mother’s back. The mother has hanged herself. Yeongho runs on. So do the police officers. The baby continues crying. The shot of the dead mother’s dangling body is as fleeting, and as unforgettable, as our first glimpse of Orson Welles in The Third Man. Seeing it, we realise – if we haven’t realised already – that the wretched lives we have been following in the film are not unusual. Everyone in post-war Seoul has a story of suffering, and the city is indifferent to them all. Obaltan is available worldwide on YouTubePortland officials have charged a 43-year-old man in the deadly shooting at a protest against police violence over the weekend. Multnomah county deputy district attorney Mariel Mota said on Tuesday that investigators had concluded Benjamin Smith confronted protesters in a Portland park on Saturday night, told them to leave and then drew a pistol and opened fire, killing a woman and wounding four other people. Mota’s description was the first detailed official account of the bloodshed. It came as Oregon’s biggest city is experiencing a sharp rise in gun violence and after Portland was an epicenter in Black Lives Matter protests. Smith “approached the demonstration and confronted several of its participants, yelling at them and demanding they leave the area,” Mota said in an affidavit, citing videos shot at the scene. After several protesters told him to leave them alone and go home, Smith said they should “make” him leave and approached a person aggressively, who pushed Smith back. Moments, later Smith drew his gun, Mota said. Brandy “June” Knightly, 60, was shot in the head at close range and died on the scene, Mota said. Smith stopped shooting only when someone fired back, striking him in the hip area, Mota said. Smith is in critical condition in a hospital under police guard. He was charged Tuesday with murder in the second degree with a firearm, four counts of attempted murder in the first degree with a firearm and assault. It was not immediately clear if Smith had an attorney who could speak on his behalf. Knightly was remembered Tuesday as a woman who stood up for others. “As a community this is deeply wounding and distressing,” Portland city commissioner Jo Ann Hardesty said. “June was part of a group of unarmed women peacekeepers who supported racial justice demonstrations and engaged in compassionate work with the homeless.” One of the wounded was shot in the neck and is paralyzed from the neck down, Mota said. Two people were shot multiple times, including one of them in the abdomen, and the fourth wounded person was shot in the arm. Smith’s roommate, Kristine Christenson, told the Oregonian that Smith often criticized the Black Lives Matter movement, Covid-19 mask requirements, crime in the neighborhood and homeless people living near the park by their apartment. Knightly’s friend Kathleen Saadat told the the Oregonian that Knightly was dedicated to acting on her values of justice and fairness. “She was a warm, giving and kind person who spent time trying to think of things she could do to make the world better and to make herself better in the world,” Saadat said. Knightly’s wife, Katherine Knapp, said Knightly first got involved in racial justice protests after George Floyd was killed by Minneapolis police in May 2020. Social media flyers show that at the same time as the shooting, a march was planned for Amir Locke, a Black man who was fatally shot by police in Minneapolis. Portland saw months of nightly protests in 2020 that often spiraled into violence following the murder by police of Floyd in Minneapolis. Portland became the center of the movement to defund the police, but the sustained protests in the city have largely faded away.Steve Baker and the group of MPs and peers who make up the Net Zero Scrutiny Group are risking not only my future but that of my children. That may sound over-dramatic, but it’s what I firmly believe to be true – and it’s why I have set my heart on making Baker either change his climate stance or change his job of MP for Wycombe. How did I get here? Since I had my children, my climate anxieties have rocketed. I have read enough climate science to know that food shortages, flooded cities and millions dying, especially in the global south, are down the line if we don’t act now. I can’t bear the idea of my children living in that future. Because of these fears, a group of environmentally minded constituents from High Wycombe, including myself, organised a Zoom meeting with Baker, our MP in October 2020 to try to persuade him to become active on the environmental issue. He had just finished work on Brexit, and shown that he could go against the political flow. In my dreams I imagined he might turn his talents towards supporting the climate agenda. Baker listened courteously to us and promised to look into it. But soon after Baker became a trustee of the Global Warming Policy Foundation (recently rebranded as Net Zero Watch), a lobby group that has been accused of denying climate science. When I found that out, I felt angry and powerless. But we’re not powerless, and some of us on that original Zoom call have found allies and set up the Steve Baker Watch campaign to let other constituents know our concerns. It is not OK with us that Baker is trying to derail the green agenda. And it is not OK with us that he is taking a minority view and pushing those views out across the media. If you look at Baker’s Twitter feed, he appears to be a man who is only interested in the energy crisis because of the effect it will have on struggling families. He has said that “the current net zero strategy only works for those who can afford much higher bills”. But I, too, work for the Wycombe community. I am an NHS occupational therapist, visiting vulnerable people in their own homes every day – the sort of people who will be worst affected by rising bills. Baker claims to be on their side, but is he really? If he cares about ordinary people, why didn’t he vote for a school meal extension for struggling families during the pandemic? Why did he get into a Twitter spat with Marcus Rashford on the subject, saying it would break the economy? All this is in spite of the fact that levels of food poverty in High Wycombe are some of the highest in England. If you examine Baker’s record it’s clear that he is willing to vote against the interests of poorer people. So why is he on your screen claiming to care that struggling pensioners can’t afford energy this winter because of the crisis? Why does he say we should continue with expensive fracking, instead of taking up cheap renewable options? It couldn’t be that he is putting the interests of fossil fuels above our futures, could it? Baker only has a 4,000-vote majority. Although he has a majority-remain constituency, he was a chief advocate of the leave campaign. He can’t keep going against so many of his constituents’ views and interests and keep his seat. Some people say wait until an election but that is too far away for us. The former UK chief scientific adviser, David King, says what we do in the next five years will determine our futures. We need to have our voices heard now. Our aim is simple: Baker needs to engage with our concerns or step down as an MP. He has claimed that those associated with Steve Baker Watch are from opposition parties in the constituency. But we are not party political. For me, it would be just as much a result if he were deselected and replaced by a Tory from the Conservative Environmental Network as if Labour or the Lib Dems were to take the seat. We are proud of what we are doing in Wycombe. And we won’t stop here. To those MPs who are lethargic on the environmental issue, we are issuing a warning. This campaign will be coming to their constituencies soon. Change your mind or change your job. Gemma Rogers is an occupational therapist and a member of Steve Baker WatchThe number of passengers travelling through Heathrow airport fell to 19.4 million in 2021, its lowest level for nearly 50 years, the airport has said as it reported a pre-tax loss of £1.8bn. Heathrow said it would need to charge airlines more for urgent investment with fewer passengers, despite predicting numbers would double this year with summer getaways. Cumulative losses during the pandemic have reached £3.8bn, as international travel was disrupted by travel restrictions, and Covid testing and quarantine requirements. The airport said it was the only European hub to see a reduction in traffic last year, falling to levels last seen in 1972, which it blamed on tighter restrictions in the UK than in EU countries. Cargo, which was mainly carried on passenger planes, was 12% lower than pre-pandemic levels. Heathrow had a weaker start to the year than anticipated, but expects about 80% of normal summer holiday departures, doubling annual numbers to 45m in 2022. Heathrow plans to reopen Terminal 4 by July, as the removal of Covid testing requirements has increased demand among UK customers, although inbound travel remains suppressed as a result of Covid measures in other countries. The airports’s chief executive, John Holland-Kaye, described 2021 as “the worst year in Heathrow’s history”, but added: “Demand is now starting to recover and we are working closely with airlines to scale-up our operations.” Increased charges to airlines will mean air fares could typically rise by just under 2%, Heathrow said. Holland-Kaye defended the steep hikes as necessary to cover costs with fewer passengers travelling, but said it could be “a short-term issue”, with a possible risk-share settlement under consideration by the regulator, the CAA. He said the CAA should ensure the airport was paid enough to enable urgent investment, including an upgrade to screening equipment under government directive. The airport also needed to replace the 50-year-old baggage system in Terminal 2, he said: “We can only maintain it by buying spare parts on eBay.” Holland-Kaye said he rejected the label of “ghost flights” on the almost 5,000 planes that left Heathrow during the pandemic with fewer than 10% of normal passenger number onboard. He said no planes had operated simply to maintain slots, and most had flown for cargo, including the export of Scottish salmon and the import of PPE for use in hospitals. “They definitely weren’t ghost flights. Because there are not enough cargo planes in the world, a lot of airlines have repurposed their passenger planes,” he said. “When American passengers were allowed to fly but no one was allowed to travel into the US, you might have a few people at the top in the passenger cabin, but cargo was paying for the plane. For UK exports and bringing in PPE, that was exactly what was needed. “If you had a flight from China bringing in PPE, there may have been no one going out but we definitely needed that flight coming back again.” While European carriers have argued that restoring “use-it-or-lose-it” slot rules could mean unnecessary flying, Holland-Kaye said that the UK’s reimposition of the 70-30 rule this summer, which allows airlines to retain rights to slots if used 70% of the time, was “a good balance”. Despite the huge drop in passenger numbers last year, the Heathrow boss said expansion plans remained on the table: “We’re still committed to the third runway. What we’ve seen over Covid is the importance of the hub, the pent-up demand, and the strategic importance of controlling the UK supply chain. Otherwise we become more depend on Schiphol and Charles de Gaulle, both of which were cut off from the UK at times last year, and that’s not sustainable.” Paul Beckford, coordinator of the anti-expansion group HACAN, said plans for a third runway were “nothing but an economic fantasy”, adding: “It is time that local communities are given permanent reprieve from the threat of destruction, increased noise, more air pollution and net zero-busting carbon emissions.”RON TIPS THE BALANCE The omens are decidedly mixed for Manchester United before their Round of Arsenal tie against Atlético Madrid in Big Cup. On the one hand, they boast a certain Cristiano Ronaldo. Over a long period of time, the old boy has regularly heaped misery upon woe on to Diego Simeone’s fuming noggin. CR37 scored against Atléti for city neighbours Real to help his side win the 2014 final. He slotted the winning penalty against them in the 2016 final. He swatted them aside in the 2017 semis with a hat-trick, then scored another treble for Juventus in a stupidly dramatic comeback from 2-0 down at this stage in 2019. It’s fair to say he’s got their number … specifically 25, which is how many goals he’s scored in 35 meetings. Poor Diego. Po’ Diego’s a-cold. On the other hand, Atlético can take succour from a little history of their own. On the only other occasion these two clubs have met, in the old Cup Winners’ Cup in 1991, they trounced United 4-1 on aggregate, prising Lord Ferg’s fingers off the trophy his side had lifted just six months earlier. Some legendary names were involved in that tie. Paulo Futre opened the scoring for Luis Aragones’ team as they romped to a 3-0 win in Madrid, while Bernd Schuster equalised in the return at Old Trafford. United’s solitary consolation that evening was scored by, who else, a young Cristiano Ronaldo. Subs please check. So if history and mathematics teach us anything, six equals half a dozen. However there’s one other, possibly more relevant, factor that may tip the scales decisively in United’s balance: Atléti are all over the shop at the minute. While Ralf Rangnick’s men are admittedly a mercurial work in progress at best, shambolic if we’re feeling less generous, they’re a Cityesque model of consistency compared to Simeone’s shower. World famous as the last word in resolute, no-nonsense, epic outhousery, Atléti have momentarily misplaced their staunch sanitary-chamber mojo, and having lost seven of their last 13, currently exude all the snarling potty-time menace of the Andrex puppy. A statement victory is United’s for the taking, as is the chance for Ronaldo to bump up those stats and consign Po’ Diego to ever more despair. LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE Join Sarah Rendell from 7.45pm (GMT) for MBM coverage of England Women 0-0 Germany Women, while Scott Murray will be on hand at 8pm for Atlético Madrid 1-2 Manchester United in Big Cup and Paul Doyle will be on Benfica 2-2 Ajax. QUOTE OF THE DAY “I asked my mum for speed, but she couldn’t give it to me … there were 10,000 boys with more talent on the streets where I come from. But it’s the choices you make that make the difference” – Sébastien Haller gets his chat on with Bart Vlietstra about his disappointing time at West Ham and how he has overcome a lack of zippiness to become a Big Cup goal-guzzler with Ajax. FULL BACKING OF THE DAY 19 February: “We’re fully behind Keith [Millen] and once the new players fully settle and some of the [knacked] players are back, we think we’ll be putting a team out there that will do [us] proud” – Carlisle director of football David Holdsworth says the League Two strugglers have the manager’s back after a 3-0 home defeat by Swindon left them second bottom and potentially needing another Jimmy Glass moment to survive. 23 February: “Everyone would like to go on record with their thanks to Keith for his work and efforts since he joined us … and we wish him the very best as he moves on” – Carlisle mutually consent Millen and Holdsworth through the door marked Do One, with Paul Simpson coming in. FIVER LETTERS “I see The Fiver is getting really good at predicting Big Cup scores (yesterday’s Live on Big Website). Careful, or you’ll increase the readership” – Steve Anniss (and 1,056 others). “Seems there is support for the STOP FOOTBALL campaign from Paul Cook, manager of Chesterfield. Interviewed after Tuesday night’s defeat at home to Wrexham, he commented on the league leaders who did not have a game: ‘Stockport have had a good night tonight without even kicking a ball … that’s what football’s about’” – Brian Ross. “All this talk of Aarhus (yesterday’s Fiver letters) has reminded me of one of my favourite overseas players at Luton Town: Johnny Vilstrup. He joined for the start of the 1995 season with the most fabulous claim to fame: he had, we were assured, the hardest shot in Denmark. How this was determined was never established and he trundled around the pitch for a few weeks to little effect until Terry Westley was sacked. Although I do have one memory of a bazooka-like shot that left the crossbar oscillating. His replacement, Lennie Lawrence, promptly sent Johnny back to Denmark – to Aarhus, whom he helped win the Danish Cup the following year. Sadly, knee-knack ended his career soon after, but presumably that is always a risk when you have a leg like a cannon” – Neil Rose. “I laughed at least three times while reading yesterday’s Fiver [are you OK? – Fiver Ed]. May I suggest that you stick to politics” – Darren Leathley. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’ the day is … Neil Rose. RECOMMENDED LISTENING Treat your ears with the latest Football Weekly podcast. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS Manchester City’s Oleksandr Zinchenko has had his say on the crisis brewing in his homeland as fears of a war with Russia grow. “My country belongs to Ukrainians and no one will ever be able to appropriate it,” he said. Birmingham striker Troy Deeney has made an impassioned plea for the English school curriculum to be made more diverse. “The importance of education at an early age to inform identity and combat racist beliefs and stereotypes cannot be understated,” he wrote in an open letter to education secretary Nadhim Zahawi. Are Liverpool going to “get a bit soft” when they face Leeds for a chance to go three points behind leaders Manchester City? “There is no chance,” yelped Jürgen Klopp. “I think Pep said we are the pain in the … lower back. That is a good description.” Antonio Conte reckons the pain of recent defeats meant the pleasure he felt after Spurs’ win over Manchester City was off the scale. “It’s very simple,” he tooted. Come now Antonio, this is Spurs. And dust off the No Jackett Required headlines as Leyton Orient are searching for a new manager, fresh off a fourth consecutive League Two home defeat without a goal. STILL WANT MORE? Barney Ronay explains how Chelsea’s perky Big Cup display against Lille left Romelu Lukaku looking more peripheral than ever. Sid Lowe on Atlético Madrid’s identity crisis. Why punditry still fails goalkeepers. By Cameron Ponsonby. This week’s Knowledge shines a light on players having medical-knack then going on to have successful careers. And if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! ‘IF THE FAST LIFE IS FAST THEN WHY DOES IT CREEP?’Boris Johnson could not have been more clear. “I just think it’s very important that the house understands: we do not raise money from Russian oligarchs.” Some opposition MPs laughed, and it very much is the case that the prime minister was accurate only in a strict legalistic sense. It would be impossible for someone with only Russian nationality, however rich, to donate legally to a UK political party. What has undoubtedly happened is that a series of people with dual UK-Russian nationality, or with significant business links with Russia, have donated heavily to the Conservatives in recent years. A Labour party calculation based on Electoral Commission information estimated that donors who had made money from Russia or Russians had given £1.93m to either the Tory party or constituency associations since Johnson became prime minister. Others put the sum higher. Ian Blackford, the SNP’s Westminster leader, to whom Johnson was replying in the Commons on Wednesday, said the Tories had raised £2.3m “from Russian oligarchs”. Oligarch is a loose term but is often associated in this context with very rich people who generally made their money amid the financial free-for-all of the post-Soviet and Putin era, and who often keep close links to the Russian president. Those who have donated to the Tories since Johnson entered No 10 in July 2019 deny either that any of their wealth has murky origins, or that they are under any sort of Russian influence over how they use it. The biggest single donor of this group is the financier Lubov Chernukhin, who has donated £700,000. A British national since 2011, she is married to Vladimir Chernukhin, a former deputy finance minister under Putin. Documents published in the Pandora papers in October suggest he was allowed to leave Russia in 2004 with assets worth about $500m (£366m) and retain Russian business connections. The couple’s lawyers say that none of Vladimir Chernukhin’s wealth was acquired in a corrupt manner, and that none of his wife’s donations were funded by improper means or affected by the influence of anyone else. What is certain is that Lubov Chernukhin is a generous donor and something of a presence in Tory circles; she had the winning bid at the party’s 2020 fundraising ball for the prize of a game of tennis with Johnson. Shortly before Johnson became PM, Liz Truss, then international trade secretary, posted a photo to Instagram of what she termed a “ladies’ night”, posing alongside Theresa May and a series of other female Tory MPs, plus Lubov Chernukhin. The industrialist Alexander Temerko, also a UK national, has donated £357,000 since Johnson took office. He is a minority shareholder and co-owner of a company called Aquind. Its majority investor is the Russian-born oil tycoon Viktor Fedotov. Another big Tory donor in the Johnson era is the businessman Mohamed Amersi, who has given £258,000 over the period. Amersi advised on a lucrative telecom deal in Russia in 2005 with a company that a Swiss tribunal subsequently found to be controlled by an associate of the Russian president, Vladimir Putin. Amersi told the Financial Times in July he had made $7m in the country, but only prior to 2008. “Not a penny that I earned in Russia … has even remotely come close to being invested in the UK political system,” he said. Under electoral laws for Great Britain – they vary slightly in Northern Ireland – donations to parties can be made only by people on the UK electoral register, or from UK-registered companies and other organisations such as unions. The only people allowed to go on the electoral register in England are British citizens, people with EU citizenship living in the UK, and Commonwealth citizens who can live in the UK.Hot summer temperatures drive up the number of people suffering mental health emergencies, the most comprehensive study to date has found. The analysis of medical records from millions of US citizens showed an average 8% rise in the rate of emergency hospital visits on days when the temperature was in the top 5% of those recorded across the decade-long study. The effect was seen for almost all mental health conditions, including stress, mood and anxiety disorders, schizophrenia, self-harm, and substance use disorders. The frequency of extreme temperatures is being driven up by the climate crisis, and the researchers said their work could help mental health services predict and prepare for times of greater need. “People are familiar with the risks of extreme heat in terms of dehydration, heatstroke, etc,” said Prof Gregory Wellenius, at the Boston University school of public health in the US and senior author of the research. “What’s really novel is that this study establishes at an unprecedented scale that days of extreme heat can also impact people’s mental health in a substantial way. And this isn’t just for a niche, vulnerable population. This is in every age bracket we looked at, for both men and women, and in every region of the country. Everybody is at risk.” The medical database used for the analysis did not include people without health insurance. “We expect [the 8% rise in risk] is an underestimate of the true burden of disease associated with extreme heat, because the most vulnerable individuals are less likely to be in this database and, frankly, less likely to be treated in the same way for mental health,” Wellenius said. Emergency visits to hospitals are the most severe presentations of mental health disorders, said Prof Amruta Nori-Sarma, also at Boston University and first author of the study: “Even small increases in the number of emergency department visits represent a huge burden to the individuals and to the system.” The study showed the biggest increase in the rate of emergency visits was across the north of the US, rising to 12% in the north-west region. That might appear counterintuitive, said Nori-Sarma, as temperatures in the southern US are hotter: “But we see the opposite.” The reason may be that those living in hotter places are already better adapted, with more access to air conditioners, for example. “This finding is important from a future vulnerability perspective, as we can expect that populations that don’t have those adaptive capacities might be more stressed during times of extreme heat,” she said. According to a report in May 2021, the climate crisis is inflicting huge hidden costs on the mental health of people around the world, such as heatwaves increasing rates of suicide, floods leaving victims traumatised, and loss of food security, homes and livelihoods causing stress and depression. The latest research, which was published in the journal Jama Psychiatry, examined anonymised data on 3.5m emergency hospital visits for mental health disorders made by 2.2 million people from 2010-2019. The study focused on the warmest months, May to September, and covered 2,775 counties, which account for 98% of US citizens. Seven of the warmest years on record for the US have occurred since 2014, the researchers noted. The increased risk was slightly higher for men than for women, the scientists found, potentially because men are less likely to seek early help and may therefore need emergency care more frequently. The only major mental health disorders that did not prompt a rise in emergency visits on hot days were personality and behavioural disorders, which are relatively rare and therefore had a smaller sample. The rise in emergency visit rates was similar for most disorders, the researchers said, indicating that the heat exacerbates existing conditions. This could be due to increasing daytime irritation or discomfort or by disruption of sleep during hot nights. “It’s increasingly clear that a changing climate threatens our bodies and our minds,” said Dr Emma Lawrance of Imperial College London, UK, and not part of the study. “While the effect is relatively small, it has big implications for public health and healthcare systems as climate change increases the number of days of extreme heat; children born today will experience seven times as many heatwaves as their grandparents.” She added: “It’s not just people with more severe symptoms of mental ill-health who are affected by heat – many of us have more symptoms of anxiety, depression and lower mood at higher temperatures. The effects are unequal though, with poorer communities often more exposed to heat. “We need climate mitigation to help prevent worsening of these impacts, and climate adaptation to provide more tree cover and access to green space to prevent urban ‘heat islands’.” The study used a “case-crossover” design, where individuals are followed over a period of time and can therefore serve as their own experimental controls. A person’s increased risk of an emergency visit on a hot day was calculated by comparing that day with the same day of the week in the week before and after. This cancels out other personal factors that might influence the results, such as age or occupation.When director Francis Ford Coppola and screenwriter-novelist Mario Puzo released The Godfather 50 years ago, the mobster had already been a stock figure in film for half a century. Their genius (and that of the film’s own godfather, producer Robert Evans) was to reinvent these criminals as a dysfunctional dynastic psychodrama. They took the figure of the ageing don as seriously as Lear, the careworn ruler of a secret American state-within-a-state. Stomach-turning flourishes of violence are juxtaposed with elaborate rituals of familial piety and respect, which generations of real-life criminals in the United States treated as how-to behaviour manuals for decades afterwards. These Italian-American gangsters do not complain about the bigotry heading their way, and are themselves casually racist and antisemitic. Extravagant gestures of romantic adoration and solemn respect for womenfolk are combined with casual sexual abuse; and women have to reconcile themselves to their role: a pretext for revenge. (A tour guide in Sicily once told me that the word “mafia” is taken from the Italian phrase “non toccare ma figlia” – don’t touch my daughter – an explanation I have yet to see confirmed anywhere else.) There is a toxic chill to the film’s opening speech, from a local undertaker piteously demanding the Don take revenge on his behalf against two over-privileged white boys who have raped and disfigured his daughter. Many cannot forgive this film for sentimentalising mob violence with this fantasy rationale. Marlon Brando is as hypnotic as a cobra playing ageing gangster patriarch Vito Corleone, his cottonwool jowl-padding giving something extra to that unmistakable adenoidal wheeze. He is hosting a colossal family wedding for his daughter Connie (Talia Shire): a magnificent set-piece scene that itself has more energy, detail and dramatic interest than most entire films. The don will, with stately calm and an upheld finger, like a cardinal or the Pope himself, listen to murmured information or advice in his ear. Vito’s wife Carmela (a name that reverberated in the later 90s era of The Sopranos) says little or nothing. Vito’s aggressive hothead son Sonny (James Caan) is at the party, a married man furtively having sex with a bridesmaid; present also is the weakling son Fredo (John Cazale), who is drunk in an undignified, undisciplined way. But the old don is pining for his favourite son, Michael (a stunningly charismatic performance from Al Pacino), a decorated second world war veteran with no interest in the family business. Michael shows up late, handsome in his uniform: indicating the transferable military skills. With him is his wasp fiancee Kay (Diane Keaton). Vito’s trusted consigliere, Tom Hagen, is the unofficial son: a brilliant, atypically self-effacing performance from Robert Duvall. It is quiet Tom who is to supervise, off-camera, the film’s most diabolical act of violence: kidnapping the racehorse (Godfather superfans will know the horse’s name) belonging to a Hollywood producer who has to be intimidated into giving a role to the Don’s Sinatra-esque godson Johnny Fontane (Al Martino), drugging it, cutting off its head and placing it in the sleeping man’s bed. Eerily, this producer (played by Cassavetes veteran John Marley) had the night before given an impassioned speech denouncing Fontane’s ruination of an innocent actress, a weird echo of the undertaker’s speech to the don about his daughter. But all this is the calm before the storm, as the crime families’ peace accord disintegrates, with the coming of drugs. Virgil “The Turk” Sollozzo (Al Lettieri) offers Vito a piece of his growing new heroin business; the don refuses, apparently because he disapproves of this evil trade, or perhaps because he thinks his cut isn’t big enough. Affronted by the refusal and suspecting the Corleones simply intend to launch an attack for all of his business, Sollozzo’s men launch a pre-emptive strike, shooting Vito as he buys oranges from a market, and of course pathetic, incompetent Fredo is unable to protect his father. (Again: Godfather superfans can tell you which Jake LaMotta fight is being advertised on the poster in the background of this shot.) And as Vito lies in hospital, having miraculously survived, it is Michael who realises at this moment that his destiny is to abandon his claim to the respectable American dream and take over the family business. It is to culminate in the now legendary sequence in which Michael becomes a godfather to his sister’s child and the baptismal service is intercut with nightmarish vignettes showing the slaying of all the rival bosses. The point of course being: this is Michael’s own baptism. Coppola’s epic storytelling sweep is magnificent: there is an electric charge in simply the shift from New York to California to Sicily and back to New York. This is the top-down approach to gangsters, the “great man” theory of organised crime. Later movies such as Scorsese’s Goodfellas will emphasise the more ragged lower ranks (although Paul Sorvino’s Paulie Cicero insists on the Corleone-esque murmuring in the ear) and David Chase’s The Sopranos showed the Italian-American mob in decline. My own view is that one of the greatest post-Godfather movies is Abel Ferrara’s The Funeral, which lays out the hellish sense of self-replicating sin and shame in the criminal world. Coppola was to follow his epic masterpiece with the equally ambitious and audacious The Godfather Part II, a sequel/prequel that is often thought of as even better. Brilliant though that second film is, I think the original will always have the edge in its simplicity, clarity and brutal power. • The Godfather is released on 25 February in cinemas.Having an asteroid slam into Earth was catastrophic for the dinosaurs, but the season of the strike may have substantially ramped up extinction rates for others species, research suggests. Scientists have found evidence that the devastating impact 66m years ago, which wiped out three-quarters of Earth’s species and created the Chicxulub crater in modern-day Mexico, happened in the spring in the northern hemisphere. The timing means that many animals north of the equator would have been particularly vulnerable to the intense heatwave unleashed by the collision, having just emerged from the harsh months of winter. Other animals in the south may have fared better given that it was autumn, especially if they were hunkering down in burrows. The direct hit from the asteroid triggered an extreme global heatwave that proved lethal for many exposed animals. In the aftermath, temperatures are thought to have plummeted in a nuclear winter that drove many more species to extinction. “To be able to fight that nuclear winter, you first had to survive the actual impact,” said Melanie During, a palaeontologist at Uppsala University in Sweden. “Anything in the southern hemisphere already sheltering had a much better chance of surviving.” When the asteroid hit, it blasted molten rock into space, which crystallised and rained back to Earth as “impact spherules” the same day. The scientists found some of these spherules lodged in the gills of fossilised paddlefish and sturgeon excavated from a fossil site called Tanis in North Dakota. The discovery of more spherules around the fossils suggest that the glassy particles were still falling when the fish perished, linking the time of death to the day, and potentially even the hour, of the impact. The fish appear to have died when they were buried alive by sediment shaken up in the collision. Writing in the journal Nature, the scientists describe how they identified seasonal cycles in the growth rates of the fish bones, along with changes in carbon isotopes linked to seasonal variations in the abundance of zooplankton, a dietary staple for the fish. The findings all point to the fish dying – and so the asteroid colliding – in the spring. Separate research on the fossils published in December by Prof Phillip Manning at the University of Manchester reached a similar conclusion. It is unclear whether small animals in the northern hemisphere actually fared worse than those in the south, however. Dennis Voeten, a co-author on the latest study at Uppsala University, said there was evidence that northern hemisphere turtles were wiped out in the asteroid strike, after which their habitats were repopulated by turtles from the south. Dr Daniel Field, an assistant professor of vertebrate palaeontology at the University of Cambridge, who was not involved in the research, said it was “plausible” that northern hemisphere animals were hit harder by the catastrophe. “If the asteroid struck at a biologically sensitive point of the year for many northern hemisphere organisms, it could have contributed to extinction rates that were even more elevated than might have been expected otherwise,” he said. But he added that nothing much larger than a house cat survived the asteroid impact and that many species would have been doomed whenever it hit. “The large non-avian dinosaurs probably would have gone extinct regardless of when during the year the asteroid struck,” he said.Europe could heat its citizens’ homes and power its industry on existing gas reserves for the remaining months of a relatively mild winter even if the standoff with Moscow over Ukraine were to escalate to a total stop on Russian gas imports, a leading German economic institute has said. Unusually low gas reserves have raised alarm among several European governments in recent months, with storage tanks across the continent on average at only 31% capacity at the start of this week – roughly half as full as in 2020. In Germany, reserves have been particularly low in storage tanks run by the Russian state-owned energy giant Gazprom, seemingly highlighting the country’s restricted room for meaningful sanctions in the case of an escalating conflict on the Ukrainian border. But after the German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, on Tuesday announced a freeze on certifying the Nord Stream 2 pipeline between Russia and Germany, and former Russian president Dmitry Medvedev threatened an ensuing doubling in European gas prices, German politicians and economists have struck a note of defiance. According to calculations by the Institute of Energy Economics at the University of Cologne shared with the Guardian, current levels of gas held in European reserves “could compensate for a loss of Russian deliveries” over the next six weeks unless temperatures were to drop dramatically in February or March. The institute’s analysis chimes with a cautiously optimistic report by the German Economic Institute, also published on Wednesday. While a complete loss of Russian gas imports, currently making up almost half of Germany’s gas needs, “will lead to bottlenecks in some European countries”, the Cologne-based institute says such supply shortages “would be limited to up to 10% of demand”. “German citizens not being to heat their homes this year is not a realistic scenario,” the study’s author, Andreas Fischer, told the Guardian. “But European governments have to make sure reserves are topped up again for the next winter.” Fischer said he was encouraged by the growing imports of liquid gas, of which Europe imported a record volume of 11bn cubic metres this January. The report voices scepticism over how quickly Germany will be able to wean itself off natural gas, predicting that its needs will decrease only by 6% to 17% by 2030. “Natural gas will continue to be the central energy source for heating supply in the coming years.” A renewed confidence that energy dependence would not restrain political action in response to Russia’s recognition of the self-proclaimed republics in Luhansk and Donetsk in east Ukraine was shared in Berlin and Brussels, reported Der Spiegel. “The fear of a stop of gas deliveries appears to have melted away like remaining snow at the end of the winter”, wrote the news magazine. A report by the Kiel Institute for the World Economy even asserts bullishly that Russia stopping gas deliveries would hit the Russia’s economy harder than Europe’s. “A trade stop with gas would result in a slump in Russian economic output of just under 3%”, the study claimed. “For Germany and the EU, there would hardly be any economic damage.” According to the northern German institute’s calculations, a gas embargo would lead Russia’s gross domestic product (GDP) to slump by 2.9%. Germany’s GDP, it argues, would slightly increase by 0.1%, as western allies would replace Russian imports with those from each other.‘Will you favour me with your eyes, your ears and your voice?” asks John Rwothomack, the writer and performer of this intense, atmospheric monologue as we enter the auditorium. It initially sounds whimsical and mannered as he invites us to play a child’s game while in character as a squeaky-voiced boy. But his questions become commands and take on chilling overtones as he begins his story about Okumu, a Ugandan boy abducted and forced to become a soldier and executioner. We are told to repeat the words of the commander that is training Okumu and then instructed to chant the acronym for the quasi-religious guerrilla rebel group, the Lord’s Resistance Army, established in the 1980s by Joseph Kony, who declared himself the spokesperson for God. It is as if we are not just watching Okumu’s story unfold in the round but also being recruited alongside him. This lean, hourlong drama has a woefully predictable trajectory: Okumu is terrorised into becoming a terrorist himself. We see his desperate attempts to hold on to his humanity, even when it is being pummelled out of him. Under the inspired direction of Mojisola Elufowoju, Far Gone incorporates a bold form of storytelling, using the oral tradition – and direct address to the audience – alongside movement and mime, often for minutes at a time without accompanying words. As Rwothomack’s first play, the script is sometimes unsubtle but his performance, especially in the non-verbal moments, transports us. Bare-chested and barefoot in childlike long shorts, he plays every character, from gunmen to the cowering child, and has a striking physicality, coiling up to appear tiny and expanding to become the ruthless commander or henchman. Depictions of violence are simulated through shocking, sinewy mime and Rwothomack dextrously plays characters chasing or fighting each other. Some of these scenes become opaque but the drama continues to grip and carry a spirit of fear and menace. William Monks’ lighting and Lee Affen’s creepy sound design (crickets, birdsong, gunfire) add to the tension while the giant mobile of rags overhead casts jagged shadows across Kevin Jenkins’s circular stage, whose ground has the hue of a parched Ugandan bush landscape. No matter how bleak the outcome, Rwothomack proves himself a captivating performer with a powerful story to tell. • At the Studio theatre, Sheffield, until 26 February.The government has been urged to tackle “cruel and unjust” waits for defendants in England and Wales to stand trial after figures showed a 15% yearly rise in the number of people being held for longer than the custody time limit of six months. As of 31 December last year, there were 4,185 people who had been held for more than six months, more than half of whom – 2,279 – were in custody for alleged non-violent offences. Almost two in five (38%) of those being held longer than six months were in custody for alleged drug offences, with 7% on remand for alleged theft. Others were charged with motoring offences being tried in magistrates courts, public order offences or fraud. The remand population has risen significantly since June 2019, exacerbated by the pandemic. The latest figures, from December 2021, show a continued rise in people being held more than six months, a year and two years, compared with June last year. Griff Ferris, a legal and policy officer at Fair Trials, said: “It’s cruel and unjust to keep people in prison for years awaiting trial. “These unacceptable delays deny justice for everyone involved, including accused people and victims, while being held for months in these incredibly difficult conditions has a devastating impact on people’s lives and wellbeing, as we can see from the shocking rise of self-harm and suicide rates among remand prisoners. “In order to address this crisis and the backlog of cases, the government must adopt meaningful, structural solutions, including de-criminalisation and releasing people from remand, rather than trying to find ways to put more people into prison.” Ministry of Justice figures show that prisoners who were on remand had the highest rate of suicide last year – 2.5 per 1,000 prisoners, up from 1.7 in 2020. They accounted for 37% of all prison suicides, up from 28% the previous year. Many people held in pre-trial detention eventually walk free. In 2020, one in 10 of those remanded before trial were acquitted and one in four of those remanded in custody were not sent to prison after their trial. While the figures, provided by the justice minister James Cartlidge in response to a parliamentary question posed by the Labour MP Alex Cunningham, do not specify whether they include those awaiting sentence as opposed to just those awaiting trial, it is exceptionally rare to be held for more than six months awaiting sentence. They show that 1,710 people had been held in custody for more than a year – compared with 1,523 in 2020 – including 730 for alleged drug offences and 118 for alleged theft. Out of the 1,710, 480 had been held for more than two years. Custody time limits were extended in September 2020 from six to eight months before reverting to six months on 28 June last year. In his written answer, Cartlidge said the number of people held on remand increased due to the suspension of jury trials for a short period in 2020 and reduced capacity because of social distancing. He added: “Judges continue to work to prioritise cases involving CTLs [custody time limits] to ensure they are listed at the first available opportunity, as well as prioritising cases involving vulnerable complainants and witnesses (including youth cases), domestic abuse and serious sex cases.” An MoJ spokesperson said: “Courts have prioritised remand hearings during the pandemic and only those posing the greatest risk to the public or who are likely to abscond are held in prison. “Extensions to normal custody time limits must be approved by independent judges and defendants have the right to apply for bail.” In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org.On Wednesday, the bureau of statistics revealed that real wages in 2021 completely tanked. In what will likely be the last release of such data before the federal election, the wages price index for all employees in 2021 rose just 2.3%, well below the 3.5% increase in inflation. Just a couple of weeks ago the Australian reported business were warning that a “wages rush ‘risks jump in inflation’”. It would be funny if it wasn’t so obtusely predictable. If there is one constant in our economic debate, it is that employer groups and certain members of the Coalition will continually warn that we are about to experience a wages breakout due to unions’ exaggerated pay claims. And, alas, another constant is that the wages breakout does not arrive. So it is again with the release of the wages figures for the last three months of 2021. Last year wages overall grew by 2.3% while private-sector wages were up 2.4%. That is, no better than occurred in the first quarter of 2019: If the graph does not display please click here And while the last half of 2021 did see a slight boost, even if we exclude the poor June quarter of last year, we are still looking at private-sector wage growth of only 2.5%: If the graph does not display please click here One problem is that the public sector, which traditionally bolstered wages, is now a drag. The decisions by state governments and the Morrison government to cap wages growth during the pandemic means that public-sector wages in the past year grew just 2.1%. The weak growth is hardly a sign of a breakout of wages and, worse, it also means that people’s wages are falling in real terms. In 2021, the consumer price index rose 3.5% – some 1.2% above wages. That real-wage fall is the worst this century outside of those that occurred when the GST was introduced. Personally, I prefer the RBA’s “trimmed mean” inflation measure when calculating real wages, because it is less erratic than the CPI and it is a bit much to expect wages will jump around every three months due to for example petrol prices soaring. But even here, real wages in both the private and public sectors fell in 2021: If the graph does not display please click here Given this is likely the last wages data before a May election (the next release is on 18 May, and 21 May is the last possible date for the election) it is a very poor showing for the Morrison government. Since September 2013, private-sector wages have grown just 1.4% above inflation, compared to the 4.2% they grew during the Rudd/Gillard governments – despite being in power for three fewer years. That 1.4% growth is so pathetic in reality, once you take into account taxation and the thresholds of government payments, it likely means that workers have not seen any increase in their purchasing power over the eight years of the Coalition government. Even in the construction sector, wages growth has slowed. In the September quarter there was a sharp 1.1% jump – the fastest quarterly rise since 2011 – but, in the last three months of 2021, construction workers wages grew just 0.4% – slower than the last quarter of 2019: If the graph does not display please click here The figures highlight that the link between unemployment and wages growth remains much reduced. If the graph does not display please click here It also suggests that the government’s predictions of wages growth getting back to 3% by the middle of 2024 while unemployment remains around 4.25% is rather fanciful. But the bigger problem is that workers are not getting rewarded for their efforts. Last week, before the Senate economics estimates committee, the head of the Treasury department, Dr Steven Kennedy, noted that so long as wages do not grow ahead of inflation and productivity then they would “put no pressure on inflation”. This is in line with the views of the governor of the Reserve Bank, that wages should grow at the level of inflation plus productivity – and ideally would be around 3.5% (2.5% inflation + 1% productivity growth) But wages are growing nowhere near that (and really have not for a long time): If the graph does not display please click here It clearly demonstrates wages are not putting pressure on inflation. Prices are not rising because of workers demanding higher pay, but mostly because of supply-side issues and some demand-driven aspects such as in the housing market. But because real wages are falling and not keeping up with productivity improvements, what is also happening is that employers are choosing to raise prices and take the increased profits rather than pay their workers more. These figures do nothing to suggest windfall gains to workers are about to occur and, if anything, highlights that the decade of stagnant real wages will be set to continue unless a prospective government seeks to do something about it.A fifth of Australia’s major coal, gas and oil facilities emit significantly more greenhouse gas than originally estimated when they submitted their plans to governments for approval, an investigation has found. In the worst cases, some fossil fuel developments now emit more than 20 times what was expected before they were given the green light, according to a report by the Australian Conservation Foundation (ACF). Campaigners say the emissions blowout, documented in an 18-month project by ACF researchers and Australian National University students, demonstrates a lack of proper regulation of carbon pollution at a state or federal level. While emissions estimates are included in many development applications, there is no requirement that companies keep their carbon pollution to the estimated level. The ACF lead environmental investigator, Annica Schoo, said it was evidence policies that were promised to keep a lid on industrial emissions, such as the federal government’s safeguard mechanism, were not effective in their current form. She said that no state or federal authority was dealing with the issue adequately despite some attempts by the New South Wales independent planning commission. “These emissions blowouts matter because the extra pollution is supercharging our climate problem,” she said. “I don’t think we can expect companies to know exactly what their emissions are going to be in advance, but I think it needs to be in the ballpark of what is approved. One in five polluting significantly more than estimated is not in the ballpark. “When a company says it will knock down three trees and it knocks down four, that’s a problem that regulators deal with. Why isn’t carbon emitted into the atmosphere being treated in the same way?” The report found few emissions estimates in environmental impact statements submitted by fossil fuel proponents during the approval process were accurate. Some sites ultimately emitted less than forecast, but one in three emitted more. Some of the breaches were small, and due to changes over time in the way the impact of methane – a particularly powerful greenhouse gas – was calculated. But one in five were significantly above the initial estimate. Sites well above their initial emissions estimate included coal mines and gas developments across the country. The most significant gap between estimated and actual emissions was found to be at Chevron’s Gorgon gas development in northern Western Australia. Over four years it released the equivalent of 16m tonnes more carbon dioxide than the company forecast in an environmental impact statement submitted to the state government, according to the ACF report. The emissions at Gorgon have even exceeded what the company said would be the worst case scenario if a carbon capture and storage (CCS) project at the site – under which emissions from a gas well are pumped back underground, not released into the atmosphere – had not worked. A Chevron spokesperson did not directly respond to questions on the difference between Gorgon’s estimated emissions at the approval stage and in practice, but said some assumptions in the report appeared incorrect. After a delayed start, the company had now stored 5.5m tonnes of emissions at the site, the spokesperson said. Jackson Balme, one of the ANU students involved in the investigation, said they read environment impact statements for hundreds of projects to compare emissions estimates with actual recorded carbon pollution, but only 48 had complete data. They contacted the owners of 11 facilities that had underestimated their carbon pollution but only one responded, and it was deemed not to have provided sufficient information to explain the discrepancy. ACF said their findings were verified by its investigations team, including former federal department staff members. Guardian Australia asked the Morrison government and relevant federal departments and agencies a series of questions about the ACF report. A spokesperson from the Clean Energy Regulator said: “The Clean Energy Regulator has looked at the report. It contains errors of fact and analytical flaws. We will respond to those in due course.” Examples of emissions discrepancies cited in the report include Anglo American’s Grosvenor metallurgical coalmine in central Queensland which started mining again this week, 21 months after a gas explosion seriously injured five workers. The coalmine was previously emitting about double the emissions that were estimated when it was approved. Schoo said it was a clear example of the failure of the safeguard mechanism, which the Coalition promised would prevent increases in industrial emissions effectively wiping out cuts from a taxpayer-funded offset scheme, the $4.5bn emissions reduction fund. In practice, companies have often been allowed to increase their carbon pollution under the safeguard without penalty. Analysis by the research firm RepuTex found emissions covered by the safeguard had increased 7% since it began in 2016. Industry representatives and climate activists have said it made the scheme a waste of time. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The ACF report said an Anglo American emissions reduction project next to the Grosvenor mine that captures methane and burns it to make electricity had received about $5m from the government to avoid about 460,000 tonnes of emissions. At the same time, the mine was found to have emitted 2.5m tonnes more than would have been expected when it was approved. Its emissions limit under the safeguard mechanism – known as a baseline – had been set above the initial estimate. This was allowed because the limit was set independently of the pre-development estimate. “It’s a really good example of the safeguard mechanism failing,” Schoo said. “We’re spending a lot of taxpayer’s money on the emissions reduction fund, on offsets, but we are not dealing with this really low-hanging fruit when it comes to preventing carbon pollution entering the atmosphere in the first place.”Three days on from the spectacular shutdown of Sydney’s train system, significant questions have emerged about the role played by the transport minister, David Elliott. While the New South Wales premier, Dominic Perrottet, insisted on Wednesday that he still had confidence in Elliott, he rebuked his failure to tell members of the government of the looming crisis and for the decision to go to bed while the department scrambled to resolve industrial action taken by the Rail, Tram and Bus Union (RTBU). “The minister will reflect on that and realise that all ministers are available 24/7,” Perrottet said. “That’s my expectation as premier.” Substantial gaps and contradictions remain in the timeline leading up to the decision to close the network. Transport for NSW has refused to answer questions about when the minister was briefed, and Elliott has at times offered contradictory statements about when he was informed. The Guardian has attempted to summarise the key questions raised this week, and what we know about the situation to date. When did David Elliott know about the shutdown? The events leading up to the decision to close the network have become a matter of contention, and Elliott has offered different versions of what occurred. At a press conference on Tuesday, Elliott said that he had gone to bed between 11pm and 12am on Sunday night, and had not been aware of the looming shutdown when he went to sleep. However, at an earlier press conference on Monday he told reporters he had become aware of it “late last night”. “That could have been very early this morning, it’s been a very long evening,” he said. It was certainly after 11pm that he went to sleep, because at 11.10pm he posted a photo to his personal Facebook account of NSW police officers attending a Sydney Gay and Lesbian Mardi Gras event. Some officers in the photo were dressed as nuns, and in his post Elliott accused them of mocking and vilifying the Catholic church. “A sad day,” he wrote. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Elliott has not revealed when his last contact with the department was, but Labor has pointed to a leaked text message sent by his chief of staff to senior transport officials at 10.43pm stating he had “been briefed and is happy with our position” as proof the minister must have known more. However, Elliott denied the message showed he was told about the shutdown, saying the text referred only to “significant interruptions” on the network and not a full shutdown. While he admitted he had an “inkling” of what may occur, he defended not informing the premier or other members of the government about the shutdown “because I had no confirmation and I didn’t know exactly what action Transport for NSW would be taking”. Who was responsible? As Elliott slept, the transport department continued to scramble. While Elliott has denied being aware of the shutdown, he has insisted he would have followed departmental advice that running the rail network under conditions imposed by the RTBU would be unsafe. He has said the key decision-maker was the Sydney Trains chief executive, Matt Longland, who reportedly made the decision to close the network at 12.43am. However, in its 1.50am statement Transport for NSW said it had been “clear at midnight” that it would not be possible to “safely operate train services”. Crucially, under NSW law transport officials are required to inform the minister before any significant developments in relation to the transit network, and the government is now investigating whether that notification occurred. But on Wednesday Elliott told parliament the department “considered it had discharged those obligations”. “However, my office remained of the view until approximately 1.30am that there would be a significant disruption to services but not a total network shutdown,” he said. “What is clear is that the communication between the department and my office was not sufficiently precise.” In a statement, a Transport for NSW spokesperson said only that “there were a number of discussions that took place across last week and weekend with the minister’s office concerning the situation involving the ongoing industrial action”. What led to the shutdown? The RTBU and the government have been locked in an ongoing industrial dispute for months, and the union first flagged on Wednesday last week its intention to begin further action due to what it called “pushback” on its key demands around pay, privatisation and safety. The union flagged a series of planned industrial actions including a ban on overtime, changes to master rosters and altered working conditions. On Friday the government filed a dispute in the Fair Work Commission seeking to halt planned industrial action by the RTBU, citing “significant disruptions to customer journeys” and “economic harm” to the state’s economy. The Transport for NSW secretary, Rob Sharp, said the government was seeking to avoid “difficulties the travelling public will face over the next two weeks”, but did not flag the potential for a network-wide shutdown. The RTBU secretary, Alex Claassens, told the Guardian negotiations in the commission began on Saturday morning. At the same time, Elliott was in Darwin in his capacity as veterans affairs minister. On Saturday he posted a photo to his personal Facebook account drinking a beer with the prime minister, Scott Morrison. In the commission, both sides believed they had struck a deal by about 8pm on Saturday night. The union said it agreed to drop some of its planned actions, including a ban on overtime and to only work to a “master roster”. At 8.33pm the union released a statement saying the agreement “provides Sydney Trains and NSW TrainLink the ability to safely run services from Monday”. However, it said it did “not mean an end to protected industrial action”. The exact wording of the agreement reached on Saturday was not released, but both parties have offered differing versions of what followed. What is known is that by Sunday evening, the government had decided to return to the commission. Both Elliott and Perrottet accused the union of not appearing at Sunday’s negotiations, although Elliott himself was not here. Claassens was also absent, though lawyers and other union representatives were present. The government accused the union of going back on the terms of the Saturday deal. The industrial relations minister, Damien Tudehope, told the ABC that the RTBU had “walked away” from the deal. But others have offered conflicting views. Elliott himself blamed a “misinterpretation” of what had been agreed to on Saturday evening, and the union denies it changed its mind. The sticking point appeared to be a disagreement over which rosters would be used as the basis of the industrial action. In any case, the failure to reach a new agreement prompted a flurry of action within the transport department. In the meantime, Elliott attended events commemorating the 80th anniversary of the Darwin bombing at about 11am eastern time and returned to Sydney later on Sunday afternoon. His office did not respond to questions about when he landed. Could anyone lose their job? It remains unclear. On Wednesday, Perrottet said he still had confidence in Elliott despite issuing a stinging rebuke to the minister’s decision to go to bed on Sunday night. He also labelled the disruptions on the network as “pathetic” and said he should have been informed about the closure, while continuing to blame the union. “Obviously what we saw on the train network on Monday was chaos,” he said. But he also revealed that he has launched an investigation into the events leading up to the shutdown, and in particular whether the department adequately informed the minister of the decision. That investigation may be able to answer outstanding questions about what the minister was told and when, although Perrottet has now instructed that briefs on major interruptions to the rail service must be made in writing, suggesting there may have been a series of verbal conversations in the lead up to the shutdown. Elliott is known to have a frosty relationship with his transport secretary, Sharp, and the outcome of the investigation could prove crucial to a number of officials’ futures. When will normal services resume? On Tuesday, Elliott revealed the government had withdrawn its case against the RTBU in the fair work commission and said he had met with union officials in the hope of a speedier return to full services. But by Wednesday afternoon the network was still running limited services, and the union suggested it was unlikely that it would end its industrial action until Monday.The prime minister, Scott Morrison, was convinced of only one thing this week as news came of an $8bn bid to buy the country’s biggest greenhouse gas emitter in order to shut its coal plants early. “Let me be really clear about something,” Morrison said. “We need to ensure that our coal-fired generation of electricity runs to its life, because if it doesn’t, electricity prices go up, they don’t go down.” A more unequivocal statement would be hard to come by. But is Morrison right? “There might be some truth to it, but that fundamentally creates the wrong picture,” says Tony Wood, an energy and climate policy expert at the Grattan Institute. So what’s actually happening? Last weekend it emerged that tech billionaire Mike Cannon-Brookes and Canadian asset management company Brookfield had launched their extraordinary takeover bid for energy generator and retailer AGL. The AGL board knocked the bid back, and now the Cannon-Brookes consortium is weighing up its next steps. Wood says if AGL was taken over under a rough timeframe set out by Cannon-Brookes, this would give Australia’s energy market about eight years’ notice to plan and prepare (that’s a lot longer than the statutory three and half years). “So even if there is a price increase – and it’s not clear there would be – then what happens to replace those coal plants is what will dictate prices. But prices don’t always just go up – that’s not true. But there is an underlying market reaction.” Dr Dylan McConnell, an energy systems expert at the University of Melbourne says Morrison’s statement had an inbuilt assumption that “nothing else gets built to replace the coal plants” when that isn’t what is being proposed. It’s a climate plan But first, what does Cannon-Brookes want to do? AGL has three large coal-fired power plants that currently emit about 40.5m tonnes of CO2 a year, according to data from the Clean Energy Regulator. Two of them – Loy Yang A in Victoria and Bayswater in New South Wales – occupy the top two places on a list of the country’s highest emitting power stations. Loy Yang A is Victoria’s biggest power station and releases 16.6 Mt of CO2 into the atmosphere a year from burning brown coal. Earlier this year AGL said it would bring forward its planned closure from 2048 to between 2040 and 2045. AGL’s black coal power station at Bayswater – the state’s biggest power asset – emits 14 Mt a year. The company wants to close it between 2030 and 2033 – at least two years ahead of a previous 2035 plan. A third power station – Liddel, close to Bayswater – will start shutting this year, meaning an end to the 9.9Mt of CO2 that’s released annually from burning black coal. Cannon-Brookes – an outspoken advocate for climate action and renewable energy – and his partners want all the coal plants closed by about 2030. He says the consortium has $20bn to spend to replace the electricity generated by the coal plants with renewable energy and storage, saying confidently this would lower prices, not lift them. From a climate change perspective, the broad challenge facing governments around the world is to get off fossil fuels as quickly as possible. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning When Morrison said this week the government was “very committed” to running coal plants until the end of their lives, it’s a good time to remember the government has signed an international climate agreement “to reach global peaking of greenhouse gas emissions as soon as possible.” Eraring error The ongoing AGL story came after a major announcement last week that Origin was to bring forward the closure of its Eraring coal plant station – Australia’s biggest power station – to 2025. That’s seven years earlier than expected. This set up the intriguing dynamic of Australia’s emissions reduction minister, Angus Taylor, expressing his “bitter disappointment” that a plant that pumps out 13 Mt of CO2 a year was going to close early. Taylor also took the opportunity to remind Australians that after the sudden 2017 closure of the Hazelwood coal plant in Victoria – at the time the country’s dirtiest power station – power prices went up by 85%. Cause = effect? The conclusion some might draw is closing a coal plant earlier than expected causes prices to go up. But McConnell says the Hazelwood story is an “ingrained narrative” that’s too simplistic and mostly wrong. Power prices did go up around the time of the Hazelwood closure but McConnell says the dominant cause was the international price of gas and the way Australia’s electricity market works. McConnell led a study looking at those price rises. He says while Hazelwood closing did have some direct effect, what was far more important was that owners of coal plants in the electricity market knew that gas was expensive. This led some to strategically “shadow price” their gas-fired competitors to make offers to supply electricity at higher costs that were just short of the price of gas. McConnell adds it’s a more complicated set of events than the simpler idea of one thing (the closure of Hazelwood) leading to another (higher prices). “It’s more complex to explain that opening up the gas export market to international prices then flowed into the domestic electricity market. But that’s much closer to the truth of what happened.”The Morrison government has awarded over half a million dollars in funding for the installation of fibre-to-the-premises NBN to a single business in the electorate of the deputy prime minister, Barnaby Joyce, despite the government having previously argued against taxpayer funded fibre upgrades. Fruit and vegetable grower Costa Group, which on Tuesday reported a 2021 yearly net profit after tax of $64m, is listed in documents provided to Senate estimates as the sole beneficiary of a planned upgrade from satellite NBN services to a full fibre to premises service. The upgrade is for the company’s tomato glasshouse facility in Guyra, in the New England electorate, as part of the federal government’s regional connectivity program. NBN Co will switch the business over at a cost of $520,018, with the company needing to install fibre along the New England Highway to connect Costa’s facility. This is despite the NBN Co estimating that the average cost per premises for fibre-to-the-premises is $4,395. The company is also spending about $1,500 per premises to upgrade select homes across the country from fibre-to-the-node to fibre-to-the-premises. When Joyce announced a range of funding under the program in April last year, while sitting on the backbench and not responsible for decisions such as this, he said of the Costa project that “more residents and businesses in New England will enjoy the benefits and opportunities that improved digital connectivity brings.” However, according to documents provided to Senate estimates by the Department of Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development and Communications, the upgrade covers just the Costa facility, with no other premises included. Other fibre upgrade projects funded in the $117m first round of the program listed cover hundreds of premises each that are subsequently able to connect to the NBN via a full-fibre connection. Round one of the regional connectivity program funded thousands of premises in regional parts of Australia to convert from connecting to the NBN via satellite to a full fibre connection at a cost of close to $40m for taxpayers, according to calculations made by Guardian Australia. A spokesperson for Joyce confirmed the then backbencher wrote a letter of support for Costa’s application. “This was done in his capacity as federal member for New England and in recognition of the benefits the project could deliver to the region, of which there were plenty,” the spokesperson said. “Any suggestion Mr Joyce acted inappropriately is off-base and only serves to perpetuate the anti-regions campaign the Labor party is running.” In Joyce’s register of interests, he discloses his partner, Vikki Campion, has shares in Costa Group, although the register does not indicate how many shares she holds. Asked whether he disclosed the shares in the letter supporting the project, the spokesperson for Joyce said: “Any suggestion Mr Joyce acted inappropriately is off base and only serves to perpetuate the anti-regions campaign the Labor Party is running.” The Guardian does not suggest any impropriety by Mr Joyce or Ms Campion. The funding decision was made by the former regional communications minister Mark Coulton, in consultation with the communications minister, Paul Fletcher. Coulton’s successor, Bridget McKenzie, passed on questions about the grant to the department. A spokesperson for the department said the objective of the program is to “use a place-based approach to target telecommunications infrastructure investment that will provide economic opportunities and improve participation in the digital economy for regional communities and businesses” and all proposals are competitively assessed by the department before funding recommendations are made to the decision maker. “The Connecting Costa Group – Growing the Guyra project, jointly funded by the Australian government and NBN Co under Round 1 of the RCP, will upgrade the NBN access technology at the Costa Group hydroponic tomato glasshouse facility from Sky Muster Satellite to fibre to the premises,” the spokesperson said. “As one of the largest businesses in the region, and the major employer in the area, the proposed solution will provide significant economic benefits to the local economy through increased employment opportunities and an increase in regional output.” The spokesperson said despite the project only connecting Costa “other business along the fibre footpath could take advantage of this investment”, suggesting businesses could later seek to get their own fibre upgrade. The use of taxpayer funds to upgrade fibre came in stark contrast to the government’s public comments about using taxpayer funds for NBN upgrades. In November, when Labor promised to add another 1.4m premises to the government’s existing plans to upgrade more homes to fibre across the country, Fletcher accused the opposition of wasting taxpayers money with the upgrade. “It’s clear that what Labor proposes here is more wasteful government spending of taxpayers’ money. That’s what Labor does – because that’s what Labor is good at,” he said. Joyce’s spokesperson said any funding for improved connectivity in the bush is a good thing. “Regional businesses deserve the same standard of digital connectivity that companies in capital cities take for granted and this funding has helped deliver that.” Comment has been sought from Costa Group.When Jannine Scott first joined her daughter Bethany on the national disability insurance scheme, it was “life-changing”. The scheme funded in-home support workers for Scott, who has a spinal cord condition, and even paid for a power wheelchair and other assistive technology. “I am sitting in my wheelchair at the moment, and without that piece of equipment, I would have been housebound much, much sooner,” she said. “But the effort it takes to engage with this part of the government now is becoming wildly unreasonable.” Like a growing number of people who are complaining about what the federal opposition claims are “stealth” cuts to the NDIS, Scott said her NDIS experience took a dark turn in the middle of the year. In the latest case where the National Disability Insurance Agency had scrapped supports it had previously funded, Scott said cuts to the tune of tens of thousands of dollars had left the family struggling to cope with daily life. She is primary carer to two children including a three-year-old, Bethany, 11, and Scott’s mother, who has Alzheimer’s disease. Bethany, who is home-schooled, was diagnosed with autism at the very early age of 18 months, lives with epilepsy and a rare genetic condition that impacts her mobility. Scott got onto the scheme two years ago after a rare congenital spinal cord condition worsened to the point she found it hard to walk. Finding a clear explanation for her degenerating genetic condition has been a lifelong journey that continues to this day. “I first presented with symptoms when I was 16,” Scott, 42, said. “It’s been a gradual deterioration. I got to the point where I was unable to walk very far, I was having a lot of motor and sensory changes. Once they (the specialists) found this congenital spinal cord injury, it became a lot clearer that I need support.” Yet in June last year, after a year on the NDIS, Scott received shock news: the NDIA had refused to continue funding supports related to her spinal cord injury. They now claimed there was a lack of evidence it was permanent. That was despite the fact the agency had already paid for a power wheelchair, in-home carers, and other assistive technology in a previous plan. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Scott’s funding was instead allocated on the basis of her other psychosocial disabilities, and reduced by about $20,000 a year on a pro-rata basis. “It certainly feels very different from what it was when Bethany first started on the scheme,” Scott said. “It feels like every time you interact with them it’s combative rather than supportive.” But the bad news was only just beginning. In a letter sent to the family three months later, Bethany’s plan was also cut. Bethany’s “core supports” funding, used to pay for things such as in-home support workers, was slashed dramatically from $86,234 to $600 over 12 months. It meant there was no support at all for in-home care for Bethany, while Scott was also dealing with cuts to her NDIS plan. Those changes – contrary to the recommendations of Bethany’s paediatrician, according to a letter seen by Guardian Australia – were upheld by the NDIA in a new plan last month. The NDIA told Scott in a letter that support workers would not be funded because some of the tasks they assisted Bethany with were considered a “parental responsibility”. Scott said she was told that while Bethany’s funding should fall for this reason, her own package would increase to provide more help around the house. Except, of course, that three months earlier, Scott’s own plan had already been cut. Bethany’s funding was boosted for therapies, and for support to help with community engagement and skills building. But the plan initially stated it could no longer be used to fund Scott’s preferred allied health professional: a developmental educator that her daughter had been seeing for more than a year. After inquiries from Guardian Australia, the NDIA clarified the funding could be used “flexibly, including for a developmental educator”. A spokesperson for the NDIA said plans could go “up or down depending on an individual’s changing disability-related needs, that is how this insurance Scheme was designed”. “These are independent NDIS decisions based on specialist advice and the participant’s individual circumstances at that time,” the spokesperson said. “There are many factors that might result in a participant’s plan value changing depending on their support needs and changes in life circumstances. “It is important to note Ms Scott and [Bethany] continue to receive a significant amount of disability-related funding from the NDIS.” The spokesperson said if “sufficient evidence” was provided to the NDIA to “substantiate the requested levels of additional disability-related health support, the NDIA would then be able to consider changes to Ms Scott’s plan”. Last week, new figures revealed a 400% increase in the number of families challenging NDIA decisions at the Administrative Appeals Tribunal in the past six months. Scott was still fighting the cuts but was hoping to avoid what she described as the “cruel” AAT process. She said she now had “significant anxiety” dealing with the NDIA. “Anything that was making Bethany improve and making her have a better outcome in her life were taken away from her,” Scott said. “That was the opposite of what the NDIS was supposed to do. “[Bethany] has trouble with her physical mobility now, she can’t walk for long distances, she’s gone through a significant amount of weight loss and muscle loss over the past six months,” Scott said. She was increasingly “disengaged” and did not want to leave her bedroom. The family has been supported by Syndromes Without A Name (Swan), an organisation that supports families caring for a child with an undiagnosed or rare genetic condition. Its chief executive, Heather Renton, said more training was needed for NDIS planners to recognise undiagnosed or rare genetic conditions. In Scott’s case, the reduced hours of in-home care had coincided with “more significant mental and physical fatigue”. “I need help seven days a week and I don’t have the funding for that any more,” Scott added. “Simple day-to-day tasks like cooking and things like that, I can no longer do. Being Bethany’s primary carer, it makes it extremely difficult.”I work in a recruitment company. I am male. I enjoy my job, I’m quite driven and I’m looking to get promoted within the company. The issue is that I’m starting to notice that my female peers aren’t treated as nicely as us men and I don’t know what to do. I’m afraid I will be made redundant if I speak up as they’ve been making redundancies getting rid of the “inconvenient” people. I’ve witnessed my female colleagues being put in a position where they had to justify their actions that were the same as other male colleagues. Female managers have to put extra effort into putting their point across and the HR is barely existent. I’d gladly speak to the CEO, but he acts like a bully. I’ve witnessed him excluding people in the pettiest ways. He’d buy everyone coffee, except for one person. It bothers me, but I’m not feeling safe enough to discuss this in the office. I’m afraid I’ll be seen as weak and inconvenient.* * Edited for brevity. Eleanor says: It’s good that you’ve noticed this and named it for what it is. A lot of people would prefer not to – they’d find ways to topiary the evidence into something that looks less unfair, choosing to believe it’s a coincidence that the “bad workers” or “difficult people” are women. The question of what to do next depends on what your goal is, and it’s worth being really specific. One goal might be to confront the people responsible for this culture so they feel challenged and held accountable – like someone’s seen them in their piggish unfairness. It’s delicious to fantasise about that goal, imagining exactly what you’d say – or even tastier, what they’d say – when you held up the mirror to their behaviour. I think that’s the sort of goal you’re wondering about whether to pursue; you talk about “speaking up”, going to see the CEO, discussing it in the office or even with HR. Unfortunately, this kind of change has a high “degree of difficulty”. Think about what we already know: we know the people responsible for this are bad at responding to evidence (otherwise they wouldn’t have this attitude towards women); we know they’re bad at handling conflict (otherwise they wouldn’t pick on people in these petty ways); we know they’re uninterested in the possibility of improving (otherwise there’d be a feedback system or an avenue for anonymous reporting). With those as our data points for the psychology of the culprits, I’m pessimistic that you’d be able to talk – or confront – them into changing. Besides, if trying to extract accountability from them puts them in a bad mood, it’ll be the women around you who suffer its spray. But you can still hold on to the goal to change things. Here’s a lesson many people learn when they have to band together under an oppressive eye: you don’t have to announce what you’re doing for it to be an effective form of resistance. I wonder if you could make it your goal to change things in ways that will – by design – escape the culprits’ notice. I promise you the women in the office are wise to what’s going on. Given that, how can you materially make their lives easier? Are there tasks you can take off their plate; private ways you can give credit for work well done? Are there moments you can increase airtime for women in an interaction – “I think Sandra mentioned this earlier, but …?” Instead of trying to cut the unfairness off at the source, you could start by trying to minimise its impact on particular people. It takes very little to privately signal to someone “I saw that too”, but to that person, the sense of being seen is anything but small. In time, these small acts of solidarity might embolden you to do more. The way gender warps your workplace is going to be a lot more complicated than some sexist “bad apples”: together you’ll be fighting a robust history of pay gaps, harassment, stereotyping, and worse. But if you focus on lessening the way those things affect specific people you might find it less daunting to start making change. Never forget the insight of revolutionary-with-a-guitar Paul Kelly: “From little things big things grow.” Ask us a question Do you have a conflict, crossroads or dilemma you need help with? Eleanor Gordon-Smith will help you think through life’s questions and puzzles, big and small. Questions can be anonymous. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service hereRosie Batty has been talking about family violence since 2014, which is when her only son, Luke, was murdered by his father at a cricket match. With no experience being in the public eye, the single mother learned fast who to trust in the media and who to avoid. During her 12 months as the Australian of the Year in 2015, she spoke in public about the culture of violence 300 times. Seven years later, Batty is joining the ranks of the media, asking other accidental heroes to open up on a new series of the ABC’s interview show One Plus One. “When Luke first got killed, I think you’re in shock, and there’s a whole stack of media and you just talk to anybody,” Batty said ahead of Thursday’s One Plus One launch. “And then you start to recognise some really stupid questions and you could feel your irritation and impatience start to come in. And you think, you know what? I really need to really be mindful of who I am speaking to.” Batty’s advocacy and bravery, driven by the horrific circumstances of her 11-year-old son’s death, forced governments to seriously rethink their approach to tackling family violence and made her a household name. Her most bruising media experience came early on when she found herself listening through an earpiece to comments made on TV by News Corp Australia columnist Joe Hildebrand, who said there was no excuse for not reporting child abuse. Waiting in the wings to talk about her fundraising efforts, Batty was asked by Studio 10 producers to respond to Hildebrand live on air. “I just heard victim-blaming statements and I was so, so angry,” Batty says now. She came on via a live cross and said: “This is beyond my comprehension that again the woman who’s the victim is punished.” She told Hildebrand he was “so misguided”. “I came off air thinking, oh my God, what did I do? I’m really embarrassed that I’d been so angry.” Hildebrand later apologised for upsetting Batty but did not resile from insisting women should report their partners for child abuse. So when Karl Stefanovic’s ill-fated panel show The Verdict came calling years later Batty just laughed. They wanted her to be on a panel with Mark Latham who had criticised her publicly. “Karl invited me on and I thought – don’t be so pathetic. I just couldn’t be bothered. I think I learned a long time ago to let other people have those divisive conversations. I learned how to pick my times to speak.” It wasn’t the media attention that wore Batty down, so much as the persistent pleas for help from members of the public who were facing family violence. “One of the most overwhelming parts that you can’t sustain is people reaching out to you in crisis with some really horrific stories which you can’t really fix and you can’t necessarily save or intervene,” she says. “Concerned parents, grandmothers or family members reaching out to me as if I would have another suggestion of what they can do. And at end of the day, as imperfect as the system we have is, it is what we have.” Batty says hosting One Plus One is a “good fit” for her because she genuinely loves talking to people. “I’m not trying to be Stan Grant, I am just trying to give people the space and time they need and know when to relate and join in with a comment.” The series kicks off on Thursday with another former Australian of the Year, Richard “Harry” Harris, who helped rescue the boys’ soccer team stuck in a Thai cave, and includes comedian Hannah Gadsby, writer and artist Amani Haydar, cook and food writer Stephanie Alexander, performer and domestic violence campaigner Russell Vickery and Frances Rings, the incoming artistic director of Bangarra Dance Theatre. She will also be talking to gun control advocate Walter Mikac, who lost his wife and two children in the massacre at Port Arthur. “If anyone would understand my pain and my journey, it would be him,” Batty says. So, has all the talking made any difference, five years on from the Victorian royal commission into family violence? “If you lodge a breach of an intervention order with Victoria police now it is much more likely to be taken seriously,” she says. “We have improved enormously from previous generations when family violence was seen as an interruption to police business. What keeps me motivated to keep going is when you look back you can see that you are constantly moving forward. It doesn’t feel like that at the time but you are.” One Plus One starts Thursday 24 February at 9.30pm on ABC.Rising global temperatures have shifted at least twice the amount of freshwater from warm regions towards the Earth’s poles than previously thought as the water cycle intensifies, according to new analysis. Climate change has intensified the global water cycle by up to 7.4% – compared with previous modelling estimates of 2% to 4%, research published in the journal Nature suggests. The water cycle describes the movement of water on Earth – it evaporates, rises into the atmosphere, cools and condenses into rain or snow and falls again to the surface. “When we learn about the water cycle, traditionally we think of it as some unchanging process which is constantly filling and refilling our dams, our lakes, and our water sources,” the study’s lead author, Dr Taimoor Sohail of the University of New South Wales, said. But scientists have long known that rising global temperatures are intensifying the global water cycle, with dry subtropical regions likely to get drier as freshwater moves towards wet regions. Last August, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change’s sixth assessment report concluded that climate change will cause long-term changes to the water cycle, resulting in stronger and more frequent droughts and extreme rainfall events. Sohail said the volume of extra freshwater that had already been pushed to the poles as a result of an intensifying water cycle was far greater than previous climate models suggest. “Those dire predictions that were laid out in the IPCC will potentially be even more intense,” he said. The scientists estimate the volume of extra freshwater that shifted from warmer regions between 1970 and 2014 is between 46,000 and 77,000 cubic kms. “We’re seeing higher water cycle intensification than we were expecting, and that means we need to move even more quickly towards a path of net zero emissions.” The team used ocean salinity as a proxy for rainfall in their research. “The ocean is actually more salty in some places and less salty in other places,” Sohail said. “Where rain falls on the ocean, it tends to dilute the water so it becomes less saline … Where there is net evaporation, you end up getting salt left behind.” The researchers had to account for the mixing of water due to ocean currents. “We developed a new method that basically tracks … how the ocean is moving around with reference to this freshening or salinification,” Sohail said. “It’s kind of like a rain gauge that’s in constant motion.” Dr Richard Matear, a chief research scientist in the CSIRO Climate Science Centre, who was not involved in the research, said the study suggested existing climate modelling has underestimated the potential impacts of climate change on the water cycle. “There’s been a dramatic uplift in our ability to monitor the ocean,” he said. “Observational datasets [like those used in the study] are really ripe for revisiting how global warming is changing the climate system, and the implications it might have on important things like the hydrological cycle.”Two men in their late 30s and three teenagers were like “a pack” as they hunted down a 14-year-old boy in broad daylight before he was fatally stabbed, a murder trial has heard. One of the attackers shouted that they were “going to get the black bastard” as they chased Dea-John Reid through the Kingstanding area of Birmingham, the court heard. An elderly woman screamed: “They have stabbed him, they have stabbed him,” after the attack, which took place in front of several witnesses, Birmingham crown court heard on Wednesday. George Khan, 39, and Michael Shields, 36, are on trial with three teenagers who were aged 14, 14 and 16 at the time of the incident last May. They all deny murder. Footage of the moment Dea-John was stabbed on College Road was played to the jury. The prosecution said it showed all five defendants chasing him and then running away after it happened. Prosecutor Richard Wormald QC said: “The evidence you are about to hear shows that acting as a group, they went to look for Dea-John Reid and after finding him in a park in Kingstanding, chased and caught up with him. He was then stabbed in the chest. “The prosecution’s case is that all five are responsible for his murder because the evidence quite clearly shows that all five acted together. They acted collectively. “It can be inferred from the evidence that all must have intended to cause Dea-John serious harm, and each knew when they began their pursuit of him that such harm was likely.” The now 15-year-old boy who is alleged to have stabbed Dea-John was motivated by “revenge” for an incident that took place earlier in the day, the court heard. He armed himself with a kitchen knife before Khan allegedly drove all five to “hunt him down”. Wormald said of Khan and Shields. “They are much older – in their late 30s – and as you listen to the evidence you may think that their behaviour in positively participating in the attack is nothing short of a disgrace.” He continued: “The killing happened in broad daylight. It was a revenge attack for events that had happened earlier in the day involving the three younger defendants. They sought help in the form of the two older male defendants.” Wormald said Khan “actively encouraged the attack” once Dea-John was found. “It was a group attack, during which they each played their part, running after Dea-John Reid, blocking off his escape routes and enabling [one of the youths] to chase down and fatally stab Dea-John Reid to the left side of his chest. “The defendants acted like a pack, chasing down their prey.” None of the group offered support or comfort to the boy, Wormald told jurors. “They simply left him to die.” Wormald said one witness who had just got off a bus in College Road recalled seeing “about five guys chasing a black boy, with one of them shouting that they were ‘going to get the black bastard’”. Another witness had spoken of how he saw Dea-John “hold his stomach and collapse” after seeing two white males chase him. The incident took place on 31 May last year. Shields, of Castle Bromwich, and Khan, of Birmingham, and the three youths, who cannot be named because of their age, all deny murder. Hollie Davies, 36, of Birmingham, denies assisting an offender. The trial, which is expected to last up to eight weeks, continues.Stephen Colbert “The thing we all knew was going to happen continues to happen at a slightly faster pace,” said Stephen Colbert on Tuesday evening, hours after Vladimir Putin ordered Russian troops into two separatist regions of eastern Ukraine, in a sharp escalation of already sky-high tensions. Putin had already unilaterally declared the breakaway Ukrainian provinces of Donetsk and Luhansk as independent republics on Monday. “Smart – he declares them independent and then when he sends troops in, he can technically say, ‘That’s not an invasion of Ukraine, because that’s not Ukraine any more,’” the Late Show host said. “And at this point, Putin’s most important weapon is his Sharpie” for redrawing the map. Putin has claimed the troops are for carrying out “peacekeeping functions” – “and it’s true,” said Colbert, describing the logic as: “I keep this piece of Ukraine, I keep that piece of Ukraine, I keep all the pieces of Ukraine, I am piece-keeping.” In response to aggression along the border with Ukraine, the US government had imposed some economic sanctions, barring new investment, trade and financing by US persons to, from, or in the provinces of Donetsk and Luhansk. “Well, that’s a disaster for anyone invested in the Ukrainian coffee chain Dunkin’ Donetsk,” Colbert joked. But on Tuesday, Joe Biden changed tune: the US government imposed full blockage sanctions on two large Russian financial institutions and on their sovereign debt, which cut off the Kremlin from western financing. “So that means no Russian money can come into the US. There goes Tucker Carlson’s sponsors,” Colbert quipped. Jimmy Kimmel In Los Angeles, Jimmy Kimmel mocked the botched launch of Donald Trump’s app Truth Social, which is supposed to be his alternative to Twitter. “You’re not going to believe this but the rollout did not go well,” Kimmel explained. “Some might even call it a total disaster. “Truth Social has been such a disappointment so far that Trump may have to rename it to Don Jr.” The app’s initial sign-up function failed for many people, with an error message that read: “Something went wrong, please try again.” “Which applies to so many things Trump is involved with,” said Kimmel. “Then they changed it to say they put you on a waitlist, because of what they claimed was massive demand. “It’s like if Trump designed a bridge that collapsed and said, ‘Oh, the bridge was just too popular. Too many people wanted to drive on my fantastic bridge,’” he joked. That wasn’t the only snafu; as Kimmel pointed out, the Truth Social logo was copied from the logo for a British company called Trailar. “You know, there’s a lot of conversation about Trump being a fascist and trying to overthrow an election, all that stuff, and rightfully so,” said Kimmel, ‘“but I think we sometimes forget: he’s a terrible business man, too.” Seth Meyers On Late Night, Seth Meyers laughed at Putin’s labeling of Russian troops in eastern Ukraine as “peacekeepers” – “specifically, they’re keeping this piece,” he said. He also characterized severe new economic sanctions on Russia in response to the troop movement as: “From now on, Russia doesn’t get the new Wordle until noon. “Russian Wordle is very easy,” he added, “because it’s always ‘Putin’.” Meyers also touched on a New York Times op-ed titled “Ignoring a text message or email isn’t always rude. Sometimes it’s necessary.” “I think I speak for everyone when I say: k,” he noted. Jimmy Fallon And on the Tonight Show, Jimmy Fallon also discussed the Russian invasion of proxy states in eastern Ukraine. “Biden gave a speech at the White House and said that Russia’s invasion of Ukraine has officially begun,” Fallon noted. “Biden said: ‘We will not put up with Russian aggression, especially on such an important national holiday: Twosday.’” Biden also announced tough new sanctions, with the EU expected to follow suit. “Yeah, nothing stops a dictator in his tracks like raising his ATM fees,” Fallon joked. On a lighter note, the AP international reporter Philip Crowther went viral for posting a video in which he reported from Kiev, Ukraine in six different languages: French, Spanish, Portuguese, English, German and Luxembourgish. “He also knows six different ways to say, ‘I’m ready to leave Ukraine now, this could be a Zoom,’” Fallon quipped.The former On the Buses and EastEnders actor Anna Karen has died in a fire at her east London home. Firefighters rushed to the blaze on the ground floor of a terrace house in Windsor Road, Ilford, shortly after 10.30pm on Tuesday. It took them less than an hour to bring the fire under control but, by that time, Karen was already dead. The cause remains under investigation. Karen, 85, was best known for playing Olive in the 1970s sitcom On the Buses, as well as her recurring role as Aunt Sal, the sister of Peggy Mitchell, played by Barbara Windsor, in EastEnders. She was a lifelong friend of Windsor, who died in December 2020. Karen’s friends and former colleagues paid tribute to the actor. The singer Cheryl Baker tweeted: “I have just heard the awful news that my fabulous mate, #AnnaKaren has died in a house fire. “What an horrific way to die, I can’t bear to think about it. I adored her – she was an absolute treasure, both on and off the screen.” The EastEnders star Rita Simons, who played Roxy Mitchell, said: “I just heard the awful news about the wonderful Anna Karen. Horrific and awful and so so sad. She was one of the best. Sleep well lovely Anna. Sending all my love to her family and friends.” The broadcaster Kay Burley said: “Terribly sad news that Anna Karen – Olive from On the Buses – has died in tragic circumstances. May she rest in peace. She was 85.” Neighbours raised the alarm after seeing smoke billowing from her front door, the MailOnline reported. Sivalai Pavananthakumar, 33, told the website: “There was a lot of smoke, and flames, people in the street had seen what was happening and came out to try and help. “The fire brigade and police were here quickly and kicked down the door, there was so much smoke.” He added: “I recognised her and would see her every day when I took my children to school. She was a nice old lady and always said hello.” Another neighbour added: “I knew her from EastEnders, it was like having a celebrity living in the street. She was a lovely old lady and always spoke to everyone.” A London fire brigade spokesperson said three fire engines and about 20 firefighters from Ilford and Barking attended the blaze.Ukrainians are buying guns, ammunition and sniper rifles ahead of a possible Russian invasion, with long queues inside weapons stores on Wednesday. With a state of emergency set to be unveiled, the country’s parliament approved a draft law that gives Ukrainians permission to carry firearms. Previously they were forbidden from leaving home with lethal weapons. Most Ukrainians – boys and girls – learn how to shoot at school. About 400,000 people are estimated to have combat experience, following Vladimir Putin’s 2014 annexation of Crimea and the Moscow-supported armed uprising in the east. But the threat in recent days of a possible attack on Kyiv has caused an unprecedented rush to buy arms. Gun shops have sold out of some weapons, such as AR-10 and AR-15 assault rifles, with business now exceptionally busy. “Of course I’m worried about the situation,” Dariia Olexandrivna said, speaking in the basement Praporshyk gun store, in central Kyiv’s Pushkin street. “I’m hoping for the best but preparing for everything.” Olexandrivna said she and her husband began taking shooting lessons six months ago, when tensions with Moscow grew. They owned two handguns. She had come to buy 400 rubber bullets. “I saw Putin’s speech on Monday. I think he’s stupid enough to do it. He hates Ukrainian people,” she said. Two weeks ago she packed the car with clothes, medicines, food, water and extra shoes. “My two children speak only Ukrainian. They don’t speak any Russian. If it’s no longer safe for us we will leave,” she said. Where would she go? “The west of the country, somewhere,” she replied. Over the past 24 hours the Ukrainian government has taken enhanced security measures, having previously downplayed the likelihood of conflict. Restrictions on movement, mass gatherings, political meetings, and concerts and sports matches, are being proposed. In a speech on Tuesday, the president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, announced the mobilisation of reserves – beginning with 36,000 people, with veterans recalled to active duty. He also told Ukrainian citizens to leave Russia. Dmytro Skatrovsky said he had not been notified by text but had turned up anyway outside the Svyatoshynskyi recruitment centre, in western Kyiv. He spent three years in the army and took part in the 2014 battle to evict separatists from the port city of Mariupol, he said. “I’ve bought two sniper complexes with good optics,” he added. “I’ve also ordered a drone on Amazon. It hasn’t turned up yet.” Skatrovsky said a group of friends had chipped in to get the rifles – at a cost of $10,000 (£7,370). US contacts had paid $2,300 for the drone, he said. The Ukrainian military gave veterans guns, but the process was slow and bureaucratic, he explained. “We can win against Russia. This isn’t 2014,” he said. “We have heavy weapons, thanks to US and UK. If they come we will shoot at them from every window.” Territorial defence courses, where ordinary citizens can learn to shoot are heavily oversubscribed. Buying a gun is legal so long as it more than 80cm in length, with weapons freely available. Police confirm Ukrainians are buying large amounts of ammunition. In February alone 10,000 firearms were registered. Overall, the country has more than 700,000 legal gun owners, the Kyiv defence reporter Illia Ponomarenko tweeted on Wednesday. At the Stvol gun store around a dozen men were waiting patiently in front of a glass counter. The shop sells rifles, pistols, knives, and camping gear, as well as cumbersome safes and a medium-sized brass model of a wild boar. The owner said he had been told not to speak. One customer, Zhenya Nedashkvskyi, said he had dropped in to buy a pump action shotgun. “It won’t stop the Russians,” he admitted. “I want to protect my house from looters. The situation has become hot. It could get worse.” Nedashkvskyi said he would like to protect his elderly parents who live in the city of Smila in the Cherkasy region, about 200km (124 miles) south of the capital. He said he had his eye on a Turkish-made Veryon model, costing 17,520 Ukrainian hryvnia – about $600. “I’ll get that or similar,” he said. Ukraine’s former defence minister Andriy Zagorodnyuk said guns had long been part of national culture. “People are not storming petrol stations or stores but they are buying weapons to protect themselves. That’s a good sign.” He added: It shows that the country is not scared. The nation is ready to fight, if it needs to.” A few shoppers, however, said they were not worried about the situation or the prospect of a looming Kremlin offensive. Alex – a 23-year-old casino manager, who declined to give his second name – said he was buying a sniper file for his father, a keen hunter. “I’m still calm,” he said. He added: “Guns are popular in Ukraine. We all get classes at school on how to shoot. My father has a big collection of weapons already. The rifle is a gift for him.” Asked what would happen if Russian troops did turn up, he said: “I think our people will shoot back.”Name: Happiness officers. Age: The psychological and philosophical pursuit of happiness was going on thousands of years ago in China, India and Greece. Think Confucius, Buddha, Socrates, Aristotle. More recently, Roger Hargreaves published his scholarly text Mr Happy in 1971. This isn’t about that though, is it? Not directly. It’s about an even more modern idea, namely the happiness officer. Happiness officer? That’s a thing? It could be soon. Where? Clifford Chance. The international law firm? That doesn’t sound like the sort of place for hippy dippy wellbeing ideas. Hippy dippy idea or the future of work? Anyway, one of the candidates for managing partner at their London headquarters, John Kewley, has promised to create the new role of chief happiness officer, if appointed. Surely they are already happy, when they earn all that money. True, partners at such firms do get seven-figure salaries. But stress levels and burnout rates are also high … OK, that’s not good. “Let’s surprise, let’s delight, let’s dream,” Kewley wrote in his manifesto. “We have a generational opportunity to create the most vibrant, happy and uplifting place to work in the world.” I’m still finding it hard to feel sorry for a bunch of rich City lawyers. It is not just at Clifford Chance; workers are burning out and dropping out all over the place. Since the start of the pandemic in 2020, almost a quarter of a million Brits aged between 50 and 65 have left their jobs and aren’t looking for new ones. And you’re suggesting appointing happiness officers would help? Well, you never know, it might do. Laurie Santos says it’s in employers’ best interest to notice that people are burning out. Laurie Santos? Who’s she? A psychology professor known as Yale’s “happiness professor”, since teaching the most popular course in the university’s history, Psychology and the Good Life. She is also host of The Happiness Lab podcast. Sounds like Santos knows her stuff when it comes to happiness. Perhaps she might be interested in the job at the London law firm? Prof Santos is currently taking a burnout break … Do say (as Albert Schweitzer once did): “Success is not the key to happiness. Happiness is the key to success. If you love what you are doing, you will be successful.” Don’t say: “Go away and leave me alone, happiness officer, I’m listening to Leonard Cohen.”A man crossing the US-Mexico border into Arizona was fatally shot by a federal border patrol agent over the weekend at about 10pm on Saturday night in a town just north of Douglas. An autopsy conducted by the Pima county medical examiner’s office confirmed the cause of death was multiple gunshot wounds. The victim’s identity and country of origin has not been released yet, but he was likely an undocumented migrant, according to local authorities. The local Mexican consulate said it had been informed of the shooting, which was of “great concern”. In a phone call with the Guardian, a representative from the Mexican consulate in the border town of Douglas said: “We are following closely this specific matter, which is of great concern to us.” The shooting took place on East Geronimo Trail on “difficult terrain”. The agent responsible for the shooting had additional personnel on duty with him. “Early indications are that one male subject, presumed to be an illegal immigrant, was fatally wounded by a Border Patrol agent who was on duty with additional personnel,” a statement from the local sheriff’s office said. Other people traveling on foot with the killed man were taken in for interviews. US Customs and Border Patrol is working with the Cochise county sheriff’s office on an investigation.Joe Biden has interviewed at least three potential supreme court nominees and is expected to reveal his decision by the end of this month, according to multiple sources close to the president. Ketanji Brown Jackson, Leondra Kruger and J Michelle Childs – all Black women – were among the contenders who spoke with the president, those familiar with the matter told CNN and the Washington Post. Jackson, who has widely been considered the frontrunner, currently sits on the US court of appeals for the DC circuit after replacing the attorney general, Merrick Garland, in June 2021. Kruger is an associate justice of the California supreme court and has served as the acting principal deputy solicitor general under the Barack Obama administration. Childs currently sits on the US district court for the district of South Carolina and was previously nominated by Biden for a seat on the DC circuit court of appeals. The impending retirement of supreme court associate justice Stephen Breyer has given Biden has the opportunity to fulfill one of his campaign promises: to appoint a Black woman to the supreme court. On Sunday evening Cedric L Richmond, director of the White House office of public engagement, told members of the organization Win With Black Women that “we’re close”. “We know what some of the attacks are going to be: not qualified, affirmative action pick … Well, it wasn’t ‘affirmative action pick’ when we just picked friends, white friends of the president, for all these decades. You know, it was just patronage or whatever they wanted to call it,” Richmond said, according to a source who has direct knowledge of the private conference call. Biden, who is dealing with a growing crisis between Ukraine and Russia, has set the end of February as his deadline to pick a nominee. According to CNN, White House officials have reached out to liberal groups to inform them that Biden will not be shifting from his timeline and urged them to support “top tier” candidates against critics’ attacks. In a statement on Tuesday, Andrew Bates, a White House spokesperson, said Biden has not yet made a decision. “The president has not yet chosen a nominee. He continues to evaluate eminently qualified individuals in the mold of Justice [Stephen] Breyer who have the strongest records, intellect, character, and dedication to the rule of law that anyone could ask for – and all of whom would be deserving of bipartisan support. He looks forward to announcing a nominee this month.”Be ready for a long haul. That was the subtext of Boris Johnson’s message to MPs as he committed to toughening up sanctions against Russia. The warning to prepare for a “protracted struggle” was both timely and appropriate. There will be no quick knockout blow because Vladimir Putin has had time to prepare and is well dug-in. On the face of it, it should be an unequal fight. Russia is the world’s biggest landmass but has annual output smaller than Italy’s. Income a head is about a quarter of that in the UK. Russia’s economy has gone through distinct phases since the collapse of the Soviet Union in the early 1990s: an initial shock treatment that resulted in a savage recession and culminated in a financial crisis in 1998; a strong recovery in the first decade of the 21st century on the back of booming oil and gas exports; and a recent period of stagnation as the failure to diversify the economy took its toll. After growing by 7% a year on average in the decade leading up to the global financial crash of 2008, the Russian economy was expanding by only about 2% annually in the three years leading up to the pandemic. The upshot is that – in some respects at least – the economy has not really moved on since the days of the Soviet Union. Russia is still rich in natural resources and human capital but performs sluggishly and has only limited ties with the west. Dr Holger Schmieding, the chief economist at the investment bank Berenberg, said Russia was a major military power and energy producer, but not a relevant market for most countries. Germany, for example, exports far more to Poland than it does to Russia. But, as those who have taken on Russia in the past have found to their cost, appearances can be deceptive and there are a number of reasons why a swift victory by the west looks unlikely. Firstly, Putin has been actively seeking to insulate Russia from the west ever since the invasion of the Crimea in 2014. Western imports of meat, fruit, vegetables and dairy were banned when sanctions were imposed. Secondly, self-sufficiency has been accompanied by an attempt at diversification, with a deliberate policy pivot towards China. An agreement with Beijing – again in 2014 – paved the way for the construction of the Power of Siberia – a gas pipeline linking the two countries that opened in 2019. China is the world’s second-biggest economy and its heavy demand for energy has been one of the factor pushing up global energy prices over the past year. Putin has already given approval for Power of Siberia 2. Thirdly, Russia has used the money received from its oil and gas exports to build up substantial financial defences. Moscow is sitting on foreign currency reserves of about $500bn (£369bn) and, by international standards, has extremely low levels of national debt. Whereas the pandemic has sent the UK’s national debt to GDP ratio spiralling above 100%, in Russia it is below 20%. That financial firepower may well blunt one of the weapons the west intends to deploy in response to the crisis in Ukraine: a ban on Russia issuing or trading its sovereign debt in London and New York. The amount of bonds Russia needs to sell is relatively small, and only 10% of the total was bought by non-residents last year. Finally, Putin has some weapons of his own that he may be tempted to use in retaliation against western sanctions. Russia provides 40% of the EU’s oil and coal, and 20% of its gas. It is the world’s biggest exporter of fertiliser and of palladium, a crucial component for the auto industry because it is needed to make catalytic converters. The Kiel Institute, a German thinktank, says stopping gas exports would knock 3% off Russian GDP while ending oil exports would result in a 1.2% hit. While western countries would be able to source their energy elsewhere, a reduction in supply would inevitably lead to rising oil and gas prices. Even during the tensest periods of the cold war, the Soviet Union continued to supply energy to the west. Cutting off oil and gas supplies would come at a heavy cost but be an example of a strategy deployed before in the country’s history: scorched-earth policy.With his incursion into Donetsk and Luhansk, Vladimir Putin has broken international law and destroyed the best negotiating track, the Minsk agreement. That is clear. What is also clear is why he did it. An increasing number of politicians and media analysts claim Putin may be mentally unstable, or that he is isolated in a bubble of yes-men who don’t warn him of dangers ahead. Many commentators say he is trying to restore the Soviet Union or recreate a Russian sphere of influence on his country’s borders, and that this week’s intrusion into eastern Ukraine is the first step towards an all-out attack on Kyiv to topple its government and even move against the Baltic states. None of these assertions is necessarily true. The Russian president is a rational man with his own analysis of recent European history. Coming from a former Communist, his blaming of Lenin for giving excessive scope to local nationalism in drawing up the Soviet constitution is remarkable. Similarly, his criticism of the way national elites destroyed the Soviet Union in its final years is sharp. Does he want to turn the clock back? People often quote his statement “the demise of the Soviet Union was the greatest geopolitical catastrophe of the century”. But it bears pointing out that he enlarged on it later, saying: “Anyone who doesn’t regret the passing of the Soviet Union has no heart. Anyone who wants it restored has no brains.” It is crucially important for those who might seek to end or ameliorate this crisis to first understand his mindset. What happened this week is that Putin lost his patience, and his temper. He is furious with the Ukraine government. He feels it repeatedly rejected the Minsk agreement, which would give the Ukrainian provinces of Donetsk and Luhansk substantial autonomy. He is angry with France and Germany, the co-signatories, and the United States, for not pressing Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, to implement them. He is equally angry with the Americans for not taking on board Russia’s security concerns about Nato’s expansion and the deployment of offensive missiles close to Russia’s borders. To those who say Nato is entitled to invite any state to join, Putin argues that the “open door” policy is conditioned by a second principle, which Nato states have accepted: namely that the enhancement of a state’s security should not be to the detriment of the security of other states (such as Russia). As recently as 2010 Barack Obama put his signature to the principle at a summit of the Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE). The summit’s declaration includes a wonderfully idealistic ambition: “We recommit ourselves to the vision of a free, democratic, common and indivisible Euro-Atlantic and Eurasian security community stretching from Vancouver to Vladivostok”. This echoes Mikhail Gorbachev’s plea, when the cold war division of Europe ended, for Russia and other European states to live together in a “common European home”. We now suffer in the shadow of the thwarting of that dream. For Putin, Obama’s signing of the OSCE statement is proof of the hypocrisy that goes back to earlier US presidents, who showed the dishonesty of Nato’s “open door” policy by rejecting Russia’s repeated feelers about joining the alliance. In his speech this week, the Russian leader said he had asked Bill Clinton about the possibility of membership but was fobbed off with the argument that Russia was too big. In 2000, during his first weeks as president, Putin was asked by David Frost on the BBC if it was possible Russia could join Nato. He replied: “I would not rule such a possibility out, if and when Russia’s views are taken into account as those of an equal partner.” George Robertson, a former Nato secretary general, recently recalled meeting Putin during his time at Nato: “Putin said, ‘When are you going to invite us to join Nato?’ And [Robertson] said: ‘Well, we don’t invite people to join Nato, they apply to join Nato.’” From outside the alliance, Putin has seen it expand continually. He says he does not seek a revived Soviet Union but a buffer zone that would be, as he put it in a long essay last year, “not anti-Russia”. John Kennedy wanted a similar cordon sanitaire when Khrushchev tried to put nuclear missiles in Cuba in 1962. Putin suggested on Tuesday that Ukraine should return to the strategy of neutrality that was in the Ukrainian constitution until the “coup” that toppled the Yanukovych government in 2014, and brought pro-US nationalists to power. After all, a majority of Ukrainian MPs then believed that the country’s fragile unity would be more secure if it was not pulled and pushed by rival pressures from Moscow and the west. Nato’s stance over membership for Ukraine was what sparked Russia’s takeover of Crimea in 2014. Putin feared the port of Sevastopol, home of Russia’s Black Sea fleet, would soon belong to the Americans. The western narrative sees Crimea as the first use of force to change territorial borders in Europe since the second world war. Putin sees this as selective amnesia, forgetting that Nato bombed Serbia in 1999 to detach Kosovo and make it an independent state. Convinced that Nato will never reject Ukraine’s membership, Putin has now taken his own steps to block it. By invading Donetsk and Luhansk, he has created a “frozen conflict”, knowing the alliance cannot admit countries that don’t control all their borders. Frozen conflicts already cripple Georgia and Moldova, which are also split by pro-Russian statelets. Now Ukraine joins the list. There is speculation about what will happen next but from his standpoint, it is not actually necessary to send troops further into the country. He has already taken what he needs. Jonathan Steele is a former Moscow correspondent for the Guardian Join a panel of journalists, hosted by Michael Safi, for a livestreamed event on the Russia-Ukraine crisis. On Thursday 3 March, 8pm GMT | 9pm CET | 12pm PST | 3pm EST. Book tickets hereThe correspondence about the meaning of “woke” illustrates the cognitive bias of failing to see ourselves as others see us, and vice versa (Letters, 22 February). A quick scan through other newspapers indicates to me that woke means self-righteous, puritanical, bossy and intolerant. Paul Whitby Market Lavington, Wiltshire • Jenny Welsh describes her alphabetical list of countries to recite as she falls asleep (Letters, 22 February) as “Azerbaijan to Zambia”. I reckon she’s 11 short, mainly at the front end, but if she began using it before 1980, Zimbabwe would not have been around yet. Fergus Nicoll Llanrhaeadr-ym-Mochnant, Powys • In response to Varrie Blowers (Letters, 17 February), our present monarch is thankfully not descended from Charles II, who had no legitimate children. Her Stuart ancestor through the Hanoverian line is his grandfather James I. I know I should get out more. George Howson Lancaster • I’m with Valerie Gidlow (Letters, 20 February). Now 80, I well remember, as a schoolgirl, bopping to Bill Haley and His Comets at the Grand Theatre, Swansea. How my hard-up parents afforded the ticket for me I’ll never know. Julia Phillips Combe Down, Somerset • All this talk of shoes only to be worn outdoors (Letters, 21 February) reminds me fondly of the late Guardian columnist Michele Hanson plodding to the corner in her slippers to post a letter. David Hamer Sheffield • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Nadia Khomami (New play to tell story of Brexit’s ‘bloody difficult women’, 21 February) quotes the actor Jessica Turner – who plays Theresa May in Tim Walker’s play Bloody Difficult Women – as saying the piece feels “very relevant now”. It has struck me as astonishing that theatre has had so little to say about the current crisis in our politics, but maybe in its enfeebled state after the pandemic – with so many venues now relying on government subsidies – it’s been cowed into submission. This has been a betrayal of what theatre ultimately ought to be about. Throughout history, the arts have often been a bulwark against dodgy governments and fascism. I think in this regard of Arthur Miller daring to write The Crucible in 1953 as a savage and brave indictment of McCarthyism, when the US government persecuted people accused of being communists. I applaud, therefore, Riverside Studios in west London for daring to put on this dramatisation of Gina Miller’s court case against May’s government and for bringing the story bang up to date. I can find no other play like it anywhere. I shall go to see it with high hopes that it will restore my faith in theatre – that it has not yet totally given up on talking about what’s happening in our society and daring to challenge the existing awful order. Muhammed Raza Hussain London • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Is he going to look anything like the picture online? Are we going to have anything to talk about? Is this dress too revealing? What if he is an anti-vaxxer? These are all normal anxieties that come with the territory of online dating. Anxieties that I used to smooth over with a few large glasses of white wine before a date. But now … Now is new; now is different. I’ve been out of the dating game for a decade, and in the meantime I quit drinking. Every first date I ever had was in a pub – usually my local, so I had the added safety buffer of knowing all the regulars and the barman. What are you supposed to do on a date if not drink? How do you get up the nerve to kiss them? What am I meant to do if not drink until they get funny or handsome enough for the aforementioned kissing? There were a bunch of factors at play when I re-entered the dating world last April. We were still in a distanced, “wearing masks in restaurants when walking to your table” type of world. And everyone was out of practice with human contact, let alone first dates. Social anxiety and awkwardness were radiating from people that had been locked inside with their cats or toddlers for a year. I was not yet confident enough with my sobriety to wear it proudly and treat it like a superpower. It was more a tick box at the end of my Bumble profile than something I accentuated, and my initial dates reflected that. I was still trying to date in pubs, like a drinker, rather than doing other activities where we could engage with each other without sharing a bottle or three of wine. I was camouflaging this huge change in my behaviour and life by trying to keep up with their drinking pace with non-alcoholic beers. But I was not enjoying myself at all. I wasn’t looking to date someone else who was sober, but I also didn’t want to date anyone who socially drank like I used to – that is to say, excessively. I didn’t want to sell a false bill of goods, either. I am not someone who goes to museums or the Proms. And pretending to like those things more than I do would end up with those same out-of-sorts feelings. I thought dog walks might be the key to my dating. I have an elderly cavalier King Charles spaniel, McNulty, whom I adore. Dog walks are incredible with people who you are connected to and want to spend hours with. But they are awful for a 45-minute stroll around the heath with a stranger, because there is no eye contact and you are often stopping to pick up dog poo. I ended up going on 18 first dates in April and May last year and didn’t say yes to any second dates. The main thing that was wrong with all of my initial sober dates was me. I was unsure of myself. I was like Bambi, unsteady on my new spindly legs, which meant I had lost a lot of my bravado and charm. I wasn’t owning this new phase of my life. I was just trying to act as if I hadn’t changed at all, and it was not working. So I took a hiatus. I took some time off to own the fact I am a non-drinker and that I don’t want dates that primarily revolve around cocktails. I run food festivals. I love trying new places. Let’s explore restaurants and cuisines that I haven’t experienced. Take me to a trattoria or an oyster bar. Let’s share small plates and connect that way. We can go to a farmers’ market and eat unpasteurised cheese or try guacamole with crickets. Come and watch American football with me – I’ll explain the rules. But be warned: I will always have McNulty in tow. My profile now clearly says that I quit drinking in April 2020. I am upfront in my messaging before meeting anyone that I am not a drinker. I also don’t respond to anyone who is pictured chugging beers or lists wine or cocktails as their interests. I have no problem with drinkers; it’s just not how I want to spend my time, and I have no interest in changing anyone else. Last week, a guy with whom I had been exchanging messages once again ignored that I had told him seven or eight times that I don’t drink. When I called him on it, his response was: “Sorry, I don’t have a record of people I speak to and their individual dietary requirements.” I think I will give that one a miss. I am now once again unapologetically brash and brazen, and me. And still worried that their picture is going to be old and they won’t wear a mask. But the dates are definitely improving. Dru Jaeger, Club Soda co-founder and author of How to Be a Mindful Drinker, gives his tips on sober dating: Consider how you’re presenting yourself on your dating profile. That picture of yourself holding a big cocktail may not tell the story of who you are now. Dating doesn’t equal drinking, so choose venues and activities that you enjoy as a non-drinker. If you do opt for bars and restaurants, check menus in advance to make sure there are good alcohol-free options. Don’t feel under pressure to justify not drinking. You don’t owe your date an explanation. Be unapologetic. If they’re adamant that they’ll only date a drinker, consider it a lucky escape.As a retired economics teacher who served for 10 years as an examinations officer and a further decade as an exams inspector, I feel able to comment on the current fiasco (Students and teachers in England decry ‘virtually useless’ exams previews, 17 February). The disparity across the student population, both in terms of face to face teaching and individual circumstances, such as computer access and home environment, requires a different approach. Announcing a restricted list of topics four months before the exams is an enormous disadvantage to those who have not yet been able to cover those topics. A much fairer system would be to set a choice of questions within each of the topics across the whole syllabus. Students and teachers would then be able to choose to answer questions on those parts of the syllabus that they have been able to cover. Students who have been able to study the whole of the syllabus would still have an advantage, but it would not be so great. This system would not wholly compensate in those subjects where there is progressive learning (eg foreign languages); nor would it compensate for the lack of opportunity to develop skills, such as essay writing – but it would be a lot better than what is currently being offered. Dennis Johnson Kempston, Bedford • Managing to avoid the highly regulated and recently reformed A-levels by using Pre-U exams, largely set and marked by teachers in the independent sector, private schools have repeatedly inflated their results, and neither the DfE nor Ofqual seems sufficiently bothered about maintaining even the appearance of a level playing field to intervene. If we want a “system that benefits society as a whole” (Editorial, 20 February), it needs to focus attention on reining in the power of private schools. Bernie Evans Liverpool • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Thank you Simon Tisdall (The long, bloody history of proxy wars should be a warning to Johnson in Ukraine, 20 February). Boris Johnson’s perennial boosterism is never truthful and I hope this particular mad idea never sees the light of day. Yes, bring Ukraine into Nato and answer Putin’s accusation head-on, or stay entirely out of the argument and protect those states who are already in Nato against the certain interference that will follow. The much criticised offer of helmets by the German government is of the same substance as Johnson’s rhetoric. A proxy war would destroy Ukrainians’ westward, anti-Putin-kleptocracy ambitions. Anthony O’Neill Glasgow • Congratulations to Simon Tisdall for his straight-talking article, largely backing up the wise piece by Simon Jenkins last month (Britain should stay well out of Russia’s border dispute with Ukraine, 20 January). The way out of this crisis isn’t by Johnsonian grandstanding, but by patient diplomacy, as Emmanuel Macron evidently realises, and from the starting point of the Minsk II accords – agreed at the time by Ukraine, but in seven years never implemented. It will happen neither by surrendering to, nor utterly rejecting, the Kremlin’s maximalist demands, but step by step, starting with the running sore of Donbas. It’s clear from Vasyl Filipchuk’s and others’ comments (Ukraine’s leader stood on platform of peace, but finds himself on brink of war, 20 February) that far-sighted Ukrainians realise this too. Robin Milner-Gulland Washington, West Sussex • In characterising a hypothetical Ukrainian war of resistance against Russian occupation as a “proxy war” on the part of Britain and other western countries, Simon Tisdall is falling into the colonialist mindset of denying Ukrainians’ own agency and imagining that they would not fight such a war without western support. This is delusional. The idea that postcolonial Ukraine would not fight a war of resistance against an occupation by their former imperial rulers is as ridiculous as the idea that Ireland, Kenya or Vietnam – among many others – would not fight an occupation by theirs. If Russia occupies, there will be a war of resistance until Russia leaves, irrespective of the opinions and actions of foreign governments. Britain can choose to stand up against Russia by arming Ukraine, supporting its entry into Nato and increasing sanctions against Russia, or it can choose to stay neutral in the face of oppression. Either way, Ukrainians will keep fighting for their independence as colonised people always have done and always will do. There can be no peace without justice, in Ukraine or anywhere else. Adam Lawson Hackney, London • Short of full-scale invasion at this point, Vladimir Putin may be content to take back Ukraine one bite at a time. He is likely to pause now and see whether the full weight of western sanctions is applied. He can reasonably expect that differences between the US and EU countries will hamper this. If this is the case, he may be willing to delay. A lot can happen in the next few years to his advantage, not least the coming upheaval in the US elections, which could bring a new administration more inclined to let western Europe defend itself. As we are all aware, Putin has wider ambitions than Ukraine and we are entering into an uncertain, if not perilous decade for democracy. David Copsey Brighton • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.A small but growing number of Ukrainians living in Britain are making plans to go back to their homeland to fight the Russian army if its invasion of the country escalates, community leaders have said. They said Ukrainian expats, including veterans of the war with Russia since 2014, would take up arms to defend the country in response to the buildup of Russian troops along and inside eastern Ukraine’s borders. Wolodymyr Pawluk, chair of the Association of Ukrainians in Great Britain, said many military veterans living in Britain were thinking of going back, with a minority having already decided to do so. “In London, I can only say a handful have said that they will go back,” said Pawluk, 58. “There are many more that I’ve also heard will go, although I don’t know them personally.” Marta Mulyak, the head of the London branch of Plast National Scout Organisation of Ukraine, said: “I do hear men who live not only here but in other European countries saying: ‘Well, if it comes to war, we want to go there. We want to be part of that defence.’” Mulyak, 39, who stressed that the scouting movement was not involved in these plans, added: “The reality is that no one except Ukrainians will defend Ukrainian land.” She said some of her friends and family members in Ukraine’s eastern region had recently joined a new territorial defence force set up by the government in January, whose civilian members will help to combat Russian troops. “Some of my cousins are thinking about it. Some of my friends have already joined. A lot of my friends already joined the regular army. All the men that I speak with in Ukraine say that we will defend our country.” Olesya Khromeychuk, director of cultural centre the Ukrainian Institute London, also said she expected her friends in Ukraine to join the territorial defence force, adding that some of the artists she has worked with spent last weekend tidying up a bomb shelter. The historian added that the escalation of hostilities had brought back painful memories of family loss. “Just imagining what sort of bloodshed this is likely to cause is awful. I lost my brother, who was serving in the Ukrainian armed forces, at the frontline in 2017. Volodya was 42 when he was killed by shrapnel in the Luhansk region. He lived in western Europe but moved back to join up.” Khromeychuk, 38, who wrote about her brother’s death in her recently published book, A Loss, added: “It’s been a tough few months, because I had to remind everybody that we’ve been in this for eight years. Thousands of people have died. I was really hoping that this would become a matter for memoirs, not for news stories. But that’s not going be the case for some time.” Like many others in the Ukrainian diaspora, Tetyana Vovnyanko, who lives in London, is anxiously monitoring the threat to her family. Vovnyanko, 48, said her brother and most of her other relatives live near Uman, a city between Kyiv and Odessa, which she has heard is a possible target for Russian occupation. She added: “This morning [Tuesday], I spoke with them, and I listened to the Ukrainian analytics, and they said that one of the possible strikes and plans, which Putin has in his mind, will be for the invasion to have Kyiv under Russian troops’ control, and possibly they will be moving towards the town where my family lives. That made me very anxious and nervous.” Vovnyanko, co-founder of British-Ukrainian Aid, which supports people suffering from the armed conflict and humanitarian crisis in Ukraine, said the charity might now pivot towards providing medical supplies and warm clothing to territorial defence forces. “If there will be a battle or invasion, they will be helping out the wounded as well.” Petro Chymera, 32, head of the Ukrainian Youth Association in Bradford, said some members of the local community were preparing contingency plans to help relatives in east Ukraine seek refuge in Western Europe and the UK. “If there was to be an invasion, there’s that worry and that fear, and contingency plans as to [whether it is] possible to head to the west of Ukraine towards Kyiv, or even further to the EU, or whether they could come over here.” Musician Peter Solowka, whose band The Ukrainians was formed a year before Ukraine declared independence from the former Soviet Union in 1991, said the country’s culture of resistance would continue amid the worsening hostilities. The former Wedding Present guitarist, 62, from Oldham, whose father was Ukrainian, said: “The history of Ukrainian culture and music refers to people fighting against oppression. People going off to fight and you cry as you leave your family because you might not come back. “It’s not going to go away just because some tanks turn up in the capital city. There’s been hundreds of years of this culture surviving that sort of thing.”Residents in areas of England affected by flooding have been urged to remain vigilant as two severe “danger to life” warnings remained in place after heavy rainfall. They came as the Met Office issued yellow weather warnings for Scotland and parts of Northern Ireland which included predictions of heavy snow, gusty winds and the chance of the relatively rare phenomenon of thundersnow. Three back-to-back storms, Dudley, Eunice and Franklin, have combined over the past week to bring travel chaos, injury, power cuts, tree loss and flooding to parts of the UK. At least three people are known to have died as a result of Eunice. The worst of the weather appears over for now but anxiety remains high for flooded areas. The two severe flood warnings are in Bewdley, Worcestershire, and the historic village of Ironbridge, Shropshire. In Bewdley search and rescue teams were out checking properties and speaking to residents after temporary flood defences were breached after heavy rain on Tuesday afternoon. The Environment Agency said the water level peaked on Wednesday lunchtime at 5.33m and levels are forecast to “remain high for a prolonged period”. Nick Green, area incident manager for the Environment Agency for the West Midlands, said it had been “incredibly frightening” for the community in Bewdley, which has faced regular flooding in recent decades. He said: “We could really see the anxiety and the worry that they had knowing that the river was going to rise and the impact that it could have on their lives.” Dan Bond, flood duty manager at the Environment Agency, said: “We are still facing a significant flooding risk, and we are urging people to remain vigilant and take extreme care. “Last weekend’s heavy rainfall on already wet areas continues to cause river flooding along the River Severn and is likely to continue over the next few days.” In Ironbridge councillor Shaun Davies, leader of Telford and Wrekin Council, said the water was just 20cm away from breaching barriers. “It’s only through the grace of God that these barriers have not been topped again.” The Met Office yellow warning for Scotland and Northern Ireland is in place between 5pm on Wednesday until 8pm Thursday. The warning has changed from snow and wind to snow and lightning. The latter means there is a chance of thundersnow,where snow dampens the sound of the thunder and reflects the lightning, making it seem brighter. All of the UK will feel colder on Thursday as a cold front sweeps through. The recent storms led to 1.48m households and businesses losing power. The Energy Networks Association said on Wednesday that 1,400 customers were still waiting for it to be restored.The French and British drugmakers Sanofi and GSK are ready to seek approval from regulators for their Covid-19 vaccine after reporting positive results from late-stage clinical trials. The firms are hoping to catch up with rivals after falling far behind in the race to develop Covid-19 shots. Their product was delayed by an early dosing error during trials, initially disappointing results in older people and other issues. It will be available as a two-dose vaccine and as a booster. The companies will now file for approval from regulators, including the US Food and Drug Administration and the European Medicines Agency, while a rolling review with the UK regulator, the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency, is already under way. Sanofi developed the jab, while GSK, the world’s biggest vaccine maker by sales, is supplying its adjuvant technology, to boost the body’s immune response. It relies on a conventional protein-based approach, compared with the newer mRNA technology used by Pfizer/BioNTech and Moderna, which makes it easier to store and transport. The companies said the phase 3 efficacy trials showed that two doses of the jab provided 100% efficacy against severe Covid-19 disease and hospitalisations; 75% efficacy against moderate or severe Covid-19 disease; and 57.9% efficacy against any symptomatic Covid-19 disease. They said the latter is in line with expected vaccine effectiveness given the emergence of several variants of concern, such as Omicron, and similar to other vaccines. A separate trial showed that the jab boosted antibody levels against the virus 18 to 30 times across all age groups, when used in people who had been given two doses of other vaccines such as the Pfizer/BioNTech, Modern and Oxford/AstraZeneca shots. Thomas Triomphe, the executive vice-president of Sanofi Vaccines, said: “The Sanofi-GSK vaccine demonstrates a universal ability to boost all platforms and across all ages. “We also observed robust efficacy of the vaccine as a primary series in today’s challenging epidemiological environment. No other global phase 3 efficacy study has been undertaken during this period with so many variants of concern, including Omicron, and these efficacy data are similar to the recent clinical data from authorised vaccines.” Roger Connor, the president of GSK’s vaccines arm, said: “We are confident that this vaccine can play an important role as we continue to address this pandemic and prepare for the post-pandemic period.”A video of a local television reporter in Ohio being surprised at work by his mother has gone viral, striking a chord with parents and their children alike. ABC 6 reporter Myles Harris was preparing to shoot a story with his back to a road when he turned to look at traffic and appeared to recognize an approaching vehicle. With an exasperated flap of his arms and a put-upon frown, Harris then suddenly turned to camera. “That’s my mom. Hold on,” he tells the cameraman. A black car then rolls up with the window down and Harris’s mother greets him with an enthusiastic shout: “Hi, baby!” “I’m trying to work right now!” Harris responds before his mother and the cameraman – and eventually Harris himself – burst into laughter. The clip, published by the TV station, rapidly went viral as social media video accounts picked it up. The video ends with Harris telling his mother: “Don’t be holding up traffic, because you got cars behind you.” His mother replies “alright” and blows him a kiss before driving away again out of shot.Bumblebee and butterfly conservationists are among dozens of environmental groups calling on MPs to back amendments removing powers to curtail protest from the government’s crime bill. They are among 32 signatories to a letter urging all MPs to back amendments by the Lords that removed clauses giving powers to police to impose restrictions on protests considered too noisy, and to place conditions on static rallies and one-person protests. “Defending these freedoms and liberties is an essential part of ensuring our environment is protected and enhanced, and our international commitments adhered to,” the letter says. “Like our most precious habitats, once damaged they are difficult to recover.” Since its introduction at the beginning of last year, the police, crime, sentencing and courts bill, a wide-ranging piece of crime legislation, has faced opposition from human rights organisations and protest groups over its proposals to curb peaceful protest. A campaign of public protests under the banner “kill the bill” took place across the UK, bringing together a diverse range of protest groups. In Bristol, protests spilled over into conflict between protesters and police, for which a number of people are now facing riot charges. After a delayed passage through the Commons, the Lords, heavily lobbied by civil rights groups, proposed a number of amendments removing some of the most controversial anti-protest measures, and was able to vote down a number of other powers criticised as excessively draconian. On Monday, MPs will have their chance to consider peers’ amendments. The justice secretary, Dominic Raab, has already promised to revive a number of measures in the Commons, setting the stage for ping-pong between the two houses before the bill can be signed into law. Friends of the Earth coordinated the letter to MPs and signatories also include organisations working to protect wetlands, frogs, dolphins and bats, development organisations such as Cafod and Save the Children, and the Women’s Institute. The Ramblers, the organisation often credited with the most successful direct action in modern history, is also among the signatories; its mass trespass on Kinder Scout in 1932 is said to have led to the creation of the UK’s national parks and walkers’ right to roam. “History has shown that protest is vital to ensure change happens at the scale and speed required,” the letter says. “Without citizens able to hold decision makers to account, strong policies to address the climate and nature emergencies are less likely to be forthcoming and targets more likely to be missed. “Defending these freedoms and liberties is an essential part of ensuring our environment is protected and enhanced, and our international commitments adhered to. Like our most precious habitats, once damaged they are difficult to recover.” “Giving the police power to restrict protests based on noise could unreasonably suppress many non-violent assemblies and marches, and have a chilling effect on free speech,” the letter says. “This has nothing to do with the sort of ‘highly disruptive’ protest ministers have repeatedly pointed to, and the police already have the powers against intimidation and harassment. “The new power would be open to abuse and confusion, with the targets of protests claiming that noise levels cause ‘serious unease’ to encourage the police to act against protests they find inconvenient or embarrassing.” A Home Office spokesperson said: “Freedom to protest is a fundamental right but current laws to manage highly disruptive protests are out of date and not fit for purpose. The new measures in the police, crime, sentencing and courts bill are designed to tackle the selfish minority of protesters who are highly disruptive and whose actions endanger the public. “It is not acceptable, as seen in recent protests, for people to block ambulances from reaching hospitals or preventing hundreds of people getting to work.”Two women are suing an Oklahoma hospital after a DNA test revealed that they were switched at birth nearly 60 years ago. Tina Ennis and Jill Lopez have filed a lawsuit against the Duncan Regional hospital after an apparent mixup resulted in the women – then babies – being unknowingly taken home by each other’s parents in 1964. The lawsuit, also filed by Kathryn Jones, who gave birth to Lopez but raised Ennis, is alleging recklessness and negligent infliction of emotional distress, according to the Daily Beast which first reported the story. In 2019, Ennis and her daughter decided to take an at-home DNA test from Ancestry.com in hopes of tracking down Ennis’s estranged maternal grandfather. However, rather than linking the mother and daughter to anyone in their extended family, the test results revealed numerous relatives with the last name Brister, all of whom the pair never heard of. Jones then took a test as well. To her surprise, the results did not show any familiar relatives and found zero connections to her daughter and granddaughter. Ennis’s daughter called Ancestry.com’s support line after Ennis assumed the mixup was a result of her not paying the website’s monthly fee. The customer representative told her that that was not the case and instead said, “You know, you find some interesting things on Ancestry,” according to Ennis. Ennis tracked down down Lopez in Lawton, Oklahoma, via social media. Lopez, who had been raised by the late Joyce and John Brister, agreed to take a test. According to the the Daily Beast, Lopez’s husband suspected Ennis to be a scammer, but Lopez did not. When Lopez’s results came back Ennis’s “heart just sank [in that moment]”, she recalled. “I just had to get my emotions straight for a while, because it’s a whole lot to get your mind around,” Lopez said upon discovering the results. “Like, you had a mom and I had a mom, and now I have a different mom.” Upon being told the results, Jones initially denied them, repeatedly affirming that Ennis was her daughter. However, after seeing a picture of Lopez, Jones said the first thing that came to mind was, “Where was I when that was taken?” and “I don’t remember those clothes.” “Because she actually looked just like me,” Jones went on to say. “And it devastated me.” According to her, “one of the low points of the whole thing” was the realization that Ennis’s children were also not biologically related to her. “I felt like I was losing my daughter and my grandchildren too,” Jones said. Ennis’s biological parents were the Bristers, who died many years ago before she got to meet them. She revealed that she sometimes feels a little jealous towards Lopez. “Jill got to be with my real parents, and now she gets to be with my parents I grew up with. I didn’t know what to think about it at first, but the more I think about it, it makes me really sad.” The hospital, which took over liability for Duncan Physicians and Surgeons Hospital after merging with several other hospitals in 1975, has denied the lawsuit’s allegations. The doctors involved in the births of Ennis and Lopez have died. The hospital’s attorneys argue that it is not the same entity as it was when the two women were allegedly switched at birth. Last month, the hospital asked to dismiss the lawsuit due to the changed entity but a judge denied the request. • This article was amended on 24 February 2022 to correct a spelling error. Ennis’s first name is Tina, not Tinna.Communities outside London have been placed on a priority list for cultural funding as part of a £75m government plan to level up access to the arts. The Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport (DCMS) announced on Wednesday that it would redistribute new Arts Council England (ACE) funding to more than 100 locations outside the capital over the next three years. In addition to the culture recovery fund’s £2bn Covid-19 rescue plan, there will be a 6% increase, or extra £43.5m, in funding to ACE, which the culture secretary, Nadine Dorries, has said must be invested outside London. Arts Council England has also been instructed to reallocate at least £24m of investment a year from London to areas outside the capital, and a further £8m will be moved out of London through supporting organisations to relocate or expand. “I have said from day one in this role my priority is to increase access to arts and culture across the whole country,” Dorries said. “Today marks a big step in achieving this aim as we shift new cultural investment into places previously at the back of the queue. Culture enriches people’s lives. It entertains us, brings us together and can be a catalyst for regeneration. Everyone should have access to it no matter where they live or what their background.” In an article for the Yorkshire Post, Dorries called it “one of the biggest ever redistributions of arts funding in our history”. The move comes after the government set out a commitment to raise cultural spending outside London in its levelling up white paper. ACE currently spends £21 a head in London and an average of £6 a head in the rest of England. Organisations in more than 109 areas with historically low investment in arts and culture have been encouraged to bid for funding. These areas, referred to as “levelling up for culture places” have been identified based on levels of cultural engagement and spending The ACE chair, Sir Nicholas Serota, said the increase in funding would “enable more people in more places to reap the benefits of arts and culture and will accelerate our commitment to parts of the country that deserve more investment”. He added: “We will be able to do more to nurture new creative talent, support work that makes us healthier and happier, renew our high streets and, above all, ensure that everyone, everywhere has the opportunity of a rich cultural and creative life.” ACE said it had already been working to move money to other regions. Grant-in-aid investments outside London had risen from 40% to 60%, and national lottery investment had increased from 60% to 75%, it said. The announcement was welcomed by leaders of regional arts institutions. Chris Stafford, the chief executive of Leicester’s Curve theatre, said: “We believe everyone, irrespective of their circumstances, should have equal opportunity to engage with world-class culture and fulfil their creative potential. “We welcome the new Arts Council investment programme, which will see a greater balance of public investment across the country, ensuring no one is left behind.” Tony Butler, the executive director of Derby Museums, said being a national portfolio organisation (one that receives public funding) had “ensured that cultural heritage frames the future ambition of our city as a place of innovation and creativity”.The default view at Westminster and in most of the media is that Vladimir Putin has saved Boris Johnson’s skin, for the present. The reflex on the Conservative backbenches is that the prospect of a European war means this is no time for a leadership change. In reality, of course, the reverse is true. Russia’s seizure of parts of Ukraine this week makes the case for replacing Johnson far stronger. That does not mean it will happen – the police investigating “partygate” and the voters have not yet spoken – but it should. Putin’s annexation of the Donbas provinces is an epochal event. It is an assault on a sovereign European state and a western ally. From the Gulf of Finland in the north to the Danube delta in the south, it ratchets up the military threat to a string of other vulnerable European nations. It redefines at a stroke the security and energy assumptions of our entire continent for a decade and more. It also represents a deliberate and culminating self-inflicted rupture by Russia’s autocracy with the western democracies. This has not come out of nowhere. There have been serious pre-eruptive signals since at least 2008 in Georgia, Crimea and elsewhere, including Salisbury. The Ukraine seizure is nevertheless a wake-up call about the absolute and systemic nature of the break. Relations could now descend into a 21st-century cyber cold war, but one in which a catastrophically divided United States – Donald Trump praised Putin’s action this week as “genius” – can no longer be guaranteed to provide the western pillar. All this poses immense difficulties for every western European nation. The west has drifted into this without much thought – and with nothing approaching the degree of strategic hostile planning of Putin’s Russia. But existential challenges have to be faced all the same. They require a serious and sustained strategic response. Yet the current British government – perhaps even British politics in general – is peculiarly unsuited to this at present, and Johnson is alarmingly ill-qualified to grapple with it effectively as prime minister. Johnson’s approach to government has proved to be the same as his approach to journalism and party politics: performative opportunism. He is not, in any traditional sense, a national leader. Just when this country needs a prime minister with a command of national statecraft, it is saddled with a prime minister who knows only stagecraft. In the Commons, he offers a pastiche of public school parliamentarism. In the world beyond, he dresses up as a builder, a doctor, a police officer or a soldier. On Tuesday, as Putin’s tanks rolled west, he went to the Ministry of Defence and dressed up again, this time as a prime minister in a war room surrounded by chaps in uniform. Johnson’s response to Ukraine may appear engaged. But this is deceptive, and is designed to be. His priority is his own survival, not Ukraine’s. Putin has provided him with a heaven-sent distraction, and Johnson will milk it. The crisis plays to Johnson’s innate desire to act the part of Churchill, though in reality, as his feeble early sanctions show, he is aping Churchill’s language while following the policies of Neville Chamberlain. At every turn, he idiotically hypes the narcissism of small differences to assert that Britain is playing a bigger and more distinct role than it really is. Britain was “out in front” he said twice in the Commons on Wednesday. This is precisely the opposite of what this situation calls for. As aspect after aspect of the Ukraine crisis shows, the reality is that Britain is not the autonomous master of its own fate, let alone of Ukraine’s. Britain is in truth what it has always been, before and after Brexit. It is one of a number of European states, though an important one, that must work together, with serious US backing, to limit the Ukraine conflict, to protect the rest of eastern Europe, to contain Russia, and to defend democracy and the rule of law. In other words, British interests are effectively synonymous and coterminous with those of the European Union and just about every sovereign state in our continent. Part of Johnson’s brain seems to understand this. Unity with allies was absolutely vital, he repeated at prime minister’s questions. But even a stopped clock is right twice a day. The problem is caused by what happens the rest of the time. In the wake of Putin’s actions, two needs stand out for Europe as a whole, Britain included. Each is simultaneously immediate and long term. The first is military: to strengthen and deploy sufficient deterrence to limit further assaults on Ukraine’s sovereignty and to uphold the security of countries bordering Russia, from Norway to Romania. That’s where the threat is greatest. The second is continuity of affordable energy supplies without overdependence on Russian gas or any compromising of green energy goals. These have been in-your-face issues for frontline states for years. Now they are top of everyone’s agenda. They cry out for a unified European tough realism to match that of Russia. The EU has been hopeless about this for many years. Germany dashed for Russian gas when the electorate revolted against nuclear power. France and Italy have bad histories of trying to be Russia’s western interlocutor and favoured trading partner. But Britain has its own big glass house too – the City’s Russian money launderers and the other enablers, including the Tory party – and should not throw stones. All of these things demand an allied cooperative response as well as a certain degree of trust. But who trusts Johnson’s Britain? A country that spends its time poking fun at the EU, playing silly buggers in the Channel over migrants, doing a bit of freelance troublemaking in Poland and threatening to trigger a trade war over Northern Ireland is a country that needs to get real, and fast. Be absolutely clear. Johnson’s Britain is acting as Putin’s useful idiot and playing his game of divide and rule. Nothing in this requires any backtrack on Brexit. But we are Europeans all the same. There is no logic in this country pretending we are an independent, freewheeling, great global power at such a time (nor ever was, come to that). No sense, either, in acting as if our greatest alliance is with reactionary Australia, that we are reborn as an Asia-Pacific player or that we are uniquely equipped to bind the US into Europe. These are the deluded and embarrassing fantasies of a post-imperial nation whose leader can only overplay or underplay. This is a time for seriousness and for action to promote collective self-interest. Putin has reminded western Europeans that war has not disappeared, nor ever will. Security cannot be shirked, and should not be merely dabbled with. There’s a generational task ahead now. We need a government, and a prime minister, who are up to the job, because these ones simply are not. Martin Kettle is a Guardian columnist Join a panel of journalists, hosted by Michael Safi, for a livestreamed event on the Russia-Ukraine crisis. On Thursday 3 March, 8pm GMT | 9pm CET | 12pm PST | 3pm EST. Book tickets hereAfter the second world war British concert and operatic life benefited from keen audiences, expanded education and broadcasting, the commercial success of the long-playing record and public funding of the arts. Remaining gaps – opportunities for young performers, new music and lesser-known operas – called for the flair of an imaginative impresario, though one working in a not-for-profit environment. John Woolf, who has died aged 91 of cancer, was such a figure. A violinist with what was then the Covent Garden Opera Company, in 1956 he accepted the use of a house in central London – 45 Park Lane, replaced in the 1960s by a nightclub – as the base for an organisation to do the things that others were not doing. For the next 65 years he ran the Park Lane Group virtually on his own, with the help of a supportive committee. Funding came mainly from musical trusts and shared gala performances of West End musicals, with some Arts Council assistance in early years. From its start the PLG provided the leading platform for young performers of outstanding talent, principally in the Purcell Room, opened in 1967 at the Southbank Centre, London. The 1,600 artists presented by the time of John’s death included the pianists John Ogdon and Imogen Cooper, the singers Thomas Allen and Josephine Barstow, the Nash Ensemble and the Arditti Quartet. The work of many living composers was featured, and in this area his efforts were aided by the music publisher Giles Easterbrook. The trust’s other two aims were to mount imaginative musical occasions, and to celebrate the lives and work of great musicians, which it often did by marking anniversaries. In 1962 William Walton conducted Façade, with Irene Worth and Sebastian Shaw reciting Edith Sitwell’s poems, in the Royal Festival Hall; she marked her 75th birthday by reading more recent poems, and Peter Pears sang. Outside London, Boulez in Birmingham (2008) took place in the presence of the composer. Park Lane Opera functioned until 1981, often at the Camden festival in London, and there were 25 productions, mostly staged, including Gian Carlo Menotti’s Maria Golovin (1976), directed by the composer. The PLG was particularly active in the 70s. The 1972-73 season, for example, opened with the mezzo-soprano Cathy Berberian in a Parisian salon programme in the Queen Elizabeth Hall, London; later in the season Igor Oistrakh gave a violin recital there. The music of Lord Berners was celebrated by the pianist and PLG founding member Susan Bradshaw, the mezzo-soprano Meriel Dickinson, my sister, and me in songs with piano, and the poet John Betjeman giving readings. John Cage’s Music Circus, with students from Birmingham University, took over the Round House, north London, for its first performance in Europe. Eight concerts including performers from six mainland European countries marked the UK’s accession to the European Economic Community. The soprano Jane Manning took part in an electronic music programme with Tristram Cary. There was jazz, with a commissioned work from Ian Carr, and a programme from the Mike Gibbs Band. Singers included Shirley Verrett in the Royal Festival Hall and Felicity Palmer in the Queen Elizabeth Hall with the Park Lane Players. Born in Nice, in the south of France, John was the son of Antoinette (nee Piguete), and Hermann Woolf, a translator. In June 1940, John and his father escaped from France through Marseille and to Gibraltar on a Scottish collier. Eventually they reached Plymouth, and were able to join his mother and older brother in London. John played the violin in various London orchestras from the mid-1940s. In 1952 he joined the second violins of the orchestra at the Royal Opera House, moving on to the first violins in 1974 and leaving in 1995. He enormously valued his contact with the greatest operatic repertoire, and came to regret selling his fine violin after his departure. After the Covid pandemic made the Purcell Room concerts around new year impossible, John put on lunchtime concerts for young artists that were streamed live from St James’ church, Piccadilly. At the time of his death a new lunchtime series was running at Holy Sepulchre church, High Holborn, and he had other plans in train for the future. John was incredibly generous and dedicated, and an affable companion. He was appointed MBE (1974), an honorary member of the Royal College of Music (1981) and honorary fellow of the Royal Academy of Music (2007). But ever modest, he refused to let me write an article about him and his achievements for his 90th birthday. He was like a gambler with concerts – he could not resist them and undoubtedly put a considerable amount of his own funds into the PLG over many years. His brief marriage to Catherine Roberts ended in divorce, and he is survived by their son, Andrew, a saxophone and clarinet player. • John Robin Marcel Woolf, concert promoter, born 12 April 1930; died 30 January 2022 • This article was corrected on 25 February 2022. The reciters of Walton’s Façade in the 1962 concert were Irene Worth and Sebastian Shaw, rather than Edith Sitwell and Peter Pears.Joe Root has declined to divulge his role in the decision to drop Jimmy Anderson and Stuart Broad for the West Indies tour but said it does not shut the door on their record-breaking careers. On the day Anderson followed Broad by venting his frustration and saying he was “praying” this is not the end, Root was pressed in his first press conference since the Ashes defeat put his own captaincy in doubt on whether he sanctioned the call, despite not having a vote in the selection meeting chaired by Andrew Strauss. “I don’t think we should have to air every single bit of information,” said Root before the team’s departure for Antigua on Thursday. “Clearly, it was a discussion point for a long period of time but the decision has been made and we’ve got to look at the squad we have got and how we’re going to beat West Indies. Sometimes we have been slightly too honest and certain things should stay in the room. I think that’s the case with this scenario. “I’ve spoken to Stuart and Jimmy and they’re obviously disappointed, angry, and Stuart in particular has voiced that quite publicly. And you’d expect that. I’ve got a huge amount of respect for both of them. At no point – it’s been made very clear – no one is saying this is the end for them.” Like Broad, Anderson is waiting on the appointment of England’s new management team and their views on the subject, while also sharing similar disgruntlement that a “five‑minute phone call” from Strauss – temporarily in charge – relayed the news. The 39-year-old appears determined to plough on, however, telling the BBC’s Tailenders podcast: “I’m praying this isn’t the end. But if I never play for England again, I know I’ve got amazing people around me to support me and that’s really important. “I’ve got one more go at digging deep. I’ve got a lot left to offer – I’ve still got the hunger and passion to play. “There is likely to be a new director of cricket and new head coach so I just hope that whatever decision is made, it is talked about in the way that it should be. Another frustration for me is that it was just a five-minute phone call – it doesn’t really clear much up for you.” Root offered a slightly contradictory explanation overall, saying it would give bowlers such as Chris Woakes experience with the new ball for future endeavours and help forge a “backbone for this team”, while in the same breath stating “we’ve got to look after what’s right in front of us”. After one victory in England’s past 14 Tests the 31-year-old certainly needs results in the three-match series that starts on 8 March and, in a bid to kickstart the ailing batting lineup that failed to pass 300 in Australia, will move up a spot to No 3. Coming off the back of a strong 2021 that included six centuries, Root said he is ready for a berth that has previously proved challenging, with an average of 38 from 30 Tests at first drop, compared with 51 at No 4. Root said: “It’s the first time [moving to No 3] has sat comfortably with me; the first time I’ve been really excited and not slightly apprehensive about it. I am coming into it having had a really strong year with a lot more clarity about how I’m going to score my runs. “I’m not saying that guarantees success, I’ll have to work really hard to transfer those performances to No 3. But I feel excited about it, I’m very motivated and I feel ready for it now. I just want to get my teeth into it, get some runs on the board early and support those openers, get us off to a good start.” Root also shared his sadness that Ashley Giles, Chris Silverwood and Graham Thorpe lost their jobs after the Ashes and on his own continuation as captain he said: “I didn’t waver. I’m very passionate about trying to take this team forward. I’m grateful I’ve got that opportunity. I’m very motivated to come away with what would be a brilliant achievement, [England] having won [in the Caribbean] once since the 1960s.”When it was released as a single in May 1967, Procol Harum’s A Whiter Shade of Pale proved an immediate sensation in that year of psychedelia and Sgt Pepper. Gary Brooker, who sang it in his expressively blues-inflected voice and wrote the music to accompany Keith Reid’s lyrics, described how he had been influenced by Jacques Loussier’s interpretation of JS Bach’s Air from his Orchestral Suite No 3 in D major. “The original Hamlet cigar commercial featuring Air on a G String had always been a favourite of ours,” said Brooker, who has died of cancer aged 76. “When the guy lit up the cigar everything just went cool.” But A Whiter Shade of Pale was not just cool, but also stately and mysterious and determined not to give up its secrets easily. Matthew Fisher’s haunting Hammond organ theme seemed to impart an aura of infinite wistfulness. A Whiter Shade of Pale topped the charts in the UK, Australia and Canada, and went to No 5 in the US. It was by far the biggest hit of the group’s career, though a live version of Conquistador took them into the US Top 20 in 1972, and they revisited the UK Top 20 with Pandora’s Box in 1975. With Brooker the focal point as the group went through numerous lineup changes, their chart performances were patchy. While they scored several Top 30 album entries on either side of the Atlantic and a US No 5 for their 1972 live album recorded with the Edmonton Symphony Orchestra, they created a lasting aura that was beyond mere chart statistics. They had a charisma that turned a number of eminent listeners into fans, including the writer Douglas Adams, who credited the band’s song Grand Hotel with inspiring his book The Restaurant at the End of the Universe. The film director Martin Scorsese, who was particularly fond of their third album, A Salty Dog (1969), wrote about Procol Harum in the foreword to Henry Scott-Irvine’s 2012 biography of the band: “The point was not so much what the songs were saying, specifically, as what they were suggesting to each of us, individually.” Brooker was born in London, to Violet and Harry Brooker. He recalled that his family “had our own house in Bush Hill Park, a leafy suburb of Enfield, and I remember life being very comfortable”. Harry was a professional musician who played the pedal steel guitar with Felix Mendelssohn’s Hawaiian Serenaders. The band secured a residency in Southend-on-Sea, Essex, with the family moving there in 1954. Brooker’s mother “encouraged me to have a profession, as long as it wasn’t music”. When Gary was 11 his father died suddenly, forcing Violet to work on a factory assembly line while Gary helped out by doing an early-morning paper round. He attended Westcliff high school for boys, while studying the piano with Ronald Meachen, under whose unorthodox guidance Brooker’s playing developed rapidly. When he was 12 he joined a skiffle group, the Electrics, then formed the Coasters, playing rock’n’roll instrumentals. When a local entrepreneur, Peter Martin, conceived the notion of forming a new band called the Paramounts by recruiting members from several groups, he hired Brooker to play the piano. The Paramounts included three other future members of Procol Harum, the guitarist Robin Trower, drummer BJ Wilson and guitarist (later bassist) Chris Copping. The Paramounts developed a reputation as an accomplished rock’n’roll and R&amp;B band, and impressed the Rolling Stones when they supported them at a gig in Walmer in Kent in September 1963. Keith Richards told Melody Maker in March 1964 that the Paramounts were “one of the best groups to come up for a long time”. In late 1963 they were signed by EMI’s Parlophone label, and their recording of the Leiber and Stoller composition Poison Ivy reached No 35 on the UK chart. It was to be the most successful of their seven single releases, though the Paramounts enjoyed a number of career highlights before they split in mid-1966. They also played some gigs backing Sandie Shaw, including one at the Paris Olympia with an orchestra, and a couple of dates supporting the Beatles on their last British concert tour in December 1965. Brooker dissolved the band to concentrate on songwriting and, at the instigation of the producer and A&amp;R man Guy Stevens, got together with the lyricist Keith Reid. One of the songs they wrote together was A Whiter Shade of Pale, apparently inspired by a remark by Stevens to his wife, Diane, about her pallid appearance. Reid and Brooker set about building a new group to perform their songs, with the name Procol Harum taken from a Siamese cat belonging to a mutual friend. A Whiter Shade of Pale was released as a single and sailed into history. After Procol Harum split up in 1977, Brooker pursued a solo career and released the albums No More Fear of Flying (1979), Lead Me to the Water (1982) and Echoes in the Night (1985). In 1979 he joined Eric Clapton’s band, appearing on the album Another Ticket. He was in demand with many high-profile names, and toured with Ringo Starr’s All-Starr Band and Bill Wyman’s Rhythm Kings. He performed at the George Harrison tribute, Concert For George, in November 2002, having featured on Harrison’s albums All Things Must Pass, Somewhere In England and Gone Troppo. He also appeared on recordings by the Hollies, the Alan Parsons Project and Kate Bush. In 1991 Procol Harum reformed and released the album The Prodigal Stranger, the prelude to years of successful international touring. In 2007, fans organised a 40th anniversary tribute to A Whiter Shade of Pale comprising two concerts at St John’s Smith Square in London, one by Procol Harum and one by Gary Brooker &amp; Friends. Another committed Procol Harum fan was the film director Alan Parker, who cast Brooker as the Argentine foreign minister Juan Atilio Bramuglia in his film of Evita (1996). From 2005 to 2009, Brooker was engaged in a lawsuit with Fisher, in which Fisher claimed he co-wrote the music for A Whiter Shade of Pale. The law lords finally ruled in Fisher’s favour, entitling him to a share of the song’s future royalties. Brooker later estimated the case had cost him £1m, but “I haven’t totalled it up because it would frighten me too much”. He received an award from the British Academy of Songwriters, Composers and Authors in 2009 for his contribution to music, and in 2003 was made MBE. He is survived by his wife, Franky Riedo, whom he married in 1968. • Gary Brooker, musician, singer and songwriter, born 29 May 1945; died 19 February 2022 • This article was amended on 24 February 2022. It was Reid and Brooker that put together Procol Harum, not Reid and Stevens, as we said in an earlier version.Keir Starmer has urged the government to end the “era of impunity” in the UK for Russian oligarchs. (See 2.47pm.) He was speaking at PMQs ahead of a Commons debate that saw Labour set out details of the links between several prominent Tory donors and the Kremlin. (See 4.51pm.) But ministers have refused to accept that their Russian-linked donors are suspect, insisting that it is wrong to see them as Vladmir Putin’s cronies. (See 9.32am.) Restoring the Palace of Westminster without finding a new home for MPs could take up to 76 years, with a repairs bill reaching £22bn, a new report shows. PA says: In an initial assessment of the cost and schedule for action required to save the palace, and an analysis of how this would be impacted by keeping MPs on site, the project’s sponsor body and delivery authority looked at a range of possible scenarios for carrying out the work. The cheapest option would involve a “full decant” of the palace for between 12 and 20 years, with the work costing in the region of £7bn to £13bn. In this scenario, with MPs elsewhere for much of the time, the report estimated the restoration would take between 19 and 28 years. If MPs were to maintain a “continued presence” in the palace, where “all essential and highly desirable functions could be accommodated but in more condensed space”, it found that the work would cost more and take longer. In one scenario, business would remain within the Commons Chamber “until such a point is reached whereby all operations are transferred to another space within the Palace of Westminster (assumed to be the House of Lords Chamber), to allow the rest of the work to proceed”, the report said. It estimated this would boost restoration costs to between £9.5bn and £18.5bn, taking 26 to 43 years. And in a third possible scenario - which would cost the most and take the longest - business would remain within the Chamber “throughout the entirety of the restoration and renewal programme of works”, with “no transfer”. It is estimated this would cost between £11bn and £22bn and take in the region of 46 to 76 years. Two men have been charged after malicious communications were sent to Labour deputy leader Angela Rayner. Scotland Yard’s leadership has hit back at Sadiq Khan’s ousting of the commissioner of the Metropolitan police, Cressida Dick, claiming “due process” was not followed by the mayor of London and calling on the home secretary, Priti Patel, to review her alleged unfair treatment. Social mobility experts have warned that government proposals to introduce minimum eligibility requirements for higher education loans in England will hit poorest students hardest, in effect “closing off university prospects at age three” for the most disadvantaged. That’s all from me for today. But there is more coverage of the Ukraine crisis on global live blog. It’s here. Andrew Robathan, a Tory peer and a former armed forces minister, told Times Radio the UK should “stop being pathetic” and adopt a more robust stance on Russian oligarchs. He told the station: I think we have to get the legal position right. And one of the problems we’ve had in this country, I don’t know if you know about a book called Putin’s People, which I’m reading at the moment, and the author, whose name escapes me, I think she was an FT journalist, has been sued for libel in our courts. And of course she’s got lots of overpaid lawyers prosecuting her. Now this is a war between Ukraine and Putin’s Russia. And we must stop playing by our rules entirely. I’m not saying be illegal, we have to stop being pathetic when it comes to rich oligarchs who are who were basically gangsters who made their money in Russia. (The book, Putin’s People, is by Catherine Belton, and it’s excellent.) Rishi Sunak, the chancellor, remains the UK’s most popular senior politician, according to new polling from YouGov. Alex Salmond is facing fresh cross-party pressure to cancel his chat show on the Kremlin-funded channel RT after Alex Cole-Hamilton, the Scottish Liberal Democrat leader, called for the former first minister to be expelled from the privy council. Like George Galloway, another Scottish ex-MP for both Labour and Respect, Salmond anchors a weekly show on RT which is produced by Tasmina Ahmed-Sheikh, also a former Scottish National party MP. It routinely features Salmond’s allies, including Angus MacNeil, the SNP MP for the Western Isles. Salmond became a member of the privy council in 2007. It is an honour mostly granted to senior parliamentarians, who can be allowed access to secret intelligence material on privy council terms. Cole-Hamilton has written to Mark Spencer MP, lord president of the Privy Council, and to the Lord Privy Seal Baroness Evans of Bowes Park, asking for him to expelled from it. RT had portrayed Russia’s incursion into Ukraine as “a liberation”, he said. I believe Mr Salmond’s close and financial association with an agent of a hostile state should therefore render him unfit to offer further advice to Her Majesty the Queen from his role as a privy councillor. His decision to continue hosting the show came under heavy attack from Nicola Sturgeon, Salmond’s successor as SNP leader and first minister, earlier on Wednesday. (See 2.14pm.) Other senior figures in the SNP quickly lined up alongside her, applauding the decision by the UK government to ask the broadcasting regulator Ofcom to review RT’s broadcasting licence. Stewart McDonald, the SNP’s defence spokesman, tweeted this: Salmond’s party Alba said earlier this week it “condemns the violation of Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity” by Russia’s recognition of Donetsk and Luhansk but it said Nato’s influence needed to be curbed, to protect “Russia’s own security interests.” Labour has written to complain about the lack of transparency following Boris Johnson’s statement at prime minister’s questions that the UK would be providing “lethal aid” to Ukraine as part of “a further package of military support”. Shortly after Downing Street said “no further details” could be provided, citing “operational security reasons,” prompting Labour’s shadow defence spokesman to complain that MPs and the public were being kept in the dark at what could be a significant commitment. John Healey, writing to defence secretary Ben Wallace, said, while the opposition supported the principle of supplying arms to Ukraine to help defend itself, it was “also right that MPs continue to be properly updated”. Overnight the Sun reported that the UK was preparing to send a Sky Sabre radar system to be deployed in Poland along its 240km border with Ukraine. Mounted on trucks it is also capable of firing small missiles to hit rockets or planes. Defence sources added two units Sky Sabre units from the Royal Artillery would be heading to Poland imminently, travelling on land and by boat to reach the border within days. Labour said that previously, on 17 January, Wallace had come to the Commons to say that the UK had supplied anti-tank weapons to Ukraine. Then on 10 February Wallace had set out the further supply of body armour, helmets and combat boots, in a written statement. But on this occasion it appeared no formal detail was forthcoming. Healey urged Wallace, in the light of the prime minister’s declaration, “to provide details to parliament as soon as possible”. The Labour opposition day motion on getting illicit Russion money out of the UK was passed at the end of the debate unopposed. For the record, this is what the motion said: That this house expresses solidarity with the people of Ukraine, and supports their sovereignty and Ukraine’s territorial integrity; condemns Russian aggression and emphasises the UK’s commitment to Nato; resolves to end illicit finance that rewards and sustains the Putin regime in Russia; calls on the government to introduce an economic crime bill, an overseas entities bill and a register of beneficial ownership by the end of March 2022; and further calls on the foreign secretary to make a statement to this House on the implementation of the recommendations of the intelligence and security committee’s Russia report. One of the most powerful speeches in the debate came from Liam Byrne, the Labour former chief secretary to the Treasury, who mocked Liz Truss’s claim in interviews this morning that the Russians who have given money to the Conservative party are not linked to the Putin regime in Moscow. (See 9.32am.) Saying that he intended to offer the Tories a vetting service, Byrne listed seven donors who he implied were suspect. Lubov Chernukhin Byrne said Chernukin had donated £2.1m to the Tories. He said her husband Vladimir (the fomer Russian deputy finance minister) received £8m from Suleiman Kerimov, who was sanctioned by the US Treasury in 2018. Byrne said the transfer to Vladimir came on 29 April 2016 “mysteriously just before a donation of £1.9m to the Conservative party”. Alexander Temerko Byrne said Temerko was someone who had “forged a career at the top of the arms industry” and who had connections at the highest levels in the Kremlin. Byrne said Temerko was a deputy chairman of the Yukos oil comany but “somehow mysteriously escaped the purge of is colleagues”. He has donated £747,000 to the party, Byrne said. Viktor Fedotov Byrne said Temerko had been working very closely with Fedotov, who was a director of Aquind and a former head of a subsidiary of Lukoil. In the Pandora Papers Fedotov was revealed as man who made fortunes in the company in the mid 2000s “around the time it was alleged to be syphoning funds from the Russian state monopoly company Transneft”, Byrne said. Dmitry Leus Byrne said Leus had donated £54,000. According to Daily Mail, Leus was found guilty of money laundering and jailed in Russia in 2004, Byrne said. Byrne said that Leus said the prosecution was politcally motivated, and the conviction was overturned. Byrne went on: Here is the mystery. He also donated to the Prince’s Foundation. The Prince’s Foundation has decided to return Mr Leus’s money. The Conservative party, you will be amazed to hear, has not. Mohamed Amersi Byrne said Amersi and his wife had given £793,000 to the Conservative party. He said Amersi had reportedly been involved in “one of the biggest corruption scandals in Europe”, which involved $220m being paid to a Gibraltar-based company owned by the daughter of the president of Uzbekistan. Byrne said Amersi says his donations came from UK profits. But the FT said he received £4m from a company he knew was secretly owned by a powerful Russian, President Putin’s telecoms minister, Byrne said. Murtaza Lakhani Byrne said Lakhani’s firm, Mercentile and Maritime, has donated £500,000 to the party. Byrne said Bloomberg has reported that Lakhani made made large parts of his fortune by channelling $6bn from Russian oil giant Rosneft to Kurdistan. David Burnside Byrne said Burnside’s firm has donated £200,000 to the party. Burnside, a former Ulster Unionist MP, boasts of his links to senior figures in the Kremlin and has introduced several to senior Tory figures, Byrne said. In her speech at the start of the debate Amanda Milling, the former Conservative party co-chair who is now a Foreign Office minister, said the party did not accept foreign donations and that all donations were from British citizens “received in good faith, after appropriate due diligence”. She also said that Russian-linked donors were not necessarily Putin allies. She said: There are people in this country of Russian origin who are British citizens. Many are critics of Putin and it is completely wrong and discriminatory to tar them with the same brush. The i’s Arj Singh has posted this on Twitter explaining why a question from the Labour MP Imran Hussain about the Islamphobia allegations against Mark Spencer, leader of the Commons, was disallowed during PMQs. (See 12.27pm.) Ofcom has released the text of a letter from its chief executive, Dame Melanie Dawes, to Nadine Dorries, the culture secretary, responding to her call for it to review RT’s broadcasting licence. (See 12.09pm and 1.31pm.) In her letter, Dawes effectively says her organisation is already on the case and that it will “not hesitate to take swift action where necessary”. She also says that Ofcom is only enforcing rules drawn up by parliament. She explains: Ofcom’s Broadcasting Code, which reflects the rules established by parliament in the Communications Act, requires all licensees to ensure that news – in whatever form – is reported with due accuracy and presented with due impartiality. It is acceptable for broadcasters to present issues from a particular perspective provided that alternative views and opinions are also represented. It would not be acceptable for any of our licensees to broadcast one-sided propaganda. David Davis, the Conservative former Brexit secretary who is one of the few Tory MPs to have publicly called for Boris Johnson’s resignation, told Radio 4’s World at One that the government’s sanctions package against Russia risked being seen as “feeble”. He told the programme: Whilst one understands that the government wants to make a staged response, this risks being seen as feeble by Russia. They immediately responded by stepping up their military activity. It doesn’t provide the sort of robust, exemplary leadership that we should be giving to a western alliance which is at its weakest point probably in living memory. It risks gives an early warning to all the oligarchs we should be penalising. In response to a point of order after PMQs, Nadhim Zahawi, the education secretary, told MPs that he would be making a Commons statement tomorrow about access to universities. As my colleagues Richard Adams and Sally Weale report, Zahawi is expected to announce that students in England could be blocked from going to university unless they get strong GCSE or A-level grades. Scotland Yard’s leadership has hit back at Sadiq Khan’s ousting of the commissioner of the Metropolitan police, Cressida Dick, claiming “due process” was not been followed by the mayor of London. As my colleague Vikram Dodd reports, Sir Stephen House, the Met deputy commissioner and a close ally of Dick, made the comments against Khan, who publicly clashed with Dick earlier this month. Vikram’s full story is here. Here is the PA Media story about the Johnson/Starmer exchanges at PMQs. Keir Starmer has urged Boris Johnson to get on with ending the “era of oligarch impunity” in the UK following Russia’s “invasion” of Ukraine. Shouts of “get on with it” could be heard from the Labour benches as the prime minister insisted “even more” sanctions against Russia are coming, when pressed to “unleash a full package” of measures by Starmer. Labour MPs were also seen tapping their watches and repeatedly shouting “when?” after Johnson told the Commons that “any Russian entity, any Russian individual” and members of the Russian parliament could now be targeted by UK sanctions and that further legislation is planned. Speaking at PMQs, Starmer said: “Putin has invaded a sovereign European nation, he’s attacked because he fears openness and democracy and because he knows that given a choice people will not choose to live under erratic violent rule. “He seeks division, we must stay united. He hopes for inaction, we must take a stand. He believes we’re too corrupted to do the right thing, so we must prove him wrong - and I believe that we can. “So will the prime minister work across the House to ensure that this is the end of the era of oligarch impunity by saying that this House and this country will no longer be homes for their loot?” Johnson claimed in his reply: “I don’t think any government could conceivably be doing more to root out corrupt Russian money - and that is what we’re going to do, and I think we can be proud of what we’ve already done and the measures we have set out. “It is absolutely vital that we in the UK should stand united and people around the world can see that the UK was the first to call out what President Putin was doing in Ukraine, we’ve been instrumental in bringing the western world together in lockstep to deal with the problem, to bring together the economic package of sanctions that I have set out. “There is still time for President Putin, as I’ve said, to de-escalate. “But what is at stake, be in absolutely no doubt, is not just the democracy of Ukraine but the principle of democracy around the world, and that is why the unity of this House is so important today, and it is absolutely vital that the United Kingdom stands together against aggression in Ukraine.” Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland’s first minister, has said she is “appalled” that Alex Salmond,her predecessor, still has a programme on the Kremlin-backed RT (formerly Russia Today). In an interview with STV News, she said: I’m appalled at Alex Salmond’s continued involvement with RT, I don’t think it’s any secret now that I don’t think he should ever have had a television show on RT, but it is even more unthinkable now that that should continue. I don’t think any elected representative should be contemplating appearing on RT right now, I will give that message - have given that message – to elected officials here at the Scottish parliament, I know (SNP Westminster leader) Ian Blackford has done so in Westminster. Salmond was first minister and SNP leader until he lost the independence referendum in 2014. He subsequently fell out with Sturgeon, who previously had been a close friend and ally, over her response to allegations he had committed sexual assault and attempted rape (he was cleared of all charges when the cases went to court) and last year he set up a new party, Alba, which he leads. Sturgeon also said she wanted Ofcom to consider whether RT should be banned. She said: It’s a matter for Ofcom, but I do think there is now a very serious question about whether RT should continue to have a licence to broadcast here in Scotland and I would certainly encourage Ofcom to look at that very, very seriously and closely indeed. In the Commons yesterday Boris Johnson said the Russian oligarch Roman Abramovich was already subject to UK sanctions. He has now issued a written ministerial statement, headed “clarficiation”, saying: “Roman Abramovich has not been the subject of targeted measures.” Johnson was referring to difficulties Abramovich had renewing his visa, which led to him getting Israeli citizenship, allowing him to enter the UK without a visa for short stays. In his statement Johnson says: “Anyone who comes to this country on an Israeli passport is a non-visa national. Israelis are required to obtain a visa if they want to live, work or study in the UK.” Here are the main points from the post-PMQs No 10 lobby briefing. No 10 refused to give further details of the extra arms being supplied by the UK to Ukraine. Boris Johnson announced the move at PMQs. (See 12.03pm.) Asked what was being supplied to Ukraine, the PM’s spokesperson said: There are operational security reasons about why I can’t go into further details about what that package entails. The spokesman said that the government does have the legal powers to impose sanctions on members of the Duma, but that it was still finalising the “evidence” needed to justify this. Johnson was questioned on this at PMQs, but gave an answer that did not clarify the situation. (See 12.36pm.) Asked to explain what was happening, the spokesperson said: We can do this under existing legislation. We are finalising the evidence to bring forward new designations against the 351 members of the Russian state assembly and the members of the federation council who voted in that way. The spokesman said the government was asking Ofcom to keep a “watchful eye” on RT (formerly Russia Today). He said: Ofcom does have the powers to step in when broadcasting rules have been breached and obviously, as you know, they previously sanctioned Russia Today for serious failures to comply with broadcasting rules on impartiality. All the culture secretary is asking is Ofcom takes any appropriate action should there be any attempt to use Russia Today to spread disinformation. See 1.31pm for a copy of the letter to Ofcom. Asked whether Johnson would advise his father not to appear again on RT, the spokesman said: “Obviously that’s a matter for individuals who appear to make that decision.” The PM’s press secretary defended the Conservative party’s right to take money from people with Russian links. She said: The Conservative party does not accept foreign donations, that’s illegal. I would make the point that there are people in this country of Russian origin who are British citizens, many are critics of Putin, so it’s wrong and discriminatory to tar them all with the same brush. The press secretary also said the “necessary due diligence” was in place to check where donations had come from. This is from Oliver Dowden, the Conservative party chair, echoing a point made by Boris Johnson at PMQs. (See 1.27pm.) Steven Swinford from the Times has posted on Twitter a copy of the letter sent by Nadine Dorries, the culture secretary, to Ofcom asking it to review RT’s licence. PMQs has never been a forum that handles nuance particularly well, and the format – indeed, even the furnishings in the chamber – encourages everything to be presented in binary. And yet today Keir Starmer was trying to pull off some mixed messaging; broad support for the government over the principle of a robust response to Russia, while criticising the government for not going far enough. Boris Johnson was also caught in the same trap himself, trying to maintain that there is cross-party support for the government’s stance on Putin, while at the same time hacking the opposition in the shins. Johnson’s messaging got particularly confused when he delivered one of the significant news announcements of the session – telling Starmer that the government has now asked Ofcom for review RT’s licence. But immediately after saying this, and appearing to take credit for robust action against a Kremlin fake news machine, Johnson insisted on adding a rider about his commitment to the principle of free speech. He said: We live in a democracy, Mr Speaker, and we live in a country that believes in free speech and I think it’s important that we should leave it up to Ofcom rather than to politicians to decide which media organisations to ban. Sometimes mixed messaging can win over the support of people on both sides of an argument, but this just left people thoroughly confused as to whether Johnson favours a crackdown on RT or not. Of course, if free speech means the right to spout spurious claims without challenge, then it is not hard to see why Johnson is such a fan and his broad response to Starmer’s claims about the flaws with his Russia strategy – which was that Britain has been “out in front” in terms of sanctions, and that no one was doing more to address the “dirty money” problem – will be seen as bogus by anyone with more than a passing knowledge of the issue. Starmer picked out the holes in Johnson’s case quite gracefully, and twice he stressed that he wasn’t trying to make party political capital out of the issue. He certainly held the moral high ground, although the case against the government may have been made more powerfully by the ferocious barracking directed at Caroline Lucas when she asked about Russian interference in elections – a performance that sounded like evidence of a party that has something to hide. (See 12.22pm.) Johnson, as usual, was far less squeamish about going party political, and he directed two jibes at Labour, over Barry Gardiner taking money for office costs from a Chinese agent, and over Labour leftwingers blaming Nato for the Ukraine crisis, and one against the SNP, over its former leader Alex Salmond appearing on RT. It was classic whataboutery, and not relevant to the criticisms being made by Starmer or Ian Blackford, but all three attacks were sharp, memorable and effective. They went a long way towards rescuing him in what was otherwise a difficult outing. Chris Bryant (Lab) makes a point of order to say that Boris Johnson is going to correct the record over what he said about Roman Abramovich yesterday. (See 10.43am.) He says this is unprecedented; it has taken a Russian billionaire to get the PM to correct the record. He suggests that the Hansard edition containing Johnson’s correct should be bound in gold to mark the event. On a point of order Ian Blackford, the SNP leader at Westminster, says Alex Salmond has “nothing to do with” the SNP. Salmond is the leader of another party, Alba. He says the SNP makes it clear that none of its parliamentarians should have anything to do with RT. Wayne David (Lab) says the Times leader this morning is severely critical of the sanctios measure. If Johnson won’t listen to MPs, will he listen to the Times? Johnson says the UK is leading the way on this. He says what would be strong would be for the leader of the opposition to take the Labour whip away from the 14 Labour MPs who say Nato is the aggressor in Ukraine. Daniel Kawzcynski (Con) asks for more government help to address flooding on the river Severn. Johnson says the government is investing £5.2bn in flood defences. Jamie Stone (Lib Dem) says it is a “disgrace” that Alex Salmond broadcasts his “half-baked world views” on Russian TV (RT). Johnson says that point would have been even more powerful if Ian Blackford had made it. Margaret Hodge (Lab) says ministers have given contradictory statements about sanctioning members of the Duma (the Russian parliament), with some saying the government already has the power to sanction them, and some saying fresh legislation is needed. Who is right? Johnson says sanctioning parliamentarians is difficult. He says the government will do more. (His answer implies that the relevant legislation is not yet in place, although he does not say that explicitly.) UPDATE: Hodge said: Yesterday the prime minister told us that we can sanction Duma members in the government’s new sanctions package. The member for Braintree [Foreign Office minister James Cleverly] told the house that we could sanctioned Duma members not through the new regime but in an extension of previous sanction rules. Yet this morning the foreign secretary [Liz Truss] said that the sanctions against Duma members will ‘take weeks to be made legally watertight’. So prime minister who is right? How can we say we are standing strong against Russian aggression when our sanctions response is such a muddle and such a mess? Johnson replied: I hope the whole house will agree that it is quite a thing to sanction parliamentarians. That is what we are doing. Andy Carter (Con) asks about funding for buses in Warrington. Will the money be spent on British-made buses? Johnson says Warrington is getting £20m for zero emission buses. He says 80% of buses are produced domestically. Sam Tarry (Lab) asks about knife crime, and the death of a constituent. Johnson says he understands the family’s tragic loss. The government is rounding up county lines drug lines. They play a large part in this, he says. Andrew Jones (Con) says some of the people most vulnerable to Covid are in danger of being missed form the present system for identifying the most vulnerable. Johnson says the 1.3m who are most vulnerable will have access to testing and antivirals. Barbara Keeley (Lab) says unpaid family carers are treated appallingly by the government. Carers’ allowance has gone up by just £2. But the cost of this will be swallowed up by the cost of a single lateral flow test. How can that be justified? Johnson says the government cannot keep free universal testing going indefinitely. Imran Hussain (Lab) says the PM is “no stranger to derogatory remarks about Muslim women”. He is asking about the inquiry into Mark Spencer and the “Muslimness” claim. Sir Lindsay Hoyle, the Speaker, says this is no place to discuss the allegation. He interrupts Hussain, and allows Johnson not to address the question. UPDATE: Hussain said: The member for Sherwood is currently under investigation for Islamophobia following accusations he told a fellow MP that her being a Muslim was making colleagues uncomfortable. How did the Government punish this behaviour? With a promotion that puts the accused member in charge of the complaints procedure. And, of course, we all know that the prime minister himself is no stranger to derogatory remarks about Muslim women, so let me ... That prompted Hoyle to say: “This is not the appropriate place to be raising this.” SECOND UPDATE: See 3.44pm for an explanation as to why the question was disallowed. Kerry McCarthy (Lab) asks how it looks for members of the cabinet to be “throwing their toys out of the pram” because they want to eat foie gras when there is a cost of living crisis. Johnson ignores the foie gras point, and lists government measures to help people with the cost of living. Caroline Lucas (Green) says when Johnson was foreign secretary, he said there was no evidence of “successful” Russian interference in UK elections. What evidence has he seen of unsuccessful interference in UK elections. Lucas is being barracked particularly loudly by Tory MPs (some of whom are particularly sensitive to claims Russia tried to intervene in the Brexit referendum). Johnson ignores the question, and repeats his claim that he has seen no evidence of successful Russian intervention in UK elections. Ian Blackford, the SNP’s leader at Westminster, says sanctions need to be stronger. We should not wait for Russia to attack before getting rid of Russian “dirty money” from London, he says. He says in the past he raised the issue of limited partnership. Some 113 of them have been used to channel $20.8m, he says. But the government has not addressed the problem, he says. Johnson claims no country has done more to tackle the dirty money problem. Blackford says he raised this problem five years ago. Nothing was done. He says Russians willing to offer “golden handshakes” got a warm reception. Some of this money went to the Conserative party. He quotes from the recent US thinktank report (see 10.04am) saying donations to the Tory party are discouraging the government from acting on this. Johnson says he wants to clarify the situation We do not raise money from Russian oligarchs. We raise money from people who are registered to vote on the UK register of interests. And he criticises Alex Salmond, the former SNP leader, for taking money from RT. Starmer says the government should make it clear the UK can no longer be a home for the “loot” of Russian oligarchs. Johnson claims no one has done more to address the problem. The UK was the first to call out what was happening in Ukraine, he claims. He says the UK is working in lockstep with its allies. Democracy is at stake, he says. He says it is vital the Commons sticks together on this. He says he is grateful for the opposition’s broad support. Starmer says Labour will back an economic crime bill in this session of parliament. He calls for legislation to tighten the rules stopping foreign money coming into politics. Johnson says the biggest foreign donations recently went to a Labour MP getting money from a member of the Chinese Communist party. Starmer welcomes the review of the RT licence. Johnson says economic sanctions will be more effective if taken in tandem with other countries. And he says the economic crime bill will come forward in the next session of parliament. Starmer says RT is Putin’s progaganda vehicle. Will the government ask Ofcom to review its licence? Johnson says the secretary of state has already asked Ofcom to review its licence. But he says the UK has a culture of free speech. Starmer says the package announced yesterday may have been misunderstood. If he goes further, Labour will support him. Will he do so? Johnson says under the measures already approved any Russian entity and any Russian entity can be targeted. And members of the Duma can be targeted too, he says. (Johnson is referring to the legislating enabling sanctions to be imposed - not the actual sanctions announced yesterday.) Keir Starmer says we all want to deter aggression in Europe. A sovereign country has been invaded. The PM said he would unleash a full package of santions following an invasion. “If not now, when?” Johnson says people do not realise that the UK is “out in front” in terms of sanctions. He says 275 people are subject to sanctions. (Only three of those were added to sanctions lists yesterday.) And he says bank assets have been frozen. And there is more to come, he says. Boris Johnson starts by saying that, in light of the “increasingly threatening behaviour from Russia”, he can announce that the UK will soon be providing a further package of military support to Ukraine, including lethal aid and non-lethal aid. In light of the increasingly threatening behaviour from Russia, and in line with our previous support, the UK will shortly be providing a further package of military support to Ukraine. This will include lethal aid in the form of defensive weapons and non-lethal aid. From Sky’s Joe Pike PMQs is starting soon. Here is the list of MPs down to ask a question. Alicia Kearns, a Conservative MP, has told BBC News that the sanctions against Russia announced yesterday did not go far enough. “I wanted us to go further,” she said. I wanted us to lay out very clearly that there would be serious repurcussions. I felt that we needed to blacklist all Russian state banks, all Russian banks in fact. I want us to ban the City from servicing any Russian state companies, and that includes the accountants and the lawyers. I wanted a far broader sanctions regime, and it does sound like that’s going to be coming forward, so I really welcome the fact that, clearly overnight, we’ve seen from the government a plan to ratchet this up. At the Treasury committee this morning Andrew Bailey, the governor of the Bank of England, who recently urged workers to show restraint when asking for pay rises because of the risk of inflation, faced awkward questions from Labour’s Angela Eagle about his own salary. These are from Reuters’ Andy Bruce. Julia Kollewe has more coverage of the hearing on the business live blog. Labour has said the Conservatives should return the £2m in donations that they have received from people with links to Russia since Boris Johnson became PM. (See 9.32am.) The Lib Dems say the money should go to the people of Ukraine instead. In a statement Layla Moran, the party’s foreign affairs spokesperson, said: Boris Johnson should use the almost £2m of Russian-linked donations received by the Conservative Party to support the people of Ukraine. This would send a powerful signal to Putin that the Conservatives are serious about no longer allowing themselves to be bankrolled by Russian money. It would also provide vital support to Ukrainians on the ground facing the threat of invasion and a sustained campaign of Russian disinformation. Redfield and Wilton Strategies, a polling company, has released some polling showing the government’s approval ratings on a range of policy issues falling since earlier this month. According to the Commons order paper, Boris Johnson is going to issue a written statement today containing a formal clarification. This is expected to be an admisssion that he was wrong to tell MPs yesterday that Roman Abramovich, the Russian oligarch and Chelsea FC owner, has been subject to sanctions. Ministers do from time to time issue written clarifications if they have inadvertently misled the Commons. But, despite having a record of saying false things in the chamber almost weekly, Johnson very rarely corrects the record. He has not issued a written clarification of his comment implying Keir Starmer was to blame for the CPS not prosecuting Jimmy Savile, though he did clarify what he meant in an interview. Here are the main points from Liz Truss’s morning interview round. Truss, the foreign secretary, said that Vladimir Putin’s plans “do not stop at Ukraine”. She said: It is important that we strengthen the eastern flank of Nato countries, that we support the Baltic states, that we support other Nato members to make sure their defences are fully protected, because Putin’s plans do not stop at Ukraine. That is why it’s important that we see strong Ukrainian resistance, and it’s also why it’s important that we strengthen Nato’s forces. She said Britain wanted to use sanctions to make it “as painful as possible” for Putin if he launched a full-scale invasion of Ukraine. She told the Today programme on BBC Radio 4: I believe that Putin is hell-bent on invading Ukraine. This is about inflicting pain on Putin and degrading the Russian economic system over time, targeting people that are close to Putin. What we have to do is make it as painful as possible, both by supplying support to the Ukrainian government in terms of defensive weapons, in terms of economic support, and by imposing economic costs. She defended the measures announced by the UK yesterday, which have been widely criticised as too limited, saying it was a “very serious package” that would inflict pain on Russia. She said: [Yesterday’s sanctions package] targets key oligarchs, we’re clear that sovereign debt will not be able to be raised by the Russian government. It targets key Russian banks that fund the military and fund the activities of the Russian government. But she stressed that the government was also planning to escalate sanctions in the event of a full-scale invasion. She said: We are aligned with our international allies in saying that we will escalate the sanctions, that there will be even more tough sanctions on key oligarchs, on key organisations in Russia, limiting Russia’s access to the financial markets, if there is a full-scale invasion of Ukraine, which I’m afraid to say ... we are very much expecting. This implies that escalation of the sanctions is conditional on Putin intensifying his aggression. But in the Commons yesterday James Cleverly, a Foreign Office minister, said sanctions would be beefed up even if Putin went no further, in the hope of getting him to withdraw. She rejected Labour suggestions that the government’s sanctions policy is influenced by donations to the Conservative party from Russia-linked individuals. She said people giving to the party were not Putin cronies. See 9.32am. She said the Champions League final should not be held in Russia. She said it was up to Ofcom to decide whether or not to ban RT (formerly Russia Today), the Kremlin-backed news channel broadcasting in the UK. Yesterday Keir Starmer said it should be banned. Truss said it was up to Ofcom to decide what to do about RT. She went on: I think it is certainly true that [it] is spouting propaganda on behalf of the Kremlin. One of the things the Kremlin does is use disinformation to try and sow discord in the west, and Russia Today is clearly part of that. It is an independent decision of Ofcom about licensing broadcasters. The allegations in the intelligence and security committee report (see 10am) were echoed in this recent report from the Centre for American Progress, a thinktank close to the Biden administration. It said: The United Kingdom, in particular, has become a major hub for Russian oligarchs and their wealth, with London gaining the moniker “Londongrad.” Uprooting Kremlin-linked oligarchs will be a challenge given the close ties between Russian money and the United Kingdom’s ruling conservative party, the press, and its real estate and financial industry. In his interview on the Today programme this morning David Lammy, the shadow foreign secretary, set out a series of concerns about the sanctions package announced by the government yesterday. The measures should have been much more extensive, he argued, and better coordinated with the sanctions being imposed by the other countries. Asked why he thought the government was holding back, Lammy said: Well, our concerns are, I’m afraid, that there has been too much connection between Russian oligarchs and donations to the Conservative party. We think they should hand back £2m [the donations received from Russian-linked individuals since Boris Johnson became PM]. And. frankly, it’s not clear entirely what’s going on. Justin Webb, the presenter, told Lammy that he was effectively alleging corruption, in suggesting that donations to the Tory party were influencing policy. “Is that seriously your allegation?”, Webb asked. Lammy replied: This isn’t just the allegation of the Labour party. This is the allegation of our intelligence committee and the Russia report. Lammy was referring to this report from parliament’s intelligence and security committee, on Russian interference in British politics, that was published in July 2020 after its release was delayed for many months, without a convincing reason from No 10, amid suspicions Boris Johnson was delaying it because he feared it would be politically embarrassing. The report did not mention the Conservative party by name, but it clearly referred to donations to the party in a passage saying that Russians with links to the Kremlin have been able to gain excessive influence in the UK. It says: The UK welcomed Russian money [from the 1990s], and few questions – if any – were asked about the provenance of this considerable wealth. It appears that the UK government at the time held the belief (more perhaps in hope than expectation) that developing links with major Russian companies would promote good governance by encouraging ethical and transparent practices, and the adoption of a law-based commercial environment. What is now clear is that it was in fact counter-productive, in that it offered ideal mechanisms by which illicit finance could be recycled through what has been referred to as the London ‘laundromat’. The money was also invested in extending patronage and building influence across a wide sphere of the British establishment – PR firms, charities, political interests, academia and cultural institutions were all willing beneficiaries of Russian money, contributing to a ‘reputation laundering’ process. In brief, Russian influence in the UK is ‘the new normal’, and there are a lot of Russians with very close links to Putin who are well integrated into the UK business and social scene, and accepted because of their wealth. This level of integration – in ‘Londongrad’ in particular – means that any measures now being taken by the government are not preventative but rather constitute damage limitation ... Several members of the Russian elite who are closely linked to Putin are identified as being involved with charitable and/or political organisations in the UK, having donated to political parties, with a public profile which positions them to assist Russian influence operations. It is notable that a number of Members of the House of Lords have business interests linked to Russia, or work directly for major Russian companies linked to the Russian state – these relationships should be carefully scrutinised, given the potential for the Russian state to exploit them. Good morning. Liz Truss, the foreign secretary, has been doing the morning interview round and she has been defending the package of sanctions against Russian announced by the government yesterday that has been widely dismissed as pusillanimous. “I think we can safely say we have taken a peashooter to a gunfight,” said Tom Keatinge from the the defence thinktank Rusi. Even the Daily Express, which often defends Boris Johnson with an enthusiasm only matched by Nadine Dorries, seems disappointed. Truss has been arguing that yesterday’s measures were just a first step and that further sanctions are “in the locker” for use in the event of President Putin escalating his aggression in Ukraine. But she has also had to respond to renewed claims from Labour that Johnson’s apparent reluctance to penalise Russian oligarchs based on the UK is linked to the almost £2m donated to the Conservative party since Johnson became leader by individuals with links to Russia. David Lammy, the shadow foreign secretary, said this morning that there was “too much connection between Russian oligarchs and donations to the Conservative party” and that the £2m should be returned. In response, Truss dismissed claims that there was a link between the donations and sanctions policy, saying that the Russians giving to the party were not Putin cronies. She told Sky News: All of donations to the Conservative party are from people on the electoral register in Britain, those donations are properly declared. What we’re talking about here ... is people, the oligarchs that we’re targeting in today’s sanctions, those are people closely linked to Vladimir Putin’s regime. Now, there are many people who have moved to Russia from Britain who are not necessarily friends of Vladimir Putin and who have become British citizens. That is a completely different matter from people who are close to Vladimir Putin who are backing his appalling regime. I will post more from the Truss and Lammy interviews shortly. Here is the agenda for the day. 9.30am: Andrew Bailey, governor of the Bank of England, gives evidence to the Commons Treasury committee. My colleague Julia Kollewe will be covering this on the business live blog. 10am: Simon Hart, the Welsh secretary, gives evidence to the Welsh affairs committee. 12pm: Boris Johnson faces Keir Starmer at PMQs. After 12.45pm: MPs begin a debate on a Labour motion saying the government should do more to stop illicit Russian finance circulating in the UK. I try to monitor the comments below the line (BTL) but it is impossible to read them all. If you have a direct question, do include “Andrew” in it somewhere and I’m more likely to find it. I do try to answer questions, and if they are of general interest, I will post the question and reply above the line (ATL), although I can’t promise to do this for everyone. If you want to attract my attention quickly, it is probably better to use Twitter. I’m on @AndrewSparrow. Alternatively, you can email me at andrew.sparrow@theguardian.com.In addition to his screen and stage roles, Gary Waldhorn created wonderful comic characters on the radio. In Jennifer Phillips’ Radio Cars (BBC Radio 4, 1991-93) he played the boss of a car firm, with the cast including Harriet Walter. His role as Desmond, the theatrical agent in Paul Mayhew-Archer’s An Actor’s Life For Me (Radio 2, 1989-93), starring John Gordon Sinclair as a hapless actor, Robert Wilson, and Caroline Quentin (later Gina McKee) as his girlfriend, makes the most of his fruity tones – never quite getting Robert any good roles while patronising his acting ability. The series has since resurfaced on Radio 4 Extra.Lewis Hamilton has accused Formula One stewards of potential bias towards specific drivers and teams as old wounds were reopened on the first day of pre-season testing in Barcelona on Wednesday. The seven-time world champion, who was controversially denied an eighth title at the season finale in 2021, suggested there was institutionalised favouritism the sport had to address. “We need to make sure we get non-biased stewards,” he said. “Racing drivers, some are very, very good friends with certain individuals. Some travel with certain individuals, and tend to take more of a keen liking to some of them. “I just think [we need] people who have no bias and are super central when it comes to making decisions.” Last week Hamilton expressed his disappointment at the then-race director Michael Masi’s decisions at the fateful Abu Dhabi GP where Hamilton was overtaken by Max Verstappen on the last lap, leading to the Dutchman’s maiden world title. Masi has since been removed from his post by the FIA and the British driver had made it clear he wanted to move on. However, speaking at the Circuit de Barcelona-Catalunya before climbing behind the wheel of his Mercedes W13, Hamilton chose to make this striking accusation of bias. The FIA assigns to each race four stewards, at least one of whom will be a driver who has raced at a competitive level. Vitantonio Liuzzi, who competed for Red Bull in 2005 and then its sister team, formerly Toro Rosso, in 2006 and 2007, was employed by the FIA at four of the 22 races last year. Liuzzi was the driver steward at last year’s Brazilian GP, one of the four stewards who controversially opted not to penalise Verstappen for driving Hamilton off the road while defending his place. The decision was questioned by many drivers for appearing inconsistent after similar incidents that season had resulted in a penalty, and was brought up by drivers at their briefing at the following round in Qatar. The Mercedes team principal, Toto Wolff, questioned the accusation of bias while backing his driver in the call for the stewarding to reach a uniform standard. “We need professionalism in the steward’s room,” he said. “I don’t think there is conscious bias to be honest. Most important, whether we talk about race direction or the stewards there needs to be a standard. “This is what we deserve, this is what everybody expects. We have all talked about the consistency. There should not be a lot of room to interpret rules, there should not be leniency depending on what a potential outcome might be. The rules are rules.” Red Bull’s team principal, Christian Horner, echoed the call for consistency but denied he believed there had been any bias shown by stewards. “We have all been on the end of stewards’ decisions we have been unhappy about,” he said. “I don’t think there is an intended bias, I am not aware of stewards travelling with drivers to races. Giving a better infrastructure for clearer decisions and clearer regulations is something that should be strived for but I certainly don’t think there has been any bias from stewards through the last seasons.” F1 has entered the opening phase of a new era in Barcelona with the cars on track for the first time after a raft of regulation changes, aimed at improving the racing. They present a fundamental change in aerodynamic philosophy, attempting to mandate the majority of downforce is created by ground effect to decrease and divert the wash behind a car and allow for greater overtaking opportunities. Intriguingly, there have been a variety of interpretations of the rules, making for a range of diversion of design. In testing they all cleared the first hurdle, they look good on track and on day one were running with consistency and no shortage of pace, especially through the faster corners despite carrying greater weight this season. Charles Leclerc topped the timesheets in the morning session for Ferrari, putting in 80 laps. Hamilton, now entering his 16th season, took to the track in the afternoon and completed a solid run, fifth fastest with 50 laps under his belt, while Lando Norris was quickest for McLaren in the second session.France has extended its time limit for abortion after an epic battle in parliament, amid anger that thousands of women had to travel abroad each year to terminate pregnancies in countries such as the Netherlands, Spain or England because of French restrictions. There was applause in the French national assembly on Wednesday when lawmakers voted definitively to extend the legal limit for ending a pregnancy from 12 to 14 weeks. France’s new time frame is still lower than in some other European countries, including England at 24 weeks. The health minister, Olivier Véran, said it was crucial “to end the distress of the thousands of women who have to go abroad” for abortions. But it took more than a year of bitter rows and struggle by politicians to change the law, amid reticence from the president, Emmanuel Macron. The law was passed in the final hours of the current parliament, before it closes ahead of April’s presidential election. Macron had expressed his opposition to extending the abortion time limit to 14 weeks in an interview with Elle magazine last summer, saying it was “more traumatising” for women to terminate pregnancies at a later point. He then told journalists that “extended time limits are not neutral in terms of a woman’s trauma”. Laurence Rossignol, the former Socialist minister for families, told the senate last month that Macron was stuck in a cliche of the past when illegal abortion was traumatic. She said times had changed since the legalisation of abortion in France in 1975 and women should not be made to feel guilty, or as if they had failed, if they ended a pregnancy. “I had an abortion and I am not traumatised,” she told the senate as another senator stood and announced the same. The change to France’s abortion time limit was first proposed by Albane Gaillot, a lawmaker who had broken off from Macron’s La République En Marche party. She called it a “step forward” for women. Marie-Noëlle Battistel, a Socialist lawmaker who co-wrote the law, called it “a big day for the rights of women”. Even though the change to the abortion time limit was not a government project, lawmakers from Macron’s party decided to back the law and push it through parliament, independent of Macron’s position. The government allowed a free vote. Macron said he would “respect the freedom of parliamentarians”. The health minister had personally approved the law and told parliament the 14-week time limit, and an increase in abortion services in France, was a “victory for society”, a “very important day for parliament” and for the “fight for the emancipation of women”. He said the law would add to the measures introduced by the government for women’s health, including free contraception for women under 25. Lawmakers on the left expressed disappointment that they did not manage to scrap a special clause that gives French health practitioners the right to refuse to perform an abortion on moral grounds. They said this clause perpetuated stigma around abortion. They said they would continue to fight to get the clause scrapped. Last month, Macron told the European parliament that the right to abortion should be added to the EU’s charter of fundamental rights, just a day after the parliament elected Malta’s Roberta Metsola, who opposes abortion, as its president.A group of US truckers embarked in a convoy of vehicles on Wednesday on a 2,500 mile cross-country trip from Barstow, California to Washington DC to protest against coronavirus restrictions. The group, which is calling itself the “people’s convoy”, is one of several starting from different parts of the country and due to start arriving in the US capital at various points through to late next week – all inspired by the demonstrations that recently paralyzed Canada’s capital city, Ottawa, for weeks. Just over two dozen trucks moved to the front of the convoy as it left Barstow, with almost none hauling cargo. The bulk of the convoy was made up mostly of regular cars, many with an assortment of flags including American flags and anti-Joe Biden banners. John Elleege, who has been a trucker for 45 years, said he was planning to drive all the way to the US capital. “If my truck makes it, I’ll be there,” he said. Elleege sat in his big rig while people walked past thanking him. One woman asked him to autograph her American flag. In the face of the protests hundreds of troops have been approved to be deployed in Washington if needed, the Pentagon announced on Tuesday. The group coming from California said it wanted to “jumpstart the economy” and reopen the US. It’s unclear how big the protest will be; organizers say they expect thousands will join them. Some of the trucker groups are scheduled to arrive in time for Joe Biden’s State of the Union address next Tuesday, 1 March, with others arriving later. The trip from California will take 11 days and the organizers say they should reach Washington on Saturday, 5 March “but will not be going into DC proper”, according to a statement by the group. The Pentagon said on Tuesday it had approved 400 national guard troops from the District of Columbia, who would not carry weapons, to help at traffic posts from this Saturday through 7 March. About 50 large tactical vehicles were also approved to be placed at traffic posts. In addition, up to 300 national guard troops from outside of Washington were approved to come to the city to assist at traffic posts if needed. Brian Brase, a truck driver who is one of the organizers, said that, regardless of where the trucks stop, “we’re not going anywhere” until the group’s demands are met. Those demands include an end to Covid-19 vaccine and mask requirements. Most US states are already easing some restrictions. In California universal mask requirements were lifted last week while masks for vaccinated people are required only in high-risk areas such as public transit, schools and healthcare settings. Another convoy was also expected to leave Scranton, Pennsylvania – the president’s hometown – on Wednesday and arrive on the Beltway road system, formally known as Interstate 495, sometime during the afternoon. The Beltway goes through Maryland and Virginia outside the district. Organizer Bob Bolus of Scranton told Washington television station WJLA that his convoy has no intention of breaking laws or blocking traffic, but warned this could happen if their demands regarding pandemic mandates and the cost of fuel are not met. “They are not going to intimidate us and they are not going to threaten us. We’re the power, not them,” said Bolus, a trucker who owns a tow truck company. As of Wednesday morning local time, the convoy, which had not yet left Scranton, consisted of a tractor-trailer rig, a dump truck and a handful of pickup trucks. In Canada, pandemic-related protests choked streets in Ottawa for more than three weeks and blocked the busiest land crossing between Canada and the United States – the Ambassador Bridge connecting Windsor, Ontario, and Detroit – for six days. Prime Minister Justin Trudeau invoked rarely used emergency powers to end the protests, and Canadian police restored a sense of normalcy in Ottawa over the weekend. “We plan to stay a while and hope they don’t escalate it the way Trudeau did with his disgusting government overreach,” Brase said from Adelanto, California, where the convoy will begin, about 80 miles (130km) north-east of Los Angeles. Brase said he expected thousands, perhaps tens of thousands, would participate. Organisers bill the convoy as non-partisan, trucker-led, and supported by a wide range of ethnic minorities and religious faiths. However, as in Canada, significant elements of the protest appeared to attract a rightwing crowd. “I’m so proud people got off their couches for this,” said Sharon Mabon, a local resident. Mabon said she had no plans to join the convoy but showed up to recruit people to a local group with a “Patriot Precinct” project that she said aims to promote “America first” political candidates to local positions of power. Another resident, Janice Ferronato, helped Mabon hold up a sign from the group with the the words: “Take back our country one county at a time.” Nationwide, new Covid-19 cases and hospitalizations due to the coronavirus have plummeted from all-time highs hit a month ago, though nearly 2,000 people a day are still dying from the disease and the number of total deaths is closing in on 1 million since the pandemic began. Reuters contributed to this reportMore than 1,600 care home beds have been lost in just six months, as worsening staff shortages and the financial strain after two years of the Covid pandemic have caused a net loss of 134 homes in England. The deregistrations, which were not outweighed by new openings, came as staff shortages almost doubled, to 11% of the workforce, from August to the end of January, according to figures released on Wednesday by the Care Quality Commission. Three-quarters of care homes that responded to a survey also told the regulator they had been unable to recruit staff, the biggest problem being the mandatory Covid-19 vaccine policy, which was scrapped at the start of February. Obligatory double vaccination for social care staff was introduced on 11 November 2021 and about 40,000 staff left their jobs, sparking anger among care home operators who said the staff had been unfairly singled out for the mandate. Two-fifths of care homes now believe a lack of staff is having a negative impact on care. CQC figures show there was also a surge in incidents affecting the health, safety and welfare of residents in December, which were caused by staffing issues. The area with the biggest reduction in care home registrations was south-east England. The crisis in staffing has been compounded by Covid outbreaks in care homes, which have forced the organisations to stop admitting new residents. It has increased pressure on homecare services, which are also struggling with their own acute workforce crisis. In Cornwall the family of a man with advanced multiple sclerosis urgently seeking a care home place was told this week by officials that there were only five places available in the county and that about 200 people needed them, including those awaiting discharge from hospital. Shelagh Young said her brother, Bob Young, had been left for periods sitting in urine and excrement at his home, and was waitingfor a respite care placement. The 58-year-old had wanted to stay at home, previously declining a move to a home. He had had sporadic help from community nurses and a volunteer charity but on Monday told his sister this was “no kind of life”. She said she sympathised with the county officials who were trying to get him help, but they told her the shortages were linked to a deficit of care workers. Cornwall county council was contacted for comment. Vic Rayner, the chief executive of the National Care Forum, which represents not-for-profit care operators, said the CQC figures had to be a wake-up call. “We have been warning about this staffing shortage for months now and this data may be the tip of the iceberg. Our members have been telling us that it is proving harder and harder to recruit staff, which is exacerbating the workforce pressures,” she said. “There is an urgent need to think strategically about the social care needed within communities, and to plan and resource the social care workforce in a way that ensures that people can exercise their right to high-quality social care when and where they need it.” Kate Terroni, the CQC chief inspector of adult social care, told the CQC board that after nearly 1,900 inspections since the start of December, the area in need of most improvement was found to be infection control. Families of care home residents are now also concerned that lateral flow tests for visitors to the establishments will no longer be free of charge. The Rights for Residents campaign group described the change as an immoral “pay per view” policy and are demanding reinstatement of the free tests. CQC reported that it also investigated allegations of blanket visiting bans at 82 homes in recent months, in breach of government guidelines.The actor Anna Karen, who has died in a house fire aged 85, was already appearing in a TV sitcom, Wild, Wild Women, as one of the workers in a millinery sweatshop, in 1969 when she was cast in another, in the role for which she is best remembered – Olive Rudge in the bawdy but hugely popular On the Buses. The writing team of Ronald Wolfe and Ronald Chesney, who created both programmes, conceived Olive as the dowdy, put-upon wife of the idle Arthur (played by Michael Robbins). They would appear alongside Reg Varney as Olive’s brother, the bus driver Stan Butler, Bob Grant as his conductor, Jack, Stephen Lewis as their boss, Inspector “Blakey” Blake, and Doris Hare as Olive and Stan’s domineering mother. (Hare was the original choice for the role but was out of the country when the programme began, so was replaced for the first series by Cicely Courtneidge.) Halfway through the run of Wild, Wild Women, Karen fell ill with flu, but continued filming. “Ronald Chesney and Ronald Wolfe happened to be at rehearsals,” she told the journalist Richard Webber. “I felt and looked dreadful, but they said I was ideal for Olive. “The writers wanted her to look a mess, so I didn’t wear make-up, wore a wig that made my head look flat and had padding around my stomach to look plump. I based her on someone I knew in South Africa who was always desperate for men. She was terribly insecure, which applied to Olive, too.” The humour was based around Olive’s inability to cook and mentions of her husband’s “operation” as she weathered a barrage of misogynistic jokes from him. Her suggestions of an “early night” were invariably rebuffed. Although panned by the critics, On the Buses was an instant success, attracting up to 16 million viewers and running for seven series and 74 episodes, and ending in 1973 with Olive and Arthur’s divorce. There were also three spin-off films, On the Buses, which was the biggest British box office hit of 1971, Mutiny On the Buses (1972) and Holiday On the Buses (1973). Curiously, the part of Olive was transferred to another workplace sitcom, The Rag Trade (1977-78), when Chesney and Wolfe revived their 1960s hit about a modern-day sweatshop, Fenner’s Fashions, with Peter Jones and Miriam Karlin reprising their roles as Harold Fenner, the boss, and Paddy Fleming, the “militant” shop steward. Later, Karen appeared in the soap EastEnders as Aunt Sal – Sallie Martin – sister of Peggy Mitchell (Barbara Windsor) and aunt to Grant and Phil Mitchell (Ross Kemp and Steve McFadden), on and off from 1996 to 2017, usually turning up at family weddings and parties. Anna was born Ann McCall in Durban, South Africa, to John McCall, an accountant, and Muriel (nee Harrison). From deciding at the age of six that she wanted to be a vet, she switched her ambitions to acting after seeing the 1944 film National Velvet. She trained for three years at the South African National Theatre before moving to Britain when she was 16 with her mother and sister following the death of her father. When her family continued on their travels, she enrolled at Lamda in London to train as an actor. To fund herself through drama school, she performed as a striptease artist at the Panama Club and other London venues. “It was here I learned more about stage timings and entertaining a live audience than anyone can teach you at drama school,” she said. “I absorbed everything and even went on tour with brothers Syd and Max Harrison with their pantomime stage act.” She and other strippers had to adopt names from “the continent” and she changed hers to Anna Karen to sound Scandinavian. She then lived for several years in Italy, where her first husband, Dick Smart, whom she married in 1957, was training to be an opera singer. She returned to Britain when the marriage broke up, rode elephants in a Christmas circus and appeared in the 1960 naturist film Nudist Memories. Karen worked with Syd and Max Harrison again in the film comedy The Sandwich Man (1966), starring Michael Bentine, and had a bit part as a neighbour in the director Ken Loach’s first feature film, Poor Cow (1967). Then, she was cast in the film comedy Carry On Camping (1969) as one of the finishing school “girls” seen in a catfight with Windsor and in the keep-fit scene. This led to a lifelong friendship with Windsor – Karen played Maude alongside her in Wild, Wild Women. She also had a small role in Carry On Loving (1970), minus Windsor, as a newlywed who has a plate of jelly pushed down the front of her dress. Fame from On the Buses brought Karen a starring role in the TV sitcom Troubles and Strife (1985-86) as the gin-swilling church caretaker Rosita Pearlman, a power behind the throne at St Anselm’s parish church. She also played the RatCave receptionist, Maureen McConkey, in Roland Rat: The Series (1986). On stage, she starred in national tours of the Ray Cooney farce Not Now Darling (1974), the Nell Dunn play Steaming (1984) and the Michael Frayn comedy Noises Off (1991), as well as appearing in many summer seasons and pantomimes, and directing Theatre in Education productions at the Theatre Royal, Stratford East. In 1967, Karen married the actor Terry Duggan, who worked with her many times on screen and stage; he died in 2008. She is survived by Gloria, Duggan’s daughter from his previous marriage. • Anna Karen (Ann Harrison McCall), actor, born 19 September 1936; died 22 February 2022 • This article was amended on 24 February 2022, to correct Anna Karen’s maiden name, and to add the names of her parents and her first husband.Two men have been charged with sending offensive or menacing messages to Angela Rayner, Labour’s deputy leader. Greater Manchester police said Stuart Kelly, 53, from Halifax, and Michael McGrath, 71, from Sheffield, were charged with sending an offensive, indecent, obscene or menacing message to a woman in Tameside, Greater Manchester. Kelly was charged over telephone calls made on 15 October last year to Rayner – the police statement identified her only as female and aged 42. McGrath was charged in connection with an email sent to Rayner on 16 October. Both were bailed ahead of an appearance at Westminster magistrates’ court on 17 March. Rayner, who is the MP for Ashton-under-Lyne, is a shadow Cabinet Office minister and shadow secretary of state for the future of work. Last month, Greater Manchester police said they had arrested a 68-year-old man in Brighton as part of the same investigation into alleged abusive messages targeting Rayner. At the time the force said it was the fourth arrest, with one man previously having been charged and given a suspended prison sentence. A spokesman for Rayner said last month: “We are working with the police to ensure that the perpetrators of these crimes are brought to justice and Angela would like to thank the police for their work during these investigations. “Abuse and threats of this nature don’t just have an impact on Angela but also on her family, her children and her staff, who are on the receiving end of these communications.”Russia’s defence minister, Sergei Shoigu, the commanders-in-chief of the Russian air force and Black Sea fleet, leading state “propagandists” and 351 Duma deputies are expected to be identified in EU sanctions that were approved on Wednesday. The list of names, which has not been officially confirmed, would go further than those announced by the US and a significant distance beyond Boris Johnson’s Russia sanctions. Ministers approved the sanctions on Wednesday, but the final list of names will not be published until later in the day. The EU will impose asset freezes and travel bans on 23 people, three banks and a notorious internet “troll factory” in St Petersburg, in response to the Russian president, Vladimir Putin’s decision to recognise the self-proclaimed republics in Donetsk and Luhansk as independent states. The bloc is also expected to sanction 351 members of the Russian state Duma that voted for recognition of the two territories. The Russian government will also be further restricted in its ability to raise money on EU financial markets. EU officials are drawing up measures to restrict trade with the two Russian-controlled territories in eastern Ukraine, mirroring earlier sanctions on Crimea in 2014. EU leaders are expected to discuss further sanctions at a special summit on Thursday evening in Brussels. “Everyone seems onboard for the adoption of sanctions,” an EU diplomat said. At the top of the sanctions list is Shoigu, because he is “ultimately responsible for any military action against Ukraine”, states the draft list seen by the Guardian. He is joined by Anton Vaino, Putin’s chief of staff, who “plays an active role in decision making”, as well as Igor Osipov, the commander-in-chief of the Black Sea fleet, and Sergei Surovikin, commander-in-chief of Russian aerospace forces. Other top officials include the deputy prime minister and chair of state-owned VTB bank, Dmitry Grigorenko, and Igor Shuvalov, the chair of Russia’s state development bank, VEB, which plays an important role in funding its defence sector. The EU is also targeting Russian “propagandists”, including the foreign ministry spokesperson, Maria Zakharova and head of the RT channel, Margarita Simonyan, both known for their strident anti-western rhetoric. Vladimir Solovyov, the pro-Kremlin presenter of the Russia One channel, also features. Other notable figures include Yevgeny Prigozhin, described in US sanctions as the founder and unofficial head of the Wagner mercenary group, which is already subject to EU sanctions for what Brussels calls “responsibility for serious human rights abuses” and extrajudicial killings in Ukraine, Syria, Libya, the Central African Republic and other countries. Prigozhin, known as Putin’s chef, finances the Internet Research Agency, which has also been added to the EU sanctions list. Based in St Petersburg, the IRA is better known as the “troll factory”, where bloggers work around the clock to flood the global internet with pro-Putin and anti-western views. Prigozhin’s mother and wife, who own companies with links to him, are also on the draft list. The sanctioned banks are Bank Rossiya, believed by EU and western officials to be the personal bank for Putin and many of his officials, as well as Promsvyazbank and Vnesheconombank, both considered by EU officials to be instructed personally by the Russian president, with a key role in financing Russia’s defence sector. The new measure constitutes the largest number of people added to the EU’s Russia sanctions, which currently cover 193 people and 48 companies linked to the annexation of Crimea and destabilisation of Ukraine. Many Russian Duma deputies are already subject to EU sanctions. EU leaders have been invited to an emergency summit on Thursday, where they will hold further talks on sanctions. “Expect some more discussions on the broader big bang sanctions package later this week,” said the EU official. Valdis Dombrovski, executive vice-president of the European Commission, said a second package of sanctions, including export controls, would be launched in the event of Russian troops moving beyond the Ukrainian territory held by Russian-backed separatists. “If there is further Russian aggression and further incursion into Ukraine territory we are willing to step up our response also in terms of sanctions,” Dombrovskis told Reuters. Asked what such a stepping up would mean, he said: “It would concern economic sanctions in the area of trade, for example export controls.” EU ministers unanimously approved the broad outlines of the existing package on Monday, after intense discussions about how to deter Putin. A few countries, notably Lithuania, wanted to hit the Kremlin with the strongest possible sanctions immediately; big member states France, Germany and Italy, however, argued for a more gradual approach. “We want to have the possibility for deterrence so we could respond if there is further action by Russia,” the EU foreign policy chief, Josep Borrell, said following the ministerial meeting on Monday. “We said clearly that there will be new sanctions against Russia. We have an arsenal of possible actions. We didn’t want to do everything at once, because I think we have to monitor events as they occur.” Sanctions, Borrell said, would cause economic damage, but had their limits. “Sanctions don’t have miraculous effects,” he said. “It’s not like a red light where everybody stops.” Russia has said it will respond to any sanctions and its ambassador to the US, Anatoly Antonov, has claimed that any sanctions will hit global financial and energy markets.Like all great children’s storytellers or illustrators, the Polish-born artist Jan Pieńkowski instinctively understood that fear is an unavoidable and necessary part of childhood – and that how a child’s emotions are contained and held is crucial when it comes to an individual’s learning to operate in the world. Pieńkowski, who died on Saturday, used fear to great effect in his works: one of his early books with the writer Joan Aiken, with whom he had already collaborated on her story A Necklace of Raindrops, was a collection of central and eastern European fairy tales with many fantastical and terrifying elements, not least in his pictures of Baba Yaga, the witch who lives in a house that stands on chicken legs and flies about in her pestle and mortar – a character who was also a scary presence at Little Bulb’s children’s Christmas show, Wolf Witch Giant Fairy, at the Royal Opera House, London, last year. Pieńkowski was no stranger to fear – real, terrible fear. As a child in rural Poland, the son of a country squire, his existence had at first been idyllic and, from a 21st-century, post-industrial perspective, almost impossibly distant (the farm grew its own flax for cloth, which would be handspun before being woven). The coachman’s wife would tell him scary witch stories and then stop on a cliffhanger – only continuing when he’d drunk a hated cupful of boiled milk. But then came the war. The family moved to Warsaw. Frightening stories became frightening reality. He witnessed awful things in the city: “I have blotted out the screams. The noise has been obliterated,” he told Kirsty Young on Desert Island Discs in 2009. But as an adult he could never bear “shrill noises”, or screaming or people stampeding. The “safe fear” contained in children’s stories was still something to be cherished and, his case, created. After the family moved to the UK, and Pieńkowski had studied classics and English at Cambridge, he turned again to his first love of drawing. Meg and Mog, the bestselling books he made with Helen Nicoll, were, admittedly, not very frightening, with their splendidly hapless witch heroine and her endless failed spells. But Haunted House, his wildly inventive 1979 pop-up book, really was, with its yellow-eyed cats peeping malevolently from roof-spaces, its haunted four-poster beds, and its skeletons in, literally, cupboards. There was also a great deal of humour: an octopus doing the washing up, a UFO lurking outside the window, and a crocodile in the bath. Funny and frightening were not so far apart – just as in, say, the dark pleasures of Heinrich Hoffmann’s Shock-headed Peter, in which Little Suck-a-Thumb has his offending digit cut off by a shears-wielding tailor, or indeed Edward Gorey’s various alphabets (though some parents may regard “A is for Amy who fell down the stairs, B is for Basil assaulted by bears” to be rather more of an adult than a child-appropriate pleasure). “What was nice about being frightened,” he told Young, “was that I was in a safe place. When you’re in bed and your father or mother is reading you a story you can be as petrified as you like – because you know you are safe.”Describing the manner in which Britain has been cravenly complicit in the laundering of Russian oligarchs’ wealth, one expert witness told the foreign affairs select committee in 2018: “We have had a welcome mat out to money – it has been financial investment as opposed to industrial investment over the past 20 years. We have had a regulatory stance that welcomed that money.” After accumulating a huge body of similar evidence, the MPs produced a report entitled “Moscow’s Gold: Russian Corruption in the UK”. Published in the wake of the novichok poisoning of Sergei Skripal in Salisbury, it starkly concluded that President Vladimir Putin and his allies hid and laundered corrupt assets in London, drawing upon them when required. Nothing of any substance was done. A subsequent “Russia Report” of 2020, published by the intelligence and security committee, judged that oligarchs had become a corrupting force in British public life, using their money to make connections and exert undue influence. Again, the government response has been to delay and prevaricate. As Vladimir Putin’s troops menace eastern Ukraine, and the world contemplates the possibility of a catastrophic war on European soil, the foot-dragging is inexcusable. Last week’s decision to shut down the so-called golden visa route for super-rich investors was welcome. But the exposure of the beneficiaries of dirty money already invested in Britain, and sweeping sanctions, should be a central part of any strategy to make Mr Putin realise the price of his aggression. “Londongrad” – a damning nickname which has been around for well over a decade – must finally be dismantled as a hub of Russian soft power and a safe conduit for Kremlin cronyism. The foot-dragging tells its own, unedifying story. Turning a blind eye to the dubious provenance of fabulous wealth, Britain has allowed Russian money to oil the wheels of politics, commerce and philanthropy, and make one of the world’s richest cities even richer. The anti-corruption organisation, Transparency International, estimates that more than £5bn of property bought in the UK has been acquired with wealth of suspicious provenance, one fifth of it from Russia. Functioning as an army of discreet butlers, a network of well-paid enablers have grown rich themselves by ensuring a congenial and accommodating financial environment. Since Boris Johnson became prime minister, the Conservative party has received at least £2m from donors with Russian links. It has benefited from the considerable generosity of figures such as Lubov Chernukin, now a British citizen and the wife of a former finance minister under Vladimir Putin; Ms Chernukin’s donations led to dinner with Theresa May and a game of tennis with Boris Johnson and David Cameron. The broader question of the timing, content and final scope of sanctions on the Putin regime is complex. Boris Johnson miscalculated in starting so small in his statement to the House of Commons on Tuesday. But there is a case for holding some measures in reserve as leverage, to be used in eleventh hour diplomatic efforts to dissuade Mr Putin from all-out invasion. In the event of further military aggression from Russia, European nations dependent on Russian energy have an invidious decision to make regarding how much pain they are willing to inflict on their own economies. The decision by the German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, to freeze Nord Stream 2 was a welcome early show of commitment on that front, as was a new tranche of sanctions unveiled in Brussels. Calling time on “Londongrad” should be an easy call to make. On Wednesday, in prime minister’s questions, Sir Keir Starmer demanded an end to an “era of oligarch impunity” in Britain. It is past time for this to happen.The new chief executive of Barclays, CS Venkatakrishnan, will know what shareholders want from him: decent profits and fewer run-ins with regulators. Predecessor, Jes Staley, made progress on the former front but failed on the latter: he somehow survived a hefty fine for trying to unmask a whistleblower but was felled by the continuing regulatory probe into his characterisation of his relationship with Jeffrey Epstein. Wednesday’s full-year report represented a promising inheritance for Venkatakrishnan. Pre-tax profits for 2021 hit a record £8.4bn and demonstrated that, for big banks at least, the pandemic is over. A total of £653m of credit impairments were written back. Meanwhile, return on tangible equity – a better measure of a bank’s financial performance – was 13.4%, the best in years, and every division achieved the desired double digits. Capital ratios were comfortably above target. At 6p, the dividend is almost back to pre-Covid levels and there was a spare £1bn to spray at buying back shares. On the requirement to avoid excitement, Venkatakrishnan sounds the part. He ducked for cover when invited to comment on Staley’s £22m-worth of frozen share awards and he signalled zero change of strategic direction – hardly surprising since he helped design the original plan. So plain sailing? Well, no. The stock market clearly still worries that Barclays will find new ways to disappoint, which is not an unreasonable view on past evidence. The deficit in the credibility ledger is a share price that, even after Wednesday’s 3% gain, stands well below book value; 196p plays 292p. Even NatWest, half-owned by the state, has a narrower discount these days. Put another way, Barclays’ “transatlantic” model of combining plain-vanilla UK retail and business lending with high-thrills Wall Street investment banking is still not universally trusted. Purely domestic banks just look more predictable. Staley, to be fair, made a better case for diversity in earnings and geography than his own predecessor-but-one, Bob Diamond, ever did. But Venkatakrishnan is the chief executive who will have to seal the deal. Interest rates are rising, which is a helpful backdrop for lenders, and Barclays’ investment bank has been redesigned to make it less of a naked bet on bond-trading volumes. The definition of a par score for Venkatakrishnan would be several years in a row of double-digit returns on equity. Easier said than done, but he has the chance to be the boring boss Barclays has been seeking for two decades. Aston Martin looks to jump start recovery Lawrence Stroll’s fan club should have listened harder when he said his intended “transformation” of Aston Martin Lagonda would take four to five years to perform. High hopes drove the shares as high as £21 soon after the rescue of the luxury carmaker in late-2020, but the price is now back roughly where it started at £10. There were few unexpected horrors within the £76.5m of operating losses for 2021, or £214m at the pre-tax level, but the gap between the two figures points to the major worry. Aston Martin, even in refinanced form, is still leaking substantial sums in interest payments on its borrowings. Net debt was £892m at the end of December and, worst of all, the company is still suffering the pauper’s interest rates agreed by old management in the dark days when corporate survival was in doubt. The aim is to achieve positive cashflow in 2023, which is probably the earliest that borrowing terms could be negotiated. The £2.5m-a-pop Valkyrie “hypercar” is built for speed; the corporate self-help programme wasn’t. Near miss: when Gazprom nearly bought Centrica As we inspect those long lists of Russian companies on the UK stock market and wonder how they all got here, here’s a tale from the archives that helps to explain. Back in 2006, there was a serious debate in Westminster as to whether Gazprom, Russia’s state-controlled energy giant, should be allowed to buy Centrica, owner of British Gas and a company that, as now, owns a significant stake in the UK’s fleet of nuclear power stations. Gazprom kicked things off in February of that year when one of its senior executives said a bid was being “analysed and investigated”. Centrica’s shares shot up 25% in a day. Even come April, the story had legs. The FT reported that “Tony Blair [prime minister at the time] has ruled out any possibility that UK ministers might actively seek to block a future bid by Russia’s Gazprom for Centrica.” The priority, apparently, was to liberalise European energy markets and face down “economic nationalism”. In the event, of course, a bid never materialised – for which we can give thanks. The political naivety was extraordinary.Boris Johnson has told ministers he is determined to give his full version of the Downing Street parties scandal in public, including his belief that there is a coordinated campaign to oust him. The prime minister has told cabinet allies he believes the police will clear him of any legal wrongdoing, the Guardian has been told. He is said to be frustrated that he is constrained by the criminal investigation and intends to set the record straight when it finishes. The prime minister has repeatedly told journalists in interviews he will have “something meaningful to say about this” when the Met investigation ends. It comes as Whitehall sources said multiple staffers had filled in Metropolitan police questionnaires stating only “no comment” in answer to questions posed as part of Operation Hillman, the inquiry into a dozen alleged events in breach of lockdown rules. There is growing nervousness among Downing Street staff that they will be handed fines while Johnson escapes without a fixed penalty notice (FPN). Some privately confessed to having little faith in the police investigation and said colleagues were likely to simply write “no comment” on the Metropolitan police questionnaire to avoid admitting guilt. Not all can afford expensive private legal advice as Johnson is expected to have received and are instead relying on pro bono help. The prime minister returned his Met questionnaire last week – one of more than 80 questionnaires reportedly set to staff members and aides. The Met has confirmed the number is more than 50. Johnson received external legal advice before submitting the questionnaire, a blank version of which was leaked on Tuesday. It revealed questions were asked under police caution, making Johnson the first prime minister to have been questioned under caution. A fresh batch of questionnaires were issued by Scotland Yard this week, suggesting Operation Hillman could continue into March. Whitehall insiders said they fear the Met investigation’s conclusions could come close to the May local elections, potentially in the “purdah” period. They warned this may further prolong the period before Sue Gray’s report into the parties was published in full. As well as asking the recipient to confirm their attendance at a specific event, the leaked questionnaire shows recipients were asked: “What was the purpose of your participation in that gathering?” and “Did you interact with, or undertake any activity with, other persons present at the gathering? If yes, please provide details.” Recipients were offered the opportunity to give a “lawful exception” or “reasonable excuse” for attending. The Met investigation into 12 social events, several of them attended by the prime minister, was triggered by evidence uncovered by Gray. Johnson’s allies are convinced he has a justification for attending events that took place at No 10, which is his home as well as his workplace. He initially denied reports that parties had been held in Downing Street, telling MPs: “All guidance was followed completely.” Many MPs and ministers have privately expressed the view that Johnson would probably face – and potentially lose – a vote of no confidence if he were to receive a fixed penalty notice for breaching the rules. But with the prime minister’s fate currently in limbo, one cabinet minister said on Tuesday that they believed enough doubt had been sowed among MPs to ensure the prime minister’s position was safe, particularly given the conflict in Ukraine. The minister said they believed there were now no more than 30 letters of no confidence submitted to the chair of the 1922 Committee, Graham Brady, with 54 needed to trigger a vote of MPs. A leading MP critical of Johnson said they believed rebels had lost their moment. “We have been poorly organised in the last few weeks, there’s no question,” they said. The MP, who has submitted a letter of no confidence, said they remained confident that at least 54 MPs would submit letters should Johnson be fined. “But Downing Street’s operation has succeeded in moving the goalposts,” they said. “Now colleagues are only prepared to move if there is a criminal offence. A month ago, it was if Sue Gray’s report was sufficiently damning. Now even some of my most critical colleagues are prepared to say in the WhatsApp group that it’s no longer an issue of concern for constituents.”The Rugby Football Union is banking on supporters to self-police and stay away from Twickenham on Saturday if they have a confirmed case of Covid-19, or any symptoms, with no plans to check vaccine passes with restrictions in England to be lifted on Thursday. The match on Saturday will be the first major international sporting event in England since restrictions were lifted with more than 80,000 supporters due at Twickenham. It will also be the first Six Nations match at Twickenham at full capacity since the same fixture two years ago, which took place just days before the UK was plunged into its first lockdown and with England’s subsequent trip to Italy already postponed. Any fears around the fixture on Saturday will be heightened by the fact that England’s victory against South Africa in November – the last Test to take place at Twickenham – was initially highlighted as a possible epicentre for the UK’s Omicron outbreak and subsequent rise in cases. During the autumn, the RFU conducted spot-checks for Covid vaccine passes – which all spectators were required to have – but from Thursday, the government has decreed that anyone with a confirmed case of Covid-19 in England is no longer legally required to self-isolate. The government continues to advise that anyone with a positive case stays at home but in the absence of a legal requirement, that advice could effectively be ignored. An RFU spokesperson said: “With the lifting of government restrictions, we will not be carrying out mandatory NHS covid pass checks. However, we expect anyone with a confirmed case of covid or with covid symptoms to protect others and not attend the game.” The RFU’s guidance for supporters also includes wearing a cloth face covering at all times as well as following good hygiene practices at all times in line with the latest government and public health guidance. Supporters with symptoms, or a positive covid case, will be able to sell their tickets via the RFU’s exchange programme until 5pm on Friday. Meanwhile, the England squad will still be subject to existing Covid protocols for the remainder of the competition despite the lifting of restrictions. During the championship the Six Nations organisers are responsible for introducing uniform protocols and given different competing countries have different levels of restrictions it is not seen as viable to relax the measures imposed on Eddie Jones’s squad.The EU has approved asset freezes and travel bans on various Russian people and entities in response to Vladimir Putin’s decision to recognise the self-proclaimed republics in Donetsk and Luhansk as independent states. The list of those targeted has not been officially confirmed, but here are five of the most prominent names the Guardian has seen on a draft list. Sergei Shoigu Russia’s minister of defence has overseen the military buildup on Ukraine’s borders and would manage the war effort if Russia chooses to launch a wider invasion. He is a rare member of Putin’s inner circle who did not serve in KGB, military or intelligence circles. He served as minister for emergency situations from 1991 to 2012, before being appointed defence minister by Putin with the task of modernising the Russian military. Alongside Putin’s senior aides, Shoigu has been involved in key decisions, such as the annexation of Crimea, because of his oversight of the military and the aggressive GRU intelligence agency. He also has direct access to Putin, including during their regular hunting and fishing trips together in Siberia. Shoigu is from Tuva, a Buddhist republic in Siberia that borders Mongolia. Yevgeny Prigozhin The St Petersburg-based businessman has been dubbed “Putin’s chef” because of the restaurants and catering businesses where he made his fortune in the 1990s. Since then his business interests have expanded into government contracts and other endeavours, allegedly including a troll factory, a private military company, and global influence operations that have landed him on numerous sanctions lists. According to the US Treasury Department, Prigozhin is the Russian financier of the Internet Research Agency, a network of websites and paid trolls that allegedly tried to influence the 2016 US presidential election in favour of Donald Trump. Prigozhin is “also believed to be the financier behind [the] private military company Wagner, a designated Russian Ministry of Defence proxy force,” the Treasury department said. The company’s alleged activities in Ukraine, Syria, Sudan and Libya have “generated insecurity and incited violence against innocent civilians”, the Treasury Department said. Igor Shuvalov Igor Shuvalov is a Russian politician and businessman who is being sanctioned as the head of Vnesheconombank (VEB), the Russian financial institution that is a key source of funding for the Kremlin’s priority projects. Those have included the Sochi Olympics, among others. Shuvalov was previously a first deputy prime minister in both Dmitry Medvedev and Vladimir Putin’s cabinets before he left government and was appointed chairman of VEB in 2018. He was previously one of the most senior liberal figures in government until they were largely ousted in favour of Putin’s security hawks as his dominant advisers. Shuvalov, who was seen as a close Putin ally nearly a decade ago, has owned property in London and was targeted for his wealth by the jailed opposition politician Alexei Navalny, who demanded a police investigation. Maria Zakharova As tensions over Ukraine reached fever pitch last week, Russia’s foreign ministry spokesperson Maria Zakharova issued a “request to the mass disinformation outlets of the USA and Britain – Bloomberg, the New York Times, the Sun etc – announce the schedule of our ‘invasions’ for the coming year. I’d like to plan my vacation.” It was a typically mocking response from the chief spokesperson of Russia’s diplomatic service. Zakharova is a career diplomat but isn’t very diplomatic. She has described a previous US ambassador as “incompetent”, said D-day’s significance should not be exaggerated on the 75th anniversary of the landings, and joked about sending a journalist asking about human rights abuses in Chechyna to the region. A graduate of the prestigious Moscow State Institute of International Relations, who speaks English and Chinese, she is fêted in Russian state media for her combative style, evident in her torrent of Facebook posts attacking western governments. The EU has called her “a central figure of government propaganda”. Margarita Simonyan Margarita Simonyan was just 25 when she was chosen to be the first editor of Russia Today, the state channel broadcasting in English and other languages, later described by the French president, Emmanuel Macron, as an agency of “lying propaganda”. Now known simply as RT, it has offered its small number of viewers in the UK guests from Jeremy Corbyn to Nigel Farage, conspiracy theories and baseless claims about “genocide” in Ukraine. Simonyan, now editor-in-chief of the RT network, is said to have a direct line to the Kremlin on her desk and was given an award by Putin for “objectivity” after the annexation of Crimea. She greeted reports of her imminent addition to sanctions lists with mockery. “Maria Zakharova and I took out our handkerchiefs,” she said, adding it was time to have “a little cry”.Restoring parliament without a full decant of MPs could take up to 76 years, while the bill for repairs would stretch to £22bn, a new report by the body set up to investigate how the project should be handled has found. MPs, peers and senior parliamentary officials are still split on the best way to proceed with extensive works to the Victorian building given safety concerns about crumbling masonry, the lack of protection against flooding and decades-old electrical wiring. Under the most recent plan, MPs were expected to move to Richmond House, the former home of the Department of Health, while the Palace of Westminster – with a floor plate the size of 16 football pitches and containing 1,100 rooms, 100 staircases and 3 miles of passageways – is being restored. However, the idea was abandoned last year. Alternatives were drawn up and presented to the House of Commons Commission, which were released on Wednesday. The cheapest plan involved a full decant of the Palace of Westminster, for between 12 and 20 years, with the work costing in the region of £7bn to £13bn. With MPs elsewhere for much of the time, the report estimated the works would take between 19 and 28 years. If MPs maintained a “continued presence” in the palace, where “all essential and highly desirable functions could be accommodated but in more condensed space”, the report found that the work would cost more and take longer. In one scenario, business would remain within the Commons chamber “until such a point is reached whereby all operations are transferred to another space within the Palace of Westminster (assumed to be the House of Lords chamber), to allow the rest of the work to proceed”. It estimated this would increase restoration costs to between £9.5bn and £18.5bn, taking 26 to 43 years. And in a third possible scenario, which would cost the most and take the longest, business would remain within the chamber “throughout the entirety of the restoration and renewal programme of works” with “no transfer”. It is estimated this would cost between £11bn and £22bn and take in the region of 46 to 76 years. This was conditional on recess being extended to scrap the three-week return for MPs between their summer and party conference breaks, so that there was no parliamentary business for four months, from mid-July to mid-October. The figures do not take into account inflation, meaning the true cost over several decades would likely be billions more expensive, given compound interest. The report was not well received by the Commons Commission, and led to it voting last month to bring the sponsor body for the works in-house. One of the plans being considered by senior Commons officials is to use boats to deliver materials and remove detritus via the River Thames. This would help minimise disruption around Westminster, but also make it harder for MPs, peers and their staff to operate as normal on the current site. Garry Graham, deputy general secretary of the union Prospect, said a full decant was “the only credible plan”, and would be cheaper, quicker and safer. He added: “We cannot allow the faux emotional attachments of some to get in the way of the restoration off the house being achieved safely, expeditiously and in a way that recognises the concerns of staff and achieves value for money for the taxpayer. “I am sure that will be fully supported by the new minister for civil service efficiency. To come to any other conclusion would be perverse.”Police in Canada have released footage of axe wielding attackers as they investigate a “calculated and organised” night-time raid on a remote work camp. Up to 20 people are believed to have attacked Coastal GasLink’s pipeline construction camp last week on Marten Forest Service Road in British Columbia. Dressed all in white, the attackers smashed vehicles with axes, including one vehicle with a security guard inside. “I heard smashes on the back tailgate and when I looked in my mirror I could see one of them was holding an axe … it was terrifying,” said the employee, Trevor, in a release from the company. The attackers spray painted the vehicle’s window and set off what was believed to be a flare gun. The group then hijacked heavy machinery, using it to destroy buildings and a drill pad. The company estimated that the cost of the damage was in millions of dollars. The few workers at the camp were escorted to vehicles by security guards and driven to safety. No injuries were reported in the attack. When police arrived, they found the service road blocked by trees, tar-covered stumps and a wooden board with spikes. Police say people in the forest threw smoke bombs and fire-lit sticks at them as they approached the camp. “Because of the nightfall and the actual booby traps that were set up, and one of our members actually getting injured … the attackers just ended up disappearing into the forest,” Sascha Baldinger, a sergeant in the Royal Canadian Mounted Police, said on Saturday. No suspects have been identified and no group has claimed responsibility. The location of the attack, about 37 miles south of Houston, BC, is the site of a pipeline project that has attracted sustained protest over the last three years. The C$6.6bn pipeline project, running for more than 400 miles, will carry natural gas to the province’s western coast. A third of the pipeline passes through the traditional lands of the Wet’suwet’en First Nation. CGL says its project is supported by 20 First Nation band councils and five of the six elected band councils in the Wet’suwet’en nation. But Wet’suwet’en hereditary chiefs have fiercely opposed the project and say the band leadership does not have the authority to negotiate such agreements. Opposition to the project by Indigenous land defenders has led to police raids on the protest camps in previous years. But the RCMP say there are not any links to the demonstrations against the pipeline. “Although there have been confrontations in the past and there has been active protest in the area, at this point we have no linkages to those events and this current event,” said Baldinger.A decision by the US supreme court to hear an appeal by a Colorado web designer who refuses to serve same-sex couples has sparked outrage among LGBTQ+ advocacy groups who fear a major setback for anti-discriminatory laws across the country. On Tuesday, the supreme court agreed to hear the case of Lorie Smith, a Christian web designer based in Denver who plans to expand her services to wedding website designs. Smith has said that due to her Christian beliefs, she will decline any requests from same-sex couples to design a wedding website. Smith wants to post a statement on her website regarding her beliefs; however, doing so will violate Colorado’s anti-discrimination law. As a result, Smith argues that the law is a violation of her religious rights and free speech. Although the supreme court has said that it will only be looking at the free speech aspect of the case, many LGBTQ+ advocacy groups fear that a potential ruling in favor of Smith will overturn anti-discrimination laws that protect LGBTQ+ customers. Jennifer Pizer, senior counsel at the civil rights organization Lambda Legal, criticized the case, saying in a statement: “We are witness yet again to the unrelenting anti-LGBTQ crusade being waged by self-described Christian fundamentalist legal groups aiming to chip away at the hard-won gains of LGBTQ people by carving out swaths of territory where discrimination can flourish.” She urged the supreme court justices to do what they “should have done three and a half years ago in Masterpiece Cakeshop v Colorado Civil Rights Commission”, referring to a case the court heard in 2018 in which a Colorado baker, Jack Phillips, refused to bake a cake for two men who were getting married. The supreme court said the Colorado civil rights commission had acted with anti-religious bias against Phillips and ruled in his favor. Pizer said: “The supreme court here has the opportunity to … reaffirm and apply longstanding constitutional precedent that our freedoms of religion and speech are not a license to discriminate when operating a business. It is time once and for all to put to rest these businesses’ attempts to undermine the civil rights of LGBTQ people in the name of religion.” One Colorado, an LGBTQ+ advocacy organization, also criticized the case. In a statement, Nadine Bridges, the organization’s executive director, said: “Just because a business serves a customer doesn’t mean they share or endorse everything that customer believes in. The best way to respect those differences is to ensure that all Coloradans are able to go about our day-to-day lives free from discrimination.” Garett Royer, One Colorado’s deputy director, said a potential ruling in favor of Smith would affect numerous communities, not only LGBTQ+ people. “A decision by the supreme court allowing discrimination would have implications for our country that reach far beyond LGBTQ people. It could threaten our longstanding anti-discrimination protections. Coloradans have shown time and time again that our state is open to all and these efforts do not represent our values.” The organization went on to say that if the supreme court chooses to allow “creative businesses”` to be exempt from anti-discriminatory laws, “any business owner that provides custom services or products could claim a right to violate anti-discrmination laws as they apply to others, not just LGBTQ people.” Alliance Defending Freedom, a conservative Christian advocacy group, will be representing Smith in court. The group, which has been labeled as an anti-LGBTQ+ hate group by the Southern Poverty Law Center, said in a statement that the Colorado anti-discrimination law “censors and coerces the speech of creative professionals whose religious beliefs do not conform to state orthodoxy”. Smith’s attorneys have asked the supreme court to reconsider whether it should overrule Employment Division v Smith, a precedent set in 1990 when the court ruled that generally applicable laws not targeting specific religious practices do not violate the first amendment. The ruling has been a pain point for some conservative Christians and some justices, who argue that it fails to offer enough religious protection. In 2020, Justice Clarence Thomas, Samuel Alito Jr and Neil Gorsuch, the supreme court’s most conservative members, said it was time for the ruling to be overruled. “Smith was wrongly decided,” Alito wrote. “As long as it remains on the books, it threatens fundamental freedom. And while precedent should not lightly be cast aside, the court’s error in Smith should now be corrected.” The supreme court, controlled 6-3 by conservative justices, is expected to hear the case in the fall.Good morning. A senior US defence official says Russia has moved nearly 100% of its troops into a position needed for an invasion as the UN chief warns: “The world is facing a moment of peril.” Ukraine has urged millions of its citizens in Russia to leave immediately. Nato has accused Russia of attempting to “rewrite the entire global security architecture”, saying the Kremlin is using “force and ultimatums … to redraw borders in Europe”. The EU approved wide-ranging sanctions that go beyond the UK and US response, including leading Russian military figures, state “propagandists” and parliamentarians. The former US president Donald Trump has called Vladimir Putin’s decision to declare independent states within Ukraine “genius”, praising as a “smart move” the call to send “the strongest peace force I’ve ever seen” into the Donetsk and Luhansk regions. Meanwhile, Ukraine’s parliament is set to unveil state of emergency laws that will allow citizens to carry lethal firearms, with Ukrainians reportedly rushing to buy guns and ammunition at weapons stores across the nation. The Australian government will implement a raft of sanctions against Russia, insisting there “must be consequences” for Moscow’s military actions and recognition of separatist-controlled regions in the east of Ukraine. Scott Morrison unveiled the “first tranche” of sanctions on Wednesday, bringing Australia in line with its US, UK and European allies’ initial responses. Australia’s sanctions would target specific Russian individuals, corporations and industries in the hope of pressuring the Russian government to stop “behaving like thugs and bullies”, Morrison said. Here’s what they’re designed to do and what their impact might be. One-in-five major coal, gas or oil facilities emit significantly more greenhouse gases than previously estimated, a report by the Australian Conservation Foundation has documented. Regulatory failure at state and federal level has allowed some fossil fuel projects to emit more than 20 times what was previously approved, the report claims, with authors of the 18-month research project concluding that the excess emissions were “supercharging our climate problem”. Global research has suggested climate change is responsible for moving twice as much water as previously calculated away from warm regions and towards the poles. Australia Disability recipients cut off from NDIS payments are claiming a campaign of defunding by “stealth” after new figures revealed a 400% spike in appeals over the past six months. A single business in Barnaby Joyce’s electorate has received a half a million dollar NBN upgrade, Senate estimate documents have revealed. A spokesperson from Joyce’s office confirmed that the then backbencher wrote a letter of support for the business in question, a company in which his partner, Vikki Campion, is a shareholder. Former Australian of the Year Rosie Batty says she will avoid “divisive conversations” as the host of the ABC’s interview show, One Plus One. Batty endured several confronting media encounters as a campaigner against domestic violence. The world France’s parliament has extended the legal limit for abortion from 12 to 14 weeks after an epic wrangle that lasted more than a year. President Emmanuel Macron had voiced his opposition to the move but members of his party helped carry the vote. US health officials have revised the recommended time between receiving Covid-19 vaccines, suggesting a delay of up to eight weeks – rather than the previously advised three to four – could provide better lasting protection. Asteroid strikes that prompted mass extinctions could have been exacerbated by the season, scientists have claimed, with research suggesting that strikes in early springtime might have decimated animal numbers emerging from harsh winters. Recommended reads Three days on from the spectacular shutdown of Sydney’s train system, questions are still being asked. Amid a fury of claim and counterclaim, Michael McGowan and Tamsin Rose pose five key questions, including, “What led to the shutdown?” and, “When will normal services resume?” Scott Morrison has warned that if Mike Cannon-Brookes’ bid to fast-track the shutdown of coal plants succeeds “electricity prices go up”. But is the prime minister right? “There might be some truth to it,” the energy expert Tony Wood tells Graham Readfearn, but only presuming no alternative energy solutions come online. And with $20bn worth of plans for a green energy rollout, it’s unlikely Cannon-Brookes would sit on his hands. Real wages in Australia “completely tanked” in 2021. While the public sector is often a buoy during economic downturns, state and federal government decisions to cap wages growth during the pandemic exacerbated the stagnation. And ongoing misinformation isn’t helping, Greg Jericho argues: “If there is one constant in our economic debate, it is that employer groups and certain members of the Coalition will continually warn that we are about to experience a wages breakout due to unions’ exaggerated pay claims.” The internet can be a scary place. Which is why this week’s curator of our. 10 funniest things on the internet, Eliza Reilly, has plumped predominantly for babies and/or animals. “Oh, bear. Why are you doing this?” Listen It’s Australia’s biggest greenhouse gas emitter. So why is Mike Cannon-Brookes making a multibillion-dollar bid for the polluter? On this episode of Full Story, environment reporter Adam Morton unpacks the big money attempt at shareholder activism. Full Story is Guardian Australia’s daily news podcast. Subscribe for free on Apple Podcasts, Spotify or any other podcasting app. Sport World No 3 Alexander Zverev has been kicked out of the Mexican Open, after a violent outburst in which the Russian repeatedly smashed his racquet against the umpire’s chair and called the official a “fucking idiot”. “There are thousands of things that go into a clean sheet.” For Premier League goalkeeper Kasper Schmeichel, some of the best games he’s played are the ones in which he goes completely unnoticed. So why is punditry so poor at analysing the performances of goalkeepers, Cameron Ponsonby asks. Media roundup Raising top teacher salaries to $130,000 could help attract high-achieving students, a leaked federal government review has suggested, the Age reports. Steven Marshall is planning a $500m pre-election hospital spending spree, according to the Advertiser. An extra $450m is also being allocated to tackle South Australia’s Omicron wave. And Chinese police have begun work restoring law and order in the Solomon Islands, the ABC writes, after ongoing riots. Coming up Anthony Albanese offers a pre-federal election glimpse into his life outside politics, in an interview with Women’s Weekly. Alan Joyce is set to reveal Qantas’s half year results. Sign up If you would like to receive the Guardian Australia morning mail to your email inbox every weekday, sign up here. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com. Discover Australian Weekend Every Saturday from 6am, enjoy early access to the best journalism planned for the weekend in one elegant app, plus a curated selection of the week’s news and analysis from Australia and the world.Boris Johnson is in his happy place. The Russian invasion of Ukraine couldn’t have come at a better time. At a stroke, people have stopped asking him awkward questions about the cost of living and the price of fuel. Better still, both Labour and – more importantly – Tory MPs have also suspended hostilities on Partygate. At a time of imminent war in eastern Europe, a united front must be maintained at home. Just in case Vladimir Putin happens to be watching and starts taking our threats seriously. Not that there’s much sign of that so far. But we can live in hope. So, for The Suspect, the heat is off temporarily. He can swan around doing his Churchill tribute act – “We shall fight them on the tennis courts. We shall fight them in the Tory party fundraising auctions. We shall never give up” – safe in the knowledge that right now it’s hard for him to screw things up too badly. No one is coming after him and there is no vote of no confidence imminent. Because however many lies he happens to tell, they are nothing to those being told by Vladimir Putin. And his corruption is amateur hour when compared with the delusional venality of the Russian president. Though it’s obviously something to which he can aspire. All of which made prime minister’s questions a curiously subdued affair with both The Suspect and Keir Starmer on their best behaviour. Something that came far easier to the Labour leader as he is by far the more serious politician. Even in an international crisis, Johnson can’t totally conceal his inherent levitas. At heart he still thinks the whole thing is a bit of a game. Starmer began by making it clear he was going to go easy on Boris. For the good of the country. The last thing people wanted to see at such a time was politicians squabbling and point-scoring. So he was thoroughly behind the efforts of the UK and other Nato countries to deter Putin. He was – as he had said the day before – just disappointed that the sanctions had been so feeble. The Russian president must have been delighted. That’s if he had even noticed. Steady on old chap, The Suspect replied. While he was very grateful to have the support of the Labour party in principle, he did want to point out that sanctioning five small banks and three individuals who had already been sanctioned by the US since 2018 was actually a massive deal. Not only had it caused Putin to rethink his invasion plans but it had given other oligarchs time to liquidate their assets and get their cash out of the country. Which was a good thing, no? Johnson didn’t really seem to have much of a grasp how sanctions were supposed to work. In any case, it was important to remember that this was just the first phase of an internationally coordinated response. So our next sanctions would be marginally less pathetic. The UK’s role was to always look a soft touch compared with other countries. The Labour leader then moved on to RT television. Surely it was time to have it banned? As it happened, Nadine Dorries had already written to Ofcom about this, The Suspect said. Though there had to be a place in the UK media for outlets that tolerated lies and made-up stories. Otherwise Johnson would never have had a career at the Telegraph. As for donations from Russian oligarchs, he wasn’t going to pay them back because he was sure the Tory party had never taken them. And just to be on the safe side, he definitely wasn’t going to investigate because who knew what you might find once you started. Sensing that they might be on the verge of kicking lumps out of each other in their usual adversarial style, Starmer and The Suspect backed off. The Labour party offers its full support etc. The government appreciates the opposition’s full support etc. Only the Labour leader managed to sound halfway sincere. In keeping with the mood, most Tory backbenchers went out of their way to avoid asking Johnson anything difficult about Ukraine, parties or the cost of living and in return he congratulated them on doing whatever it was they did. He still gives the impression of having no idea who any of them are. Others weren’t so docile. Caroline Lucas tried to ask about Russian involvement in UK elections. Her question went on a bit and she got drowned out by Tory MPs shouting her down as they tried to protect their leader from all too believable truths. Lindsay Hoyle did himself no favours in his failure to allow Lucas to be heard. The most telling intervention came from Margaret Hodge who wanted to know if it was possible to sanction members of the Duma. “It’s quite a thing to sanction parliamentarians,” said The Suspect. Inadvertently giving away far more than intended. Because few parliamentarians have more experience of getting away with things than Johnson. He knows he’s lied to the police. To parliament. To everyone. And he still reckons he’ll get away unscathed. People in power are untouchable. At heart, Boris is just another oligarch manque. Only without the billions. Rejoicing in his freedom, The Suspect went on to tell some lies. He’d forgotten how naturally it came to him. The UK was the first to appreciate the seriousness of Ukraine. Alex Salmond was a member of the SNP. He was on the point of telling the Labour party Jeremy Corbyn was still its leader when Hoyle called time. Labour’s Chris Bryant made a point of order. For the first time ever, Johnson had apologised for lying to the house. About Roman Abramovich facing sanctions. It had taken the fear of reprisals from a Russian oligarch to get him to do the decent thing. The sanctions were working. Just in the opposite way to what had been intended.Health unions have criticised the government for offering NHS staff in England a “miserly” 3% pay rise from April, despite inflation having hit 5.5%. Ministers have proposed the increase in their written evidence to the NHS pay review body, which advises what salary uplifts the service’s 1.3 million staff should get. “With spiralling inflation and hikes to national insurance contributions, this derisory proposal means NHS workers are staring at yet another real terms loss,” said Rachel Harrison, a national officer with the GMB. The union, along with Unison and the Royal College of Nursing, warned that offering only a 3% rise – the same as staff got in the current year – will prompt frontline workers to quit and thus exacerbate the NHS’s already widespread understaffing. Harrison said that the GMB had warned ministers and the pay review body that staff are already leaving. “This will be the final push that many others need”, she added. Lambasting the pay rise as “miserly”, Sara Gorton, head of health at Unison, said: “This tight-fisted proposal falls well short of rising costs and staff hopes. It’s barely half the rate of inflation, which is far from peaking and won’t be for many more months.” Pat Cullen, the general secretary and chief executive of the Royal College of Nursing, said that its members “will see this as a deliberate attempt to pitch nurses against patients.”. Gorton said that the below-inflation offer “would mean floods of NHS staff quitting for less stressful, more lucrative jobs”. Meanwhile, NHS staff in England who get Covid-19 will still have to stay off work for at least five days, despite Boris Johnson scrapping that requirement for the general public from Thursday. NHS England confirmed on Wednesday that health service personnel will have a continuing duty to isolate once the lifting of restrictions in Johnson’s “living with Covid” strategy kick in. In guidance telling NHS care providers how to respond to the prime minister’s new approach, NHS England made clear that “healthcare staff who have tested positive for Covid-19 should not attend work until they have had two negative lateral flow test results, taken 24 hours apart. “The first test should not be taken before day five after their initial positive test. “These tests need to be 24 hours apart and, providing there are medically fit, they can return to work on the morning of day six providing they tested negative 24 hours earlier.” The chief executive of one hospital trust welcomed the guidance. “Continued isolation is sensible,” they said. “We have vulnerable folk coming in for care and need to protect them, and we also know how quickly Covid can run through a team.” However, the guidance does not explain who will pay for NHS staff’s Covid tests once free testing in England ends on 1 April. The uncertainty was triggered last week when the Treasury rejected a request from the Department of Health and Social Care for £5bn to pay for them, prompting concern that other parts of the health budget may be cut to cover the cost. It simply says that the matter will be decided “in the coming weeks”.A California woman is suing the Los Angeles police department after she was imprisoned for nearly two weeks before officers determined they had the wrong suspect. Authorities reportedly mistook Bethany K Farber for a woman with the same name who was wanted in Texas. Farber said she was traveling to Mexico in April 2021 when Transportation Security Administration (TSA) agents at Los Angeles international airport detained her, eventually informing her that there was a warrant out for her arrest in Texas. The aesthetician was arrested and booked into jail, where she was held for 13 days without bail. “I asked them repeatedly to double check and they completely blew me off,” Farber said. “They said, ‘Nope, Bethany Farber, we have you.’” In a federal civil rights lawsuit filed on Tuesday, Farber accused the city, airport police and the LAPD of violating her civil rights and falsely arresting and imprisoning her, intentionally inflicting emotional distress. Farber also alleged officials kept her in custody for three days after learning they had the wrong person in custody. “This was an experience that no one should go through, especially a law abiding citizen,” Farber said in a statement. Farber said she told TSA officials that she had never been to Texas, let alone committed a crime there and that she might have been the victim of identity theft, but they held her in a room without food or water for more than two hours. Airport police then arrested her and transferred her into the custody of LAPD, the lawsuit states. According to the lawsuit, police arrested her without checking her driver’s license, asking for any personally identifying information or using any other method to confirm her identity. Farber and the woman police were after “had nothing in common besides their name”, the complaint states, and don’t share a physical resemblance. Her family, who hired lawyers in Texas and California to assist with the case, sent a photo and phone records to officials in Texas who promised to help secure Farber’s release. She was released after 13 days but the incident left her with “severe stress, anxiety … and mental anguish”, according to the lawsuit. While in jail, Farber said she was forced to take extreme measures in order to keep warm, such as placing hot food underneath her clothes and “saw human feces thrown around and smeared across the walls”. The stress of the experience caused her grandmother to have a stroke, which led to her death, the lawsuit alleges. Rodney Diggs, Farber’s attorney, said his client endured “things that she could never have imagined” because police “didn’t do the basics of their job to confirm the identity”. The Los Angeles police department declined to comment on the lawsuit, stating it does not comment on pending litigation. The Los Angeles airport police did not immediately respond to a request for comment.• An article about the reaction of other countries to the decision to relax Covid rules in England included several references to the UK or Britain, when England was meant (Watching with interest …, 12 February, p8). • Tera Jism Meri Marzi, the title of a song featuring the rapper Eva B, translates from Urdu as Your Body, My Rights, not My Body, Your Rights (Straight outta Karachi: The rap sensation committed to her veil, 14 February, p25). • Other recently amended articles include: Scotland to lift all Covid legal restrictions on 21 March ‘All that Hollywood glamour doesn’t feel like me at all’: Joanna Scanlan on self-doubt, sexism and being the red-hot favourite at the Baftas Thrills, spills and Olympic figure skating dreams – in pictures Special report: with a new billionaire on board, what next for West Ham? Cut meat and dairy output by a third to save climate, British farmers told Loving a cold climate: Ireland’s Nordic-inspired wilderness retreat John Aldus obituary The Guide #22: is Amazon’s Lord of the Rings adaptation the one show to rile them all? Twenty photographs of the week Editorial complaints and correction requests can be sent to: guardian.readers@theguardian.com. You can also write to: Readers’ editor, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU, or leave a voicemail on +44 (0) 20 3353 4736.Actors Kedar Williams-Stirling, Emeka Sesay and Francis Lovehall. Writer Tyrell Williams. All names to remember, who have created this fierce, affectionate, effortlessly funny play. Set in a fading football ground in south London, it isn’t really about the game. It’s about gentrification, change, ambition and the fear of being left behind. Most of all, it’s about friendship. Daniel Bailey’s production buzzes with energy but is also understated, relaxed and peculiarly real. As these three 16-year-old black boys practise religiously for their football trials, but essentially just chat, tease and genuinely look out for each other, the artifice of acting almost disappears. A warm and involved atmosphere emerges, as if we the spectators (on bleachers surrounding the stage) are merely an unseen extension of their lives. Sesay’s Joey is the sensible one. With football trials just around the corner, he dreams of making it big but is taking a course in business – just in case. There’s a frantic energy about Bilal, played by Sex Education’s Williams-Stirling, and his desire to succeed feels as much about fear as it does about hope. Lovehall’s Omz is the only one determined not to leave the neighbourhood and who, in a particularly lovely scene, herds his imaginary kids (“one for every day of the week”) around Red Pitch stadium. Williams’s first full-length play shares a similar wit and focus to his viral web series #HoodDocumentary. Meticulously mined details hold his script together (the structure isn’t perfect) and create a convincing bond between these friends. They share jokes that stretch back years and have epic feuds about Twix bars and tropical juice. They dance as one. When they fight, it draws gasps from the audience – not shock at the violence but fear for what they stand to lose if they leave each other, and their neighbourhood, behind. • At the Bush theatre, London, until 26 March.The award-winning singer George Ezra has been confirmed as the first act for the Queen’s jubilee event the Platinum Party at the Palace, celebrating the monarch’s 70 years on the throne. The 4 June concert will have an in-person audience of 10,000, half of which will be members of the public from a ticket ballot, the BBC reported, to be awarded in pairs. The Queen, 95, reached 70 years on the throne on 6 February. This year will see a four-day UK bank holiday weekend from 2 to 5 June alongside a slate of celebratory events. “I can’t begin to tell you how excited I am to be part of the Queen’s Platinum Jubilee concert, what an incredible honour to be asked,” 28-year-old singer said in a statement, adding he will “bring pop and roll to the palace.” The party will be formed of three stages and feature projections across the face of the palace. The event will feature a lineup of global pop and rock artists, opera singers and a full live orchestra. People can apply for the free ticket ballot online until 23 March. “The remaining tickets will be made available to charitable organisations including those who work in support of young people, the military, the environment and those who supported communities during the pandemic,” a palace statement reads. The Queen’s diamond jubilee in 2012 featured artists including Elton John, Brian May, Robbie Williams and Kylie Minogue. Meanwhile, the Queen – who tested positive for Covid on Sunday – held her weekly audience with the prime minister over the phone despite her illness. “Her majesty did speak to the prime minister this evening,” a Buckingham Palace spokesperson said. It came after the monarch cancelled virtual events on Tuesday as she continued to suffer from mild cold-like symptoms of the virus. Boris Johnson, the prime minister, told MPs in parliament on Monday that the Queen’s positive test was a reminder that the virus “has not gone away”.If there were ever fears of Burnley’s clash with Tottenham being an example of “after the Lord Mayor’s show” for the hosts, at least, their leader Ben Mee ensured the procession continued. The Burnley captain won the game by flinging himself around to stop Spurs scoring before heading the winning goal to earn his side a second successive victory, boosting their survival hopes. The swirling wind and rain implied perfect conditions for Burnley to build on their win at Brighton but it was Spurs who started brightest, buoyed by defeating the Premier League leaders, Manchester City. Within a minute of the whistle Harry Kane found himself in space on the right-hand side of the area, giving him the time and room to send in a dangerous, low cross. It deflected off the outside of James Tarkowski’s boot into the side‑netting, though many inside the ground feared it had gone in. There was a pace and energy rarely seen from Burnley this season. Spurs’ defence did not enjoy being put under pressure, giving away a needless corner after trying to pass it around in their own area, while Ben Davies did not welcome the physicality of cult-hero-in-the-making Wout Weghorst, much to the crowd’s enjoyment. It was a night made for longer studs as the weather caused the ball to hold up in gusts and players to slip repeatedly. Burnley enjoyed great spells of possession without the ability to find a way through the Spurs midfield block, forcing the home side to waste the ball with direct passes aimed at Weghorst which never came to anything. Not that Spurs fared much better as they struggled to find any space behind the trademark Burnley back four, who diligently went about their business as the English centre‑back pairing of Tarkowski and Mee kept the England captain Kane quiet in front of Gareth Southgate. That changed quickly after the break as Mee scythed down a marauding Son Heung-min on the right wing. Son peeled himself off the turf to swing in a free‑kick for Kane to attack with vigour, only for the striker to see his header cannon off the crossbar inches above Nick Pope’s outstretched hand. It was that moment which created urgency within the Tottenham side after a slow first half. Son looked more eager to run at Burnley’s defenders, forcing them to backtrack at speed on the squelching surface. There was more space to exploit for Tottenham and almost two perfect opportunities to open the scoring, only for Erik Pieters and Mee to intervene at the last second. Pope finally had to make a save in the 64th minute as the ball crisscrossed the box until Emerson Royal laid it off to Davies to have a prod at goal. However the goalkeeper threw out a left fist to divert the shot wide. Hugo Lloris, too, suffered a rude awakening after a long night of keeping the rain out of his eyes, as Jay Rodriguez finally received the service he demands but his powerful downward header from a perfect Dwight McNeil cross was palmed to safety by the Spurs goalkeeper. He was not able to do anything minutes later, however, as Mee held off the challenge of Cristian Romero to head a deep free-kick back across goal to give Burnley the lead. Before scoring, Mee had dived across his own goal to head away a Dejan Kulusevski shot targeting the bottom corner. The captain is the beating heart of the club after more than 10 years at Turf Moor, a man on a mission to ensure he does not end his anniversary season as a Championship player, as shown by his chest-thumping celebrations as he moved Burnley to within two points of 17th. Mee should have doubled the lead, this time from a corner as he poked a shot at goal, before receiving the ball back to volley across the area to a waiting Rodriguez. He lifted the ball over the bar from six yards out. But it did not matter as Burnley held on for their third win of the season to make the soaking night worth it for the home fans. “I have great trust and belief in the players,” Sean Dyche said. “They deserve a massive amount of credit, they have taken ownership of the season. It is not a done season, there is a lot of work to be done.”Sarina Wiegman said England have taken “lots of information” from their 3-1 victory against Germany – only their second in 27 attempts – and inaugural Arnold Clark Cup win but will not get carried away before the European Championship in the summer. “This was a step towards the Euros,” the England manager said. “We will stay neutral. This was successful. We have grown a lot but we know the opponents in the Euros will be too. We weren’t tight enough on the ball so that was hard for us but then you can come back to your fundamentals. I am happy with this tournament. We got lots of information about ourselves and where we are in our style of play.” With draws against Canada and Spain, England topped the standings in the friendly tournament based on goal difference, after finishing level on five points with Spain. Ellen White scored the opening goal in front of 13,463 fans to join Sir Bobby Charlton on 49 goals for England and to move within four goals of Wayne Rooney’s record. Her effort was cancelled out by Lina Magull’s powerful free-kick in the first half, but Millie Bright’s poached strike on the rebound after a mazy run and shot from Lauren Hemp helped England towards three points and Fran Kirby added the flourish with a blistering goal on the counterattack in added time. The sight of the defender Bright posing with a golden boot alongside the Ballon d’Or, Fifa Best and Uefa player of the year winner, Alexia Putellas, after scoring her second goal of the tournament was a strange one. Wiegman had said it did not matter who was scoring for England, as long as the team were, but Bright’s volley against Canada was their only goal of the tournament before this game. Against a depleted Germany, with 12 regular squad members unable to be called up because of injury or Covid, Alex Greenwood and Bright were partnered in defence, Chelsea’s Jess Carter was shifted to left-back and Lucy Bronze was favoured, familiarly, on the right. Behind them, Manchester City’s Ellie Roebuck was given the opportunity to attempt to win back her No 1 shirt, making her first start under Wiegman. Almost instantly England’s greatest threat, the fearless winger Hemp, went to work on the left, causing problems for the Bayern Munich defender Maximiliane Rall, but the breakthrough, 15 minutes in, came from a more tried and tested source. Georgia Stanway, operating as a No 10, neatly played in Kirby but her shot was intercepted by Jana Feldkamp who passed the ball straight back into the feet of the Chelsea forward. She sent White through the middle and the striker calmly slotted past Merle Frohms. It is impossible to write eight-time Euro winners off regardless of key absentees such as Alex Popp, Melanie Leupolz, Dzsenifer Marozsán and Almuth Schult but it took a moment of brilliance to break through England’s new steely backline. Magull’s free-kick, courtesy of Greenwood’s foul on Lea Schüller just outside the box, was exactly that, smacking down off the underside of the bar and in. If there was any deflation at having conceded a second goal under Wiegman, there was consolation to be taken in the quality of the two strikes shipped in the past six days – a far cry from the scrappy and chaotic goals conceded before she arrived. Changes were made at half-time in both of England’s storm-swept Arnold Clark Cup games but here, in kinder climes, the Dutch manager did not ring the changes as readily – bar an enforced one in the 34th minute, with Rachel Daly coming on for the injured Carter. This tournament has very much been a chance for Wiegman and her staff to test partnerships, the versatility of players and formations, but this was the time to see how the closest first-choice starting XI available to her would cope in a competitive matchday scenario. With England struggling in the final third again, though, Stanway made way for the Arsenal winger Nikita Parris just past the hour mark, shifting Kirby more central. The impact was instant, with Parris injecting energy on the wing and the world-class Kirby far more effective stationed closer to White. Unwilling to be outdone by the Lionesses record goalscorer, in the 84th minute and with England in the ascendency, a sweeping run from Hemp ended with her shot deflecting off Feldkamp into the path of Bright who fired in to give England the lead. “We wanted to get some extra energy in the game and score a goal. We needed an extra player up front, she’s really strong, a good header of the ball and good with her feet. I know that’s a risk, but it went our way,” Wiegman said of Bright’s presence up top late on. There was further cause for celebration when Kirby raced away, after a headed clearance from Bright, three minutes into six minutes of added time. Her shot squeezed past Frohms to confirm a first win against Germany on home soil and to maintain Wiegman’s unbeaten record as England manager.It’s all to play for in the second leg. Ajax looked at one stage like they could have wrapped up qualification today but Benfica, roared on by a terrific crowd, fought back hard and deserved their equaliser. There could have been plenty more goals in a splendidly frenetic game. The second leg should be well worth following. 90+3 min: The corner is cleared as far as Antony, who tries to curl it into the top corner from 25 yards out. The keeper pushes it wide for another corner. 90+2 min: Berghuis swings over a wicked cross from the left. Vertonghen plunges to head it behind before Haller can get on the end of it. 90+1 min: Benfica substitutions: Lazaro and Gonçalves on, Nunez and Gilberto off. 89 min: As Ajax try to take a quick attacking throw-in, the ref whistles to allow treatment for a defender who has gone down in the box, seemingly with cramp. Ajax are peeved. 86 min: Nunez and Antony square up to each other after tangling for the ball. They go forehead-to-forehead and Antony thrusts his head towards the Uruguayan, who hurls himself backwards and collapses on the grass as if mortally wounded. The ref decides a yellow card will suffice. 83 min: Benfica substitution: Bernardo on, Taarabt off 79 min: Benfica are finishing the stronger. Ajax, superior for most of the match, look like they’d do well to get away on level terms. Having said that, Halle has just cracked on over the bar from the edge of the area. 76 min: The stadium is absolutely heaving! The crowd are lapping up this action and are urging their team to go for a winner. Yaremchuk might just have got it a moment ago if not for a timely interception by Timber, who has been superb for most of this match, both defensively and going forward. 74 min: The VAR check is over: the goal stands. We have ourselves a humdinger of a tie. 73 min: Wait! There’s a VAR check to see whether the goal should be chalked off and Ajax awarded a penalty at the other end for the challenge (foul?) on Timber. This could be fun! What an incredible passage of play! Ajax threatened at one end, with Timber joining in the attack brilliantly and then going down in the box. The ref waved play on and, boy, did Benfica do that! Ramos thundered a shot at goal from 25 yards. Pasveer saved with one hand but Yaremchuk followed up to head the rebound into the net! 70 min: Silva slips the ball through to Yaremchuk in the area. The Ukrainian pokes it past the keeper but Timber does superbly to get back and whack it out for a corner. 69 min: Silva thwacks one over the bar from 20 yards after neat service by Yaremchuk. It wasn’t a great effort but it’s encouraging that Benfica attacked in such numbers and were able to work a clear opening. 67 min: Ramos goes down in the Ajax box following a corner. The crowd want a penalty but he threw himself. 66 min: Benfica are not out of this yet, thanks mainly to Ajax’s wasteful finishing. Mazraoui has to make a last-gasp tackle to deflect the ball out for a corner. 64 min: A lovely flighted ball over the top of the Benfica’s defence. Mazraoui ties his run perfectly, takes the ball down and drives at goal. The keeper parries well. 63 min: Benfica substitution: Yaremchuk on, Everton off. 63 min: Nunez has a bash from way out. The keeper dives but only to get a better view of it as it sails wide. 61 min: Timber gets caught upfield after leading another bold attack. Benfica counter. Silva hurtles down the right, leading a 3v3 attack. He tries to pick out Nunez racing in towards the far post ... but his low delivery is fractionally too long for the striker. 59 min: Gravenbersh miscontrols after being sent clear by Tadic. 58 min: Ajax make a mess of a rehearsed corner routine. Nunez tries to run all the way from his own box to the opposing one, riding a wild tackle as he goes. He’s caught legitimately before he can get into shooting range. 55 min: Sharp move by Benfica, the smartest bit being the way they worked it out Silva at the edge of the area. He shifted quickly on to his let foot and let fly ... it deflects off a defender ... wrongfoots the keeper ... and spins just wide! 53 min: Haller lopes on to a smart through-ball by Tadic. He picks out Alvarez at the edge of the area, but the midfielder sidefoots the ball over the bar. 52 min: Better from Nunez. HE shows strength and speed to storm down the left and then tries to pick out a teammate in the middle. Blind reads his mind and positions himself well to prod out for a corner. 51 min: Benfica frustration can only be rising as Ajax make pretty triangles all over the pitch, forcing the hosts to chase in vain. Ajax could finish the tie today if they show enough ruthlessness. 49 min: Another Benfica booking. Ramos cops yellow for tugging back Timber as the defender strode past him. Their heads are going here .... 47 min: Nunez gets away with a yellow card after a wild tackle on Martinez. It was obviously borne of frustration after he was denied a freekick a moment before. His teammates lead him away as he scowls at the ref following his booking. 46 min: Here comes the players. No personnel changes during the break - even Martinez is back out despite seeming to be hurt and dazed after his clash of heads with Otamendi in the first period. The first thing to say is this has been a joyously entertaining match. It’s being played at an exhilarating pace and with thrilling attacking intent; at times it has been hurly-burly but it has also been embroidered with some wonderfully skilful play, especially by Ajax. You get the feeling there’ll be plenty more goals. 44 min: A brilliant run and pass by Antomy gives Alvarez a chance to make it 3-1. He fires first-time across the keeper and towards the far corner. But it bounces out off the post! Straight to Haller ... whose reactions let him down, as he fails to adjust his feet quickly enough and winds up slotting wide from three yards! What an escape for Benfica! 41 min: Silva - by far Benfica’s best attacker - cuts a dash through midfield and tries to slip in Nunez, but the forward can’t get the ball under control. 38 min: Gravenberch scoots down the left, riding two hopeful challenges and then feeding Tadic. With the Benfica defence in a tizzy, the ball is eventually worked to Haller, whose shot from 20 yards doesn’t present too much of a problem to Vlachodimos. 35 min: another break in play, this time for Martinez, seemingly for some head injury. The treatment at the moment consists of him rubbing his face with water. That does not look like a head injury that is being taken seriously. 32 min: Silva’s dribbling skills are making him a nuisance to the Ajax defence. This time they fend him off but he works the ball wide to Nunez on the right. The forward whacks the ball low across the face of goal. Pasveer dives on it before any striker can get a touch. 30 min: After lengthy treatment for an unspecified injury, Otamendi is ready to resume ... with a black swimming cap on his head. 28 min: The goal came from an inviting cross from the left by (I think) Timber. Haller beat Vertonghen to it at the near post and poked it goalward. The keeper saved but Haller flipped the rebound nonchalantly into the net with his left foot from eight yards. Did you really doubt he would net at the right end? 28 min: This is game is non-stop! Mazraoui and Tadic combine niftily down the right, enabling the Moroccan to clip over a dainty cross. It’s cleared ... and then suddenly Benfica are tearing forward at the other end. Blind steps in to put a stop to that. 26 min: It’s worth highlighting some wonderful play by Silva just before that goal. His wizardly play down the right won the corner that led to Ajax’s problems. The irrepressible striker has scored against his own team! He can blame Vertonghen for that! The former Spur retrieved the ball after a corner wasn’t cleared and then smashes it low across the face of goal. Haller tried to clear but could only shank it into his own net! 24 min: Mazraoui booked for a foul out wide. 22 min: Benfica have been rattled by falling behind; they’re now overhitting or underhitting passes even when not under pressure. 20 min: Oops! Benfica’s attempt to summon a quick retort goes awry when they make a mess of a freekick wide on the right. That’s a beautifully controlled finish by Tadic! No surprise that the goal came from Ajax winning the ball high up, with Mazraoui pouncing on it and then playing a one-two before crossing for Tadic, who got his leg over the bouncing ball to steer it high into the net from 12! 14 min: Gilberto clatters Tadic from behind, giving Ajax a freekick out by the left touchline. It’s curled into the mixer but headed well clear. “As an Everton fan, I’m not sure if nominative determinism requires that Everton play for Everton at some point in his career, or if Everton scoring against Everton would cause the universe to implode,” ponders Matt Burtz. I fancy it’s only a matter of time before Farhad Moshiri appoints him as manager. 11 min: This is all becoming thrillingly hectic: it’s high energy and full of attacking intent, plus a fair few forced errors, with both sides pressuring the other into frequent ball losses. 9 min: Benfica are trying to string together passes now but Ajax are petering them high and hard. And you know that if they win the ball back up there, they’ll be quick to to threaten the goal .... 7 min: Ajax gets in behind Benfica down the left and pull the ball back to the edge, but Antony’s shot is blocked. 5 min: If the opening five minutes are anything to go by, Ajax are going to have most of the ball and Benfica are going to sit tight - but not too deep - and look for chances to spring forward on the counter. 3 min: Grimaldo curls over a freekick from the left, Vertonghen leaps highest - way above Mazraoui - and flicks a header towards goals from seven yards. But it’s straight at Pasveer, who saves without trouble. 2 min: Wonderful trickery by Antony down the right leaves Everton spinning to the grass in bewilderment. Then the winger swaps passes with Blind and darts into the area, but that’s as far as he gets before being dispossessed. A heck of a shot of intent, though. 1 min: Queen’s We Will Rock You booms out around the ground before being abrupt switched off so that the game can get under way. Don’t stop me now ... It’s a full house at the Estadio do Sport Lisboa, including over 3,200 Ajax fans. The visiting players are wearing black shirts with red, yellow and green trims, while the hosts don red tops with white lines across the shoulder. Before the match, the managers have been talking up their opponents. Here’s Erik ten Haag on Benfica: “They are strong opponents. They are especially good at capitalising on mistakes.” And here’s Nelson Verissimo on Ajax: “We are facing a great opponent ... they are great in attack and concede very few goals.” “I was debating which of the two Champions League matches to watch today,” announces Kári Tulinius “But this two minute promotional video released by Ajax settled it for me.” If you ever wanted proof that there is life after the Premier League, just look at those lineups. Not only is the ex-Hammer Sebastien Haller the top scorer in the Champions League so far this season, thanks partly to able support from Dusan Tadic, but he’ll be marked by Nicolas Otamendi and Jan Vertonghen, who would be trying to forget about Europa Conference League elimination if he were still a Tottenham player And do you think Adel Taarabt would be preparing for a Champions League knockout tie if he were still turning out in various states of readiness for QPR? And how forlorn Everton would look now if he were a club rather than a midfielder, eh. Benfica: Vlachodimos; Gilberto, Otamendi, Vertonghen, Grimaldo; Silva, Weigl, Taarabt, Everton; Nunez, Gonçalo Ramos Subs: Leite, Meite, Yaremchuk, Diego Gonçalves, Joao Mario, Lazaro, Radonjic, Dias, Bernardo, Araujo, Morato Ajax: Pasveer; Mazraoui, Timber, Martinez, Blind; Alvarez, Berghuis, Gravenberch; Antony, Haller, Tadic Subs: Gorter, Onana, Schurs, Klaassen, Pereira, Rensch, Kudus, Taylor, Jensen, Daramy, Tagliafico Referee: S Vincic (Slovenia) Hello and welcome. It’s hard to foresee a time when either of these great clubs will be European champions again, and that’s a damnable thing. But at least we can still enjoy them trying. Ajax have been especially impressive in this competition so far, whupping everyone in the group stage, including Sporting Lisbon, who are above Benfica in the Portuguese league. But Benfica, who are appearing at this stage for the first time in five years, made it this far by finishing above Barcelona in their group. They’ve changed manager since then - with Jorge Jesus replaced by Nélson Veríssimo. Results haven’t improved at home but doing a number on the team of the highly esteemed Erik Ten Hag would be a dandy way for the new manager to make his mark and for Benfica to take a step towards the quarter-finals. It’s on!Thank you so much for joining me for this stunning and scintillating match. The Arnold Clark Cup and a first home win against Germany bagged for England. Germany put up a great fight but in the end England managed to claim the win, albeit with Bright’s goal being offside. If you want to recap all the action from the match, read Suzy Wrack’s report here. I didn’t notice it at the time but Bright was actually offside for her goal. There isn’t any VAR in the match and so England got away with that. Ian Wright has made a good point as the assistant referee was perfectly line up and should have spotted the error. England manager Sarina Wiegman told ITV: “The tournament was as we expected, three top level games. We have seen different players and starting line-ups. We have seen different style. “Today we weren’t tight enough but then you have to be compact as a team. “When I came in this team had a lot of experience. The eagerness to commitment and wanting to learn is immense. It has been a pleasure so far. “You want to keep all the players fit and in form at their clubs. Other teams progress too so it’s hard to predict [Euros outcome].” Wiegman remains undefeated as England boss and has shown her brilliance with those late subs and formation changes. So many people were questioning putting Bright up front in the closing moments of the match but it paid off massively. It’ll be interesting to see what the manager says, she should be facing the press shortly. Yellow streamers drown the England team as they raise their arms and the crowd goes wild. A great moment for the team who have struggled for form over the past few years. Wiegman has done unbelievably well since taking the helm in 2021. Millie Bright and Alexia Putellas have posed for a picture with the golden boot, both scoring two goals in three games. The breakthrough star of the tournament has been named as Spain’s Athenea del Castillo - very much deserved. England players are putting medals around each other’s neck ahead of the trophy lift. It’s worth remembering how close this tournament was, England have won this cup on goal difference. The only side not to claim a win was Germany and Canada and Spain only bagged a victory each. This sets up such an exciting stage for the Euros! Trophy ceremony to come ... Player of the Match Millie Bright told ITV: “It’s brilliant. For us in the past it was a rocky road, for us to finally be on a journey together we are on the right road. “This is just the beginning. It wasn’t pretty out there but it’s another element to our game that we can win dirty. “We’re not bothered who scores, it’s just about getting it in the back of the net. “We have shown that we can win” While the concentration and talk will be around England because of the dramatic late win, props need to be given to Germany. They came into this tournament without 12 players due to injury and Covid. They held Spain to a draw, lost 1-0 to Canada and suffered a late defeat to England. And my, oh my Magull’s strike is something so promising for the visitors. Imagine Magull at the Euros when all of their star players return. The Euros are going to be amazing. Take a look at the England goals which sealed the win: England are screaming and hugging each other, such wholesome scenes! Bright, Player of the Match, embraced Sarina Wiegman and you can just see what it means to them. England have won the Arnold Clark Cup and defeated Germany for the first time at home. A great strike from White in the first match was cancelled out by arguably the goal of the tournament from Magull. The second half saw both teams playing well with shots coming in. But it was England’s Bright who broke the deadlock and Kirby added the extra. A breath-taking match, I am so excited for the Euros! Kirby makes a sensational break and just kept going. And going. And going! She smacks it home and seals a cracking match. Wow, this is why Kirby should be at 1o 90 + 2 min: There are three minutes added to this match. Germany look desperate to keep England to two goals as Russo and Hemp look to shoot. The defence does enough to quell the danger 90 min: Player of the Match has been confirmed as Millie Bright. The defender has played well in defence and came through for England when they needed her. She’s also the joint top tournament scorer with Spain’s Alexia Putellas. 88 min: England look to get a third as Hemp passes to Kirby but German shirts swarm. The visitors look to equalise one again, Rall is doing so well to battle with Kirby. The Chelsea star, though, ends up on the better end and wins a free kick. Germany make a change as Buhl comes off for Cerci. What a match this has been! 86 min: It’s interesting to note that was one of the many runs Hemp made where she kept her head up. Emma Hayes mentioned the Manchester City star didn’t have enough awareness but she seemed to get it just in time. What a finish from Bright as well! The camera has panned to Spain who are not happy with that score. England are so intent on finding a winner they have left Bright up front. And what a decision that is! A cracking ball from Hemp sees Bright tap home. 84 min: Hemp thumps the ball upfield as England throw everything at Germany to try and find a winner. But it’s the visitors who look dangerous, Brand almost scores from a cracking header. This is so tense! 82 min: Williamson takes a shot and the attempt sails way over the bar. Possession pinballs around the midfield and it ends in a break in play. England take the opportunity to bring Russo and Toone on for White and Bronze. 80 min: We are back, I have a feed back up and running! England have a free kick and Kirby takes it. Bright gets a head to it but it goes wide. Wow, what a stressful few minutes! 75 min: I apologise for the lack of on pitch updates, the ITV Hub has decided to have a meltdown and Twitter is raging about it! According to my Twitter sources, Germany were pinging the ball in the box but couldn’t quite get a shot away. England countered as Kirby saw a shot rattle the woodwork. Russo on shortly. 71 min: Neither side are yet to find a winner and Germany are the first to bring on their next changes. Hagel and Dallmann are on for Dongus and Magull. Interesting move taking Magull off. The goal-scorer and such a bright spark to this second half. 69 min: Alessia Russo is said to be warming up and will be the next England change. It will be interesting to see (if ITV wants to get their Hub back up and running) how she goes as she hasn’t had the best tournament. 66 min: England are on the attack once again with Daly smashing a great ball in. It just beats White as the hosts look to put themselves ahead once again. I’m relieved and frustrated to update you that it isn’t my internet causing the issue with my feed, it’s ITV Hub cutting out. I’m hoping it’s because so many fans are trying to watch the match. If you want to vent Hub frustrations to me, I’m all ears! Email or send me a tweet! 64 min: A heavy challenge comes in as Hemp and Gwinn collide. The England star looks in pain, let’s hope she is okay! She is on her feet and is staying on the pitch. My feed has decided to cut again, the joy. I’ll be all over any updates while my laptop decides to play ball though! 62 min: It was a solid cross from Stanway but it pings back out to Bronze. Her cross doesn’t have an affect. But Hemp is with the ball again and this time shoots, it’s saved by Frohms and she was offside anyway. England make their first change as Stanway comes off for Parris. 60 min: Hemp is great at dribbling the ball around the box but she needs to shoot! She’s in a great position but gets caught in two minds and doesn’t pull the trigger. She makes up for it by winning a free kick. Stanway on the kick again ... 58 min: Brand concedes a free kick with a foul on Walsh. The kick goes to Bronze but her pass is cut out. This is turning into a slightly sloppy performance from England now. Germany are really building and the mistakes are seeping into the Lionesses game. This may be the brightest Germany has played this tournament. 56 min: Williamson this time the one to lose the ball in the midfield but Bronze does well to get back to clear. England counter well with Hemp crossing to White but Feldkamp shuts down the attack - a great defensive move. 53 min: Bronze has a sloppy pass and it would have seen Buhl away but the German stops as she fouls Bronze. A lucky escape for England. Walsh passes sublime ball to Hemp who wins a corner. Stanway plays it short and low which is easy to read from Germany. Interesting the Lionesses have switched who takes the kick. Greenwood had been the taker. 51 min: Dongus’ pass goes straight out after impressive play from goal-scorer Magull. England look to build but they spill the ball in Germany’s half, a dangerous spell here for the hosts. Brand gets it into the box but a sloppy pass sees England full of relief. 49 min: Bronze does excellently as Germany look to shoot in a great position. She calmly intercepts the ball. Buhl has had a bright game so far and continues to be a big threat. 47 mins: What a fun fact, England have never drawn three consecutive matches in their international history. Hemp looks to break but it just gets away from her. Williamson gets the ball and the crowd encourages her to shoot, she doesn’t. It’s a high tempo star with only one change at half-time with Brand on for Germany. We are back underway. England need to score again in order to win the Arnold Clark Cup. If Germany hold them to a draw or bag a win, the cup will go to Spain. In other news, did I grab another Skittles bag in the break? Maybe I did, maybe I didn’t. Here’s a look at Magull’s sensational strike! As I said before the game, don’t count out Germany. White scored a beautiful opener after sustained England pressure. The hosts continued to impress and an error from Greenwood led to a German freekick. Magull then struck the perfect freekick, it superbly curled into goal with Roebuck able to do little to stop it. We are all square! 45 +1 min: England are retaining possession here, maybe running down the clock? There are two minutes added. Feel like my stress levels are back to normal now, phew the panic when my feed cut was very real! 44 min: My feed is back, huzzah! Gutted I missed that goal in real time, it was an absolute stunner. The equaliser means as things stand, Spain will win the tournament. From Twitter sources it seems Greenwood was booked, giving Germany a free kick. Magull curled the shot straight into goal, now we have a match on our hands! Don’t you just love it when the feed cuts and a goal is scores, I know I do! 39 min: Another mistake from Kirby in the midfield, unlike the Chelsea star. A pass gets away from her to gift the ball to Germany. Walsh wrestles the ball back, who passes to Greenwood and she sends it upfield. Hemp clatters to the floor to earn a free kick in scoring distance. Greenwood takes the kick and just as she does my feed on ITV Hub cuts out. Just what I need! 36 min: Dabritz, what a mistake! She nabs the ball after Kirby’s pass is loose in the midfield. The German captain makes a great run but doesn’t get it away to a teammate and Bright runs her off the pitch. England counter and White is almost through to double the lead. 34 min: Magull dribbles the ball around the top of the box and feeds Rall. She takes a shot but Roebuck calmly collects. Carter is receiving more treatment, surely she is coming off here? Yeah she is, Daly on in her place. 32 min: A lot of play in the midfield with possession exchanging hands. Carter looks to be suffering from that earlier clash, will keep you up to date on if she is taken off. 29 min: A clever play started by Rall sees Germany in the box for some time. Unfortunately for Germany, England manage to get the ball away. The match has so much tempo but some passes need to be more clinical for both sides. 27 min: Oh Stanway what a goal that would have been. White has a great pass and it looks like a bicycle kick from Stanway. Frohms makes a cracking save to limit England’s lead. Hemp wins a free kick from England’s half, seeing the Lionesses build again from deep. 25 min: Roebuck almost loses control of the ball in front of goal but she manages to scoop it up. A shaky start from the Manchester City keeper so far. Bright gifts away a throw in to halt Germany attack. Gwinn takes the throw but England clear. Hemp now on the run who passes to Carter. The Chelsea star’s pass isn’t good and it goes all the way back to Roebuck. 22 min: The game has wound down slightly with Carter down with injury. She got back to her feet and will play on. With the lull in the game, a recap of where we are at in the worst to best Skittles debate. We are now on yellow, green, orange, red and purple. Let me know your thoughts! An England corner sees Greenwood cross in but it goes to nothing. 20 min: Bronze concedes a corner after great play from Gwinn. Buhl takes the kick but England clear well. The ball then pinballs around the box and eventually get it away. This game is full throttle! 18 min: As things stand England will win the tournament on yellow cards but Germany aren’t going to lay down and let the hosts take a win. The goal hasn’t shaken the visitors but they will have to do something to stop the momentum soon. Kirby tries to get a shot away but Germany tap it back. The lack of power on the clearance meant Kirby could pass to White who splices it home. Are England on their way to a first home win against Germany? Finally England get their opener, a great team goal! 14 min: Hemp holds onto the ball in the final third a touch too long to silence a deadly attack. And Greenwood puts a delightful pass in but again England spill the attack. This must be frustrating for England fans to watch. The German defensive wall holds strong though and the visitors look to counter. 12 min: Bronze deals well with a slow build from Germany, the pressure from the visitors is brilliant. Williamson concedes a corner and Buhl takes the kick. Rall gets a head to the cross but Roebuck jumps on it. Roebuck gets herself out of trouble as a pass from goal goes loose. She smothers the ball heading back to goal. 9 min: Carter did well to win a throw in as Germany players swarm the ball. Germany start to counter but Walsh intercepts the ball and look to build from deep. A great start from England so far. 7 min: As Rall clears a great Greenwood pass, we have had more opinions on Skittles. Courtney has tweeted me: “Orange deserves to be higher up that list.” I don’t think I would be mad if orange rose in the ranks, anything but the yellow. 5 min: Is there anything Hemp can’t do? Every time she has played for England this tournament she has made great breaks. Her danger is dealt with well though Buhl. The hosts wins a free kick, Greenwood takes the set-piece but it goes to nothing. Rall looks to counter but Roebuck collects. Lively exchanges! 2 min: The Skittles debate is raging on and I have received a controversial comment. Daniel reached out via Twitter and said: “I‘m very uncouth and just bundle a lot in and snaffle them down, so I don’t really know if yellow ones are gross or not. I hate yellow Starburst and Fruit Gums though.” I feel you need to do a taste test Daniel to see if your hate for yellow sweets extends to Skittles. An interesting experiment. Back to the football, England have started brightly! I think this is the loudest crowd yet, huge applause and cheers for both teams! The anthems ring out and the players discard their jumpers. Here we go! Earlier I said I was unsure who would win the tournament if England beat Germany 1-0 and pick up three yellow cards, I now have the answer - England and Spain would share the trophy. I don’t know how to feel about a shared win if I’m honest The players are about to come out onto the pitch with anthems to follow. Kick-off isn’t far away ... I am grateful to share I am not the only person who hates yellow Skittles, our very own Suzy Wrack has told me she tolerates them. Suzy went a step further and ordered them worst to best, I can’t say I disagree with her. Yellow, Orange, Green, Red, Purple. I will welcome, and challenge, any other orders or opinions on Skittles. Email me or send me a tweet @rendellx. The stats are ever in Germany’s favour ahead of this clash. The visitors have played England 26 times and they have only lost once. On top of that, Germany have never lost to England away from home. It’s an astonishing achievement and they will look to maintain it. Kick-off in just over 15 minutes. If anyone was intrigued by what snack I landed on, I went with Skittles. The only issue is I hate the yellow ones. Does anyone else share my disgust? Anyway, back to the task in hand, we are just over 20 minutes away from kick-off. Can England take the trophy? Or will Germany halt the celebrations? Get in touch and let me know. I believe this is the first Arnold Clark Cup match England have played without a storm going on. First it was Eunice, then Franklin. The weather isn’t much brighter but at least it’s not gale force winds and rain! England manager Sarina Wigeman told ITV: “As we said we play three games, we will try some things. A lot of players will get minutes and after this tournament we will have a lot of information. “It is very competitive [in goal]. At the moment Mary is our first choice keeper.” Considering how injury hit Germany’s team was heading into this tournament, they have played extremely well and it won’t do England any favours if they under-estimate them. They were able to claim a late equaliser against Euros favourites Spain and just lost 1-0 to Canada. We have quite the match on our hands. The biggest surprise for me there was Hannah Hampton’s change. I know I should have seen it coming with the goalkeepers changing every match but Hampton did fantastically well on her debut last time out. Before the tournament decider gets underway I’m going to raid my snacks cupboard, I’m thinking maybe some Skittles or crisps. Do you have a go to snack for football? Let me know be emailing me or dropping me a tweet @rendellx! I’ve also gone rogue and made myself a coffee past 6.30pm. Will I regret this later? More than likely. England have made six changes following their draw with Spain and it sees Leah Williamson handed back the captaincy. England’s starting XI is: Roebuck, Walsh, Greenwood, Bright, Kirby, Williamson, White, Hemp, Bronze, Stanway, Carter Substitutes: Earps, Daly, Stokes, Toone, Hampton, Mead, Parris, Nobbs, Charles, Scott, Russo, Zelem Germany have made five changes from their loss to Canada. Their starting 11 is: Frohms, Rall, Feldkamp, Kleinherne, Gwinn, Dongus, Dabritz, Magull, Anyomi, Schuller, Buhl They haven’t released a list of substitutes but I will try and track them down. Preamble Welcome back to the Arnold Clark Cup and we return with its concluding match. England take on Germany and the hosts have the potential to win the tournament if they can limit their disciplinaries and claim victory over their opponents. England are currently third and but with Spain beating Canada 1-0 earlier today, the Lionesses could take the crown. Germany, meanwhile, are unable to win after a draw and a loss so far in the competition. So how can England win? This is where it gets complicated ... If England beat Germany 1-0 and only get two disciplinaries they win. If they beat Germany and score more than two goals they win. I’m unsure how the tournament would be decided if England beat Germany 1-0 and pick up three disciplinaries as they would then be all square with Spain. But we will cross that bridge if it comes to it! Both England and Germany will release their starting XI’s shortly for the 7.30pm kick-off, so stay tuned.Sometimes the stars align, even a stopped clock tells the right time twice a day and occasionally Eddie Jones’s views on team selection match up with those of the England masses. On Wednesday night the latest indications were that by selecting a midfield combination of Marcus Smith, Manu Tuilagi and Henry Slade, Thursday morning’s team announcement is set to be one of those occasions. The curveball move would have been to pick Tuilagi on the wing – as was the case against Australia in November – or leaving him on the bench but barring a late change of heart, Jones is likely to give the public what they want. For, given the options available to him, a 10-12-13 combination of Smith, Tuilagi and Slade is the most logical choice - a midfield trio providing the backbone of a lineup to quicken the pace en route to Twickenham. To date that midfield trio have appeared together only in glimpses, including eight minutes in the victory over South Africa before Tuilagi went off with a hamstring injury, having already scored the opening try. But with 15 Tests left before the World Cup campaign begins, now is the time for Jones to unleash this perfectly-balanced combination which could wreak havoc at France 2023, the elephant in the room that is a fit-again Owen Farrell notwithstanding. It is a combination that marries Smith’s electricity at fly-half with the gainline power of Tuilagi and the abundant class of Slade as a second playmaking option. It would be so well received that supporters would not quibble as to which way round Tuilagi and Slade are selected, provided they occupy the same midfield. The theory goes that Tuilagi would link with Smith the way that Andre Esterhuizen does at Harlequins, punching holes in the Wales defence to give the fly-half the front-foot ball and space with which to work his magic. Smith and Slade dovetailed wonderfully against the Springboks despite Tuilagi’s early withdrawal so the prospect of those two working in harness with the fit-again 30-year-old is a mouthwatering one. Indeed, with the exception of Anthony Watson and perhaps Jonny May - though he has struggled for form this season - Thursday’s selection will largely reflect the New England Jones wants to take with him to the World Cup. Courtney Lawes is back available, another significant reinforcement, and there is a sense that the pieces of the puzzle are slowly but surely coming together. Jones’s other big selection calls come at No 8 with neither Sam Simmonds nor Alex Dombrandt truly seizing their opportunity in the opening two rounds of the Six Nations and between Nick Isiekwe and Charlie Ewels in the second row with question marks still persisting over the identity of Maro Itoje’s long-term partner. Jones will also decide whether to return Lawes to the captaincy – the expectation is that he will – provided he is fit enough to start and whether Ben Youngs wins his record-breaking 115th England cap from the start or the bench, given Harry Randall’s impressive performance against Italy. “I’ve got so much respect for the bloke,” said Youngs’ Leicester teammate Ellis Genge. “I can’t describe it. The stuff he’s sacrificed to achieve what he’s achieved in rugby, and what he gave up, which most people would take an arm off for, like staying at home for the Lions tours to support his brother and his family. I love him to bits, he’s a great guy. “For someone to do it 115 times, the weekend all being well, then play 200-odd times for his club as well, that’s more than 300 senior games, not bearing in mind the amateur game… he’s just so much fun to be around.” Meanwhile, Louis Rees-Zammit has been dropped from the Wales side to face England in a surprise move by Wayne Pivac, who announces his starting XV on Thursday. The 21-year-old wing has struggled for form and Josh Adams has been declared fit to start at Twickenham but the decision to omit Rees-Zammit, who is likely to feature for Gloucester instead this weekend, is a shock nonetheless given the manner in which he lit up last year’s Six Nations.Since the millennium, reality TV has undergone a slow but steady shift – away from the pseudo-sociological experiment and towards the “dinner party descends into total chaos” genre. This latter-day variant is engineered to achieve a single goal: create a situation in which a group of people argue savagely (and usually drunkenly) over an extremely large table, until at least one person storms out, and everyone else sits there looking awkward. (Masters of the manoeuvre include: Made in Chelsea, Married at First Sight, and the Real Housewives franchise.) On the face of it, the dinner-chaos format doesn’t seem the ideal vehicle for We Are Black and British (BBC Two), a two-parter that aims to examine the problems faced by Black people in the UK today, and to brainstorm potential solutions. Motivated, in part, by 2020’s Black Lives Matter protests, the show invites six Black Britons with divergent opinions on race, society and politics to live together in a Cotswolds country pile for 10 days. There, they are encouraged to engage in a series of crackingly tense debates, which routinely erupt into full-blown rows over dinner every evening. And yet, these arguments are a world away from the squawking, self-involved drama that tends to act as reality-TV rocket fuel. Structured via a series of questions, each introduced by a different participant – “Should stop and search be stopped?”; “When Black kids fail, why do schools get the blame?” – most of the discussions are nuanced and insightful. In fact, We Are Black and British can comfortably claim to be the most intelligent reality TV show in recent memory. This is largely thanks to the participants, who all come across as thoughtful, articulate and engaging. Only two of them seem to have arrived with a fully formed worldview: Birmingham City University professor Kehinde Andrews, who describes himself as a Black radical who wants to defund the police, and 23-year-old political commentator Dominique Samuels, who doesn’t believe in systemic racism and enters the house proclaiming how proud she is to be British – with a slogan T-shirt to match. Everyone else – rapper Mista Strange, NHS doctor Raphael Olaiya, security guard and mother of two Michelle White, and property and litigation contractor Lin Mei – seems to possess a patchwork of opinions that don’t conform to any easily digestible agenda. That means group debates are often shaped by fast-moving logic and critical thinking rather than set-in-stone values. A discussion about the relationship between the police and the Black community is empathic, wide-ranging – and also deeply ambivalent. There is no right or wrong perspective here: everyone makes compelling points and equal numbers of viewers might come away convinced by Kehinde’s stance or by Lin’s. That is not to say that all of the conversations go in edifying directions. When Mista Strange wants to discuss how difficult it is for Black people to come out as gay, a highly uncomfortable chat about Christianity follows. This, in turn, is derailed by Lin and Dominique, who decide to grill the rapper about the “transgender agenda” supposedly being introduced into primary schools, in what seems like a particularly unpleasant example of whataboutery. That is really the only moment when you feel as if you’re in the Other Place. The spectre of social media debate is ever-present in We Are Black and British – but largely as a positive contrast. Twitter is where people who already know what they think about everything shout about it: this show makes room for deeply held beliefs as well as uncertainty. Its emphasis is on listening to the human being sitting next to you, and giving them a hug when they’re upset – even though you might find their political views repellent. In fact, by the end, the group dynamic is so heartening that it’s discombobulating to discover – via some light Googling – that a few participants have clearly been cast in the show precisely because they are expert in this kind of social media discourse. In a couple of cases, their online presences feel like case studies in how social media has evolved to breed division – and a reminder of how the internet can warp your impression of a person entirely. If you remain blissfully ignorant of that background, We Are Black and British is a masterclass in how to have divisive discussions in an uplifting, constructive way. And yet the show’s most memorable moments come when nobody is arguing: when Michelle breaks down in tears at the memory of her son being arrested for carrying the penknife he needs for work, or when Lin explains how her mixed-race background means she was subjected to racist abuse at family functions. There may be a questionable moral dimension to this: while the show never feels exploitative, it still asks its contributors to make themselves vulnerable by revealing distressing experiences of racism – essentially turning Black people’s pain into entertainment. But it would be difficult to make such a powerful programme about race without that emotional element. And, crucially, it also provides a sense of urgency to their discussions, underlining how imperative it is that Britain changes the way it treats its Black citizens. Something – everyone seems to agree – that is not up for debate.That’s it from me today. Here’s how the day unfolded in Washington, as the world awaits Russia’s next move in Ukraine: Joe Biden announced he will allow sanctions on the company overseeing construction of the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline to move forward. The news comes nearly a year after Biden used a national security waiver to block the congressionally-approved sanctions on the Russia-to-Germany pipeline. The White House had previously been hesitant to sanction Nord Stream 2 AG out of concern for its relationship with Berlin, but German Chancellor Olaf Scholz’s decision to halt the project’s certification has now cleared the way for the sanctions. The Kremlin said it received an official request for military aid from the leaders of the two self-proclaimed in east Ukraine. The request could allow Vladimir Putin to send a larger military force into the region, potentially setting the stage for a fuller-scaler invasion. Republicans have offered a scattered response to the first tranche of Biden’s sanctions on Russia. Some Republican hawks in Congress, including Senator Lindsey Graham, have attacked the sanctions as an inadequate response to Putin’s aggression in Ukraine. But the leader of the Republican party, former President Donald Trump, has praised Putin as a “genius” for recognizing the two self-proclaimed republics in east Ukraine. House speaker Nancy Pelosi attacked Putin as a “tyrant” for ordering troops into east Ukraine. “It’s stunning to see, in this day and age, a tyrant roll into a country,” Pelosi said on Capitol Hill today, after returning from the Munich Security Conference. “This is the same tyrant who attacked our democracy in 2016.” For more updates on Ukraine and Russia, be sure to follow the Guardian’s separate live blog: The Kremlin says that it has received an official request for military aid from the leaders of the two Russian-controlled territories in east Ukraine. The request gives Russia a pretext to send a large military force into Donbas as early as this evening. The separatist leaders asked Russia to “help repel the aggression of the Ukrainian armed forces in order to avoid civilian casualties and a humanitarian catastrophe in the Donbas,” according to Kremlin spokesman Dmitri Peskov. Russian news agencies have posted copies of the letters from the Donetsk and Luhansk Peoples’ Republics. Vladimir Putin received authorisation from lawmakers to use his military abroad on Tuesday. He has amassed more than 60% of his land forces on the border with Ukraine. Despite the intensifying concerns over Russia launching a fuller-scale invasion of Ukraine in the coming days, Joe Biden still has no plans whatsoever to send US troops to Ukraine, Jen Psaki said. “The president has been crystal clear and consistent: he is not sending US troops to fight in Ukraine. That has not changed,” the White House press secretary said. Psaki noted the US has taken a range of steps to provide humanitarian and security assistance to Ukraine, while also helping to bolster the defenses of its partners in eastern Europe, in response to Russian aggression. “We will continue to plus this all up, but the president is not sending US troops to fight in Ukraine,” Psaki said. “That hasn’t changed.” A reporter asked Jen Psaki why the Biden administration’s first tranche of sanctions against Russia does not include direct sanctions on Vladimir Putin. “It remains an option on the table,” Psaki said, noting that US sanctions are meant to be “escalatory” if Putin pursues a fuller-scale invasion of Ukraine. The White House press secretary noted that subsequent rounds of sanctions may also target Russia’s largest banks and other components of the country’s economy if Putin moves forward. Jen Psaki said that the US believes Vladimir Putin has been caught off-guard by the west’s response to Russia’s military actions in Ukraine. “What our assessment is is that President Putin did not expect the United States to have the level of information that we have, did not expect us to put out this amount of information that we have put out, did not expect the global community to be as unified,” the White House press secretary said. “And what we’re seeing now, our assessment is that he is improvising, adapting, and we’re having to respond.” Psaki noted that Joe Biden is continuing to meet with his national security team as the US monitors Russia’s maneuvers in Ukraine, amid fears of a fuller-scale invasion. Biden is “continuing to work with partners and allies to ensure we remain united, to leave the door open to diplomacy but to make very clear to President Putin and to our partners around the world that there will be significant consequences beyond what we have done already should he invade further,” Psaki said. The White House press secretary, Jen Psaki, is now holding her daily briefing, and she kicked off her prepared remarks by offering more details on the Biden administration’s new sanctions against Russia. Psaki noted the Russian economy has already suffered setbacks in recent months, with the ruble trading at its lowest level since March 2020 and the country’s wealthiest families losing $32bn this year. “Obviously, the bite of these sanctions has not taken place yet,” Psaki said. “This is a vicious feedback loop that will get more severe.” The state department spokesperson, Ned Price, was also asked about Secretary of State Antony Blinken’s decision to cancel a meeting with his Russian counterpart yesterday. Price emphasized that the US was no longer willing to engage in “the pretense of diplomacy” as Vladimir Putin orders Russian troops into east Ukraine and recognizes two self-proclaimed republics in the region. “This is and has been, in some ways, diplomatic Kabuki theater on the part of the Russians – making statements that they are committed to a diplomatic path while their actions suggest exactly the opposite,” Price said. “That is not an environment in which diplomacy can achieve the results that it needs to achieve.” Price said the US and its allies still hoped to “avert the worst-case scenario” in Ukraine, which may include a fuller-scale Russian invasion, attacks on major cities and human rights atrocities. “We absolutely remain open to diplomacy but only if Moscow is serious,” Price said. “We are not going to engage in this pretense with them.” A reporter asked Ned Price, the spokesperson for the US state department, about Donald Trump and former secretary of state Mike Pompeo praising Vladimir Putin’s military maneuvers in Ukraine. “I have no response. In fact, I have no words,” Price said. Trump said in an interview yesterday that he considered Putin’s recognition of two self-proclaimed republics in east Ukraine to be “genius” and “very savvy”. Pompeo has also repeatedly praised Putin in recent weeks, as more Russian troops appeared along Ukraine’s borders in the run-up to the invasion. “Very shrewd, very capable. I have enormous respect for him,” Pompeo said last month. “I’ve been criticized for saying that. No, I have enormous respect for him.” In response to Joe Biden’s new sanctions on Nord Stream 2 AG, Republican Senator Ted Cruz is lifting some holds he had placed on state department nominees to protest the president’s previous opposition to the congressionally-approved sanctions. “President Biden made the right decision today,” Cruz said in a statement. “Allowing Putin’s Nord Stream 2 to come online would have created multiple, cascading, and acute security crises for the United States and our European allies for generations to come. Today’s announcement is critical to preventing such scenarios.” But Cruz also warned that Russian President Vladimir Putin considers Nord Stream 2 to be a “fait accompli now that it has been physically completed,” and he emphasized the importance of ensuring the pipeline does not become operational. “Meanwhile, our Ukrainian allies are on the front lines this very moment bravely facing down Russian forces,” Cruz said. “For months they have been pleading with us to help them by, first, locking in exactly these sanctions on Nord Stream 2 and, second, providing them with the lethal aid they need to defend themselves. President Biden has now taken positive steps in both areas, but much more still needs to be done to deter and counter the threat that Putin poses to our allies in Ukraine and across Europe.” Daleep Singh, the deputy national security advisor for international economics and the deputy National Economic Council director, said that the termination of Nord Stream 2 would deprive Russia of a vital economic resource. “That’s an $11bn investment in a prized gas pipeline controlled by Russia that will now go to waste, and it sacrifices what would have been a cash cow for Russia’s coffers,” Singh said at yesterday’s White House briefing. “But it’s not just about the money. This decision will relieve Russia’s geostrategic chokehold over Europe through its supply of gas, and it’s a major turning point in the world’s energy independence from Russia.” A reporter later pressed Jen Psaki, the White House press secretary, on why Joe Biden blocked sanctions on Nord Stream 2 AG last year if he considered the project to be such a threat to international security. “The president has never been a supporter of Nord Stream 2. We’ve always criticized it as a project that we didn’t support,” Psaki said. “The announcement made by the German chancellor today was not by accident; it was at the conclusion of a range of diplomatic engagements and efforts by the president and members of our national security team, in unity from the Europeans, about the fact that this could not move forward. ... The president didn’t feel that issuing pre-emptive sanctions on that was the right step to take.” Joe Biden’s newly announced sanctions specifically target the Swiss firm Nord Stream 2 AG, which is overseeing construction of the oil pipeline, and its corporate officers. It’s worth noting that the parent company of Nord Stream 2 AG is the Russian gas giant Gazprom, according to CNN. One senior administration official told CNN that the sanctions would effectively be a death knell for Nord Stream 2, which was already facing a bleak future after German Chancellor Olaf Scholz announced he would halt certification of the project. The planned Russia-to-Germany pipeline had attracted widespread scrutiny from Vladimir Putin’s critics, who warned that he would use the oil source to exert influence over Germany and its allies. Joe Biden has now confirmed that his administration will impose sanctions on the company overseeing construction of the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline. “Yesterday, after further close consultations between our two governments, Germany announced that it would halt certification of the pipeline. Today, I have directed my administration to impose sanctions on Nord Stream 2 AG and its corporate officers,” Biden said in a new statement. “These steps are another piece of our initial tranche of sanctions in response to Russia’s actions in Ukraine. As I have made clear, we will not hesitate to take further steps if Russia continues to escalate.” The announcement comes nearly a year after Biden used a national security waiver to block the congressionally-approved sanctions on the company overseeing Nord Stream 2. The White House had previously been hesitant to sanction Nord Stream 2 AG out of concern for its relationship with Germany, but Chancellor Olaf Scholz’s decision to halt the project’s certification has now cleared the way for the sanctions. “Through his actions, President Putin has provided the world with an overwhelming incentive to move away from Russian gas and to other forms of energy,” Biden said. “I want to thank Chancellor Scholz for his close partnership and continued dedication to holding Russia accountable for its actions.” US warns Ukraine that full scale invasion ‘highly likely’ within next 48 hours - report Citing US intelligence officials, Newsweek is reporting that President Biden’s administration has warned Ukrainian counterpart Volodymyr Zelenskyy that Russia is preparing a full scale invasion within the next 48 hours: “The President of Ukraine has been warned Russia will highly likely begin an invasion within 48 hours based on US intelligence,” a US official told Newsweek. “Additionally,” the US official added, “reporting from aircraft observers indicates Russia violated Ukrainian airspace earlier today, flying possible reconnaissance aircraft for a short period over Ukraine.” Cyber attacks are ‘negatively impacting Ukranians’ The websites of Ukraine’s government, foreign ministry and state security service were down on Wednesday in what the government said was the start of another massive denial of service (DDoS) attack, Reuters is reporting. Melissa Griffith, a Senior Program Associate at The Wilson Center in Washington DC has this analysis on the growing threat of cyber warfare. Cyber operations, like those we are currently witnessing in Ukraine, are here to stay... States in general and Russia, in particular, can and have leveraged them to shape the environment (or circumstances) in their favor through intelligence collection and sabotage as well as spreading fear, uncertainty, and distrust. These operations directly, and negatively, impact Ukrainians’ lives. However, neither the United States nor Ukraine can afford to miss the forest through the trees. Cyber operations - including the recent wave of DDoS attacks - are just one element of a much larger and pressing set of national security concerns. The consequences from a land war are far graver than any cyber operation Russia has carried out or may carry out in the future. Ukraine urges its citizens to leave Russia immediately The latest from Andrew Roth in Moscow and Emma Graham-Harrison in Kyiv: Ukraine has advised its estimated 3 million citizens living in Russia to leave the country, in the latest signal that Kyiv believes Moscow may be planning an invasion. In a statement on Wednesday, the Ukrainian foreign ministry urged its citizens to refrain from travel to Russia and for those already in the country to leave as soon as possible. “Due to the increased Russian aggression against Ukraine, which, among other things, may lead to a significant restriction of the ability to provide consular assistance on the territory of the Russian Federation, the ministry of foreign affairs recommends that Ukrainian citizens refrain from any travel to the Russian Federation, and those who are in this country immediately leave its territory,” the ministry statement said. It also warned that it would have limited resources to help those Ukrainians who remained in Russia in case of a major diplomatic rupture. Ukrainians make up the largest diaspora community in Russia, where many have family members and travel to work. An estimated 3 million Ukrainian citizens live in Russia, according to a speech Vladimir Putin made in 2019. Here’s where the day stands so far: Republicans have offered a scattered response to Joe Biden’s sanctions on Russia in response to Vladimir Putin’s military actions in Ukraine. Some Republican hawks in Congress, including Senator Lindsey Graham, have attacked the sanctions as an inadequate response to Putin’s aggression. But the leader of the Republican party, former President Donald Trump, has praised Putin as a “genius” for recognizing the two self-proclaimed republics in east Ukraine. Biden is expected to allow sanctions on the Russian company overseeing construction of the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline to move forward, according to multiple reports. The news comes nearly a year after Biden used a national security waiver to block the sanctions, which have been championed by Republicans in Congress. House speaker Nancy Pelosi attacked Putin as a “tyrant” for ordering troops into east Ukraine. “It’s stunning to see, in this day and age, a tyrant roll into a country,” Pelosi said on Capitol Hill today, after returning from the Munich Security Conference. “This is the same tyrant who attacked our democracy in 2016.” The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned. House speaker Nancy Pelosi said that the US sanctions on Russia were necessary to show the Russian people how Vladimir Putin and his elite allies have used their authority to build personal fortunes. “Putin is probably the richest man in the world,” Pelosi said. “The Russian people have to see how they had been exploited by their own government.” Emphasizing the urgency of the situation in Ukraine, Pelosi said it was imperative that the US and Nato deliver a robust response to Putin’s aggression in defense of democracies around the world. “We cannot ignore what Putin is doing,” Pelosi said. “You cannot take it any lighter than what it is: a total assault on democracy.” Adam Schiff predicted that the Biden administration’s sanctions on Russia, which some Republicans have attacked as too lenient, will escalate as Vladimir Putin pursues further military action in Ukraine. “The sanctions are going to just continue to increase and will have an ultimately crippling impact on many sectors of the Russian economy,” said Schiff, the chairman of the House intelligence committee. Schiff added that the sanctions would also have an impact on public opinion of Putin, saying, “We have to make sure that those costs continue and that the Russian people see the costs of their dictator’s aggression.” Adam Schiff, the Democratic chair of the House intelligence committee, applauded Joe Biden for authorizing a “very shrewd declassification of intelligence” on Russia’s planned invasion of Ukraine. “It stripped away any Russian pretext and laid bare for the world to say that this Russian invasion of Ukraine is nothing more than naked aggression by Vladimir Putin,” Schiff said. The California congressman also emphasized the importance of the US and its allies remaining unified in the face of Russia’s escalating aggression against Ukraine. “Putin will look to exploit any fissure, any crack within Nato in our coalition,” Schiff said. House speaker Nancy Pelosi is now holding a press conference on Capitol Hill, after attending the Munich Security Conference last week. Pelosi attacked Russian President Vladimir Putin for recognizing the two self-proclaimed republics in east Ukraine and ordering troops into the region, repeatedly describing him as a “tyrant”. “It’s stunning to see, in this day and age, a tyrant roll into a country,” Pelosi said. “This is the same tyrant who attacked our democracy in 2016.” That is, of course, a reference to Russian meddling in America’s 2016 elections to boost Donald Trump’s chances of victory in the presidential race. “This is the same tyrant who is opposed to democracy and wants to minimize, trivialize it, to downgrade it in the eyes of the Russian people,” Pelosi added. Russian forces massing near Ukraine’s borders can only remain in position for a few days before they have to be sent back to nearby bases or risk their capability being significantly degraded, western officials and experts believe. That means that President Vladimir Putin will come under increasing pressure to use them in a full invasion of Ukraine – or send them back to staging areas, still in Russia’s south or west, but tens or even hundreds of kilometres back. Such advance positions, often with poor protection from the cold, can be held only for a short period – and there is some evidence on social media of the poor conditions endured by soldiers near the border. The US stock market is taking a tumble this morning, in response to Vladimir Putin’s military actions in east Ukraine and reports of cyberattacks impacting Ukrainian government sites. Reuters reports: After opening higher, eight of the 11 major S&amp;P 500 sectors fell, while a 2.3% drop in Tesla (TSLA.O) dragged the Nasdaq lower. Twenty of the 30 Dow components were trading in the red. ... At 10:29 a.m. ET, the Dow Jones Industrial Average (.DJI) was down 86.00 points, or 0.26%, at 33,510.61, the S&amp;P 500 (.SPX) was down 10.83 points, or 0.25%, at 4,293.93, and the Nasdaq Composite (.IXIC) was down 50 points, or 0.37%, at 13,331.52. U.S. stocks have had a turbulent start to 2022 as worsening geopolitical tensions hurt investor sentiment already dented by worries about aggressive policy tightening by the Federal Reserve to combat inflation. Donald Trump has said that Vladimir Putin is “very savvy” and made a “genius” move by declaring two regions of eastern Ukraine as independent states and moving Russian armed forces to them. Trump said he saw the escalation of the Ukrainian crisis on TV “and I said: ‘This is genius.’ Putin declares a big portion of the Ukraine … Putin declares it as independent. Oh, that’s wonderful.” The former US president said that the Russian president had made a “smart move” by sending “the strongest peace force I’ve ever seen” to the area. Trump’s intervention was criticized by the two Republicans serving on the House select committee investigating the January 6 Capitol riot, who are among the few Republicans who have been critical of the former president. Liz Cheney tweeted that Trump’s statement “aids our enemies. Trump’s interests don’t seem to align with the interests of the United States of America.” Adam Kinzinger, meanwhile, retweeted a screenshot from the House Republicans that showed Biden walking away – which was captioned with the comment: “This is what weakness on the world stage looks like” – to denounce it in fiery terms. Kinzinger wrote: “As still ‘technically’ a member of house Republicans, let me, with all my might, condemn this damn awful tweet during this crisis. You can criticize policy but this is insane and feeds into Putins narrative. But hey, retweets amirite?” Madeleine Albright, the former secretary of state who served under Bill Clinton, warns in a New York Times op-ed that a full-scale invasion of Ukraine would be a “a historic error” by Vladimir Putin. Albright notes that she first met Putin in early 2000, and she was struck by how he seemed “embarrassed by what happened to his country and determined to restore its greatness”. “I have been reminded in recent months of that nearly three-hour session with Mr. Putin as he has massed troops on the border with neighboring Ukraine,” Albright writes. “Mr. Putin has for years sought to burnish his country’s international reputation, expand Russia’s military and economic might, weaken NATO and divide Europe (while driving a wedge between it and the United States). Ukraine features in all of that. “Instead of paving Russia’s path to greatness, invading Ukraine would ensure Mr. Putin’s infamy by leaving his country diplomatically isolated, economically crippled and strategically vulnerable in the face of a stronger, more united Western alliance.” Joe Biden is expected to allow sanctions on the Russian company overseeing construction of the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline to move forward, according to a new report. The report comes nearly a year after Biden used a national security waiver to block those sanctions, which have been championed by Republicans in Congress. CNN reports: The administration decided to move forward with rescinding the national security waiver after Germany on Tuesday announced that it was halting the certification of the pipeline, [one] official said. Sanctioning Nord Stream 2’s parent company, Nord Stream 2 AG -- a registered Swiss firm whose parent company is the Russian gas giant Gazprom -- is effectively a death knell to the project, the official added. The move marks a significant shift in the administration’s policy toward Nord Stream 2, which had previously been to sanction some of the smaller entities involved in the project, including some Russian companies and ships that have been helping in the construction, but to hold off on sanctioning Nord Stream 2 AG and its CEO, Matthias Warnig. The Wall Street Journal’s editorial board has criticized Joe Biden’s newly announced sanctions against Russia, arguing the measures do not go far enough to deter Vladimir Putin. The conservative-leaning board writes: ‘Who in the Lord’s name does Putin think gives him the right to declare new so-called countries?’ President Biden asked Tuesday in announcing new sanctions against Russia. The answer is a complacent West, which has failed to impose serious costs despite more than a decade of Russian aggression. At least the Administration overcame its initial reluctance to call Vladimir Putin’s deployment of troops in Eastern Ukraine an ‘invasion.’ Mr. Biden on Tuesday called it ‘the beginning of a Russian invasion,’ and he responded with what he said was the beginning of greater sanctions. The White House bet seems to be that sanctions restraint will cause Mr. Putin to settle for holding the regions his forces now occupy and forgoing an assault on Kyiv. But the Russian has never been deterred before by Western restraint, and he may see this as more weakness. Mr. Putin responds only to strength, and the West still isn’t showing enough. Russia’s defence minister, Sergei Shoigu, the commanders-in-chief of the Russian air force and Black Sea fleet, leading state “propagandists” and 351 Duma deputies are expected to be targeted in EU sanctions announced on Wednesday. The measures, which have to be signed off by EU foreign ministers, would go further than those announced by the US and a significant distance beyond Boris Johnson’s Russia sanctions. If approved, the EU will impose asset freezes and travel bans on 23 people, three banks and a notorious internet “troll factory” in St Petersburg, in response to the Russian president, Vladimir Putin’s decision to recognise the self-proclaimed republics in Donetsk and Luhansk as independent states. The bloc is also expected to sanction 351 members of the Russian state Duma that voted for recognition of the two territories. Joe Biden thought he would be remembered as the pandemic president, but finds himself commanding the arsenal of democracy in what could become the biggest military assault in Europe since the second world war. The crisis escalated on Monday after Vladimir Putin recognised two breakaway territories in eastern Ukraine as independent entities, an apparent pretext for invasion. “Who in the Lord’s name does Putin think gives him the right to declare new so-called countries on territory that belonged to his neighbours?” Biden demanded in the east room. “This is a flagrant violation of international law, and it demands a firm response from the international community.” But the response he delivered did not go as far as some in Washington would have liked, receiving a cautious welcome from Democrats and failing to satisfy Republicans who accuse Biden of appeasement. It was a shot across Putin’s bows but also the work of an administration keeping some of its powder dry. The logic here is that sanctions lose their potency as a deterrent if they are imposed too quickly: if somebody has been punished for something they haven’t yet done, they might as well do it anyway. But with the window for diplomacy rapidly closing, it may soon be too late for deterrence to mean anything. Greetings from Washington, live blog readers. Joe Biden announced yesterday that his administration would issue sanctions on Russian financial institutions, sovereign debt and elite families in response to Vladimir Putin’s military actions in Ukraine. The announcement came after Putin said Russia would recognize the two self-proclaimed republics in east Ukraine and send troops to the region, sparking international outrage. For some Republicans, the sanctions issued by Biden are an inadequate response to Putin’s undermining of Ukrainian sovereignty. “This is a critical moment in history … and President Biden is NOT seizing the moment,” Republican senator Lindsey Graham said on Twitter. “The sanctions outlined are woefully inadequate to deter Putin’s efforts to redraw the European map and dismember a neighboring democracy.” But the leader of the Republican party, Donald Trump, has struck a far different tone on the Ukraine crisis. In an interview with The Clay Travis &amp; Buck Sexton Show, Trump described Putin’s maneuvers in Ukraine as “genius” and “very savvy”. “I went in yesterday and there was a television screen, and I said, ‘This is genius.’ Putin declares a big portion of the Ukraine, of Ukraine, Putin declares it as independent. Oh, that’s wonderful,” Trump said. If Republicans want to criticize Biden over his response to Putin, they may need to get on the same page first. The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned.Crystal Palace cavorted to their first league win of 2022 at the seventh attempt and in doing so surely banished any lingering concerns over being dragged into a relegation battle, making clear in the process their superiority over one of the sides that had hoped to overhaul them. Two late goals from Wilfried Zaha added gloss to a victory in which the visitors were assisted by opponents whose defence too often seems to favour voluntarily creating chances for their opponents over preventing them. It is hard to blame Roy Hodgson for the failings of a team that so many other coaches have also failed to inspire, but there was certainly nothing in this game to make anyone at Palace regret no longer having him in their dugout as, the defending at one first-half corner apart, their side appeared both better coached and better motivated, strong in defence, vibrant in attack and ruthless in exposing their hosts’ weaknesses. “It was an important game for us and we needed that win for our confidence,” Patrick Vieira said. “I think when you’re looking at our performances in the last couple of games, they were good but we were missing this kind of clinical finishing. Today our game was more complete – we defended well, we used the ball well, and when we had chances we scored in important moments in the game.” The victory against Aston Villa on Saturday had applied the defibrillator paddles to the Hornets’ battle against relegation, but here they once again resembled the walking dead who lost against Brighton in their previous home game. Not since November have they claimed so much as a point at Vicarage Road, a run of defeats now extended to seven. Hodgson said afterwards that his team were “punished quite heavily for the few defensive mistakes that we made in and around our box”, but in the first half in particular there was a string of them. Hassane Kamara’s miserable attempt to deal with Zaha’s cross fell to Conor Gallagher inside the six-yard box; Samir presented Jean-Philippe Mateta with a chance to run clear from halfway; and the Brazilian failed to deal with Gallagher’s cross as it ran to Mateta, whose shot held little danger before it deflected off Kiko Femenía’s back and wrong-footed Ben Foster. Roused by the opener the following 10 minutes were Watford’s best of the game and it took only three of them to score, Moussa Sissoko thundering home a header from Femenía’s corner. It was to be their only shot on target. In the following minutes Emmanuel Dennis and Joshua King both missed presentable headed chances, but in time Watford’s forward momentum faded while the air of defensive calamity did not. Shortly before half-time Gallagher’s sublime first touch brought Nathaniel Clyne’s cross under control, rendered a wildly onrushing Kamara irrelevant and was followed by a fine finish. Soon after the interval Watford took off King and shifted Dennis to the centre of their attack, and the Nigerian had their only two chances thereafter, prodding wide from a flicked-on free-kick and volleying high when Kamara sent a cleared corner back into the penalty area. Palace did not always dominate possession, but as a rule they looked surer in defence and more threatening, if not exactly a constant menace, in attack. “We certainly weren’t inferior in terms of our play between the penalty areas,” Hodgson said. “What was different was what Palace did when they had the ball around our penalty area and what we did when we had the ball around theirs.” The visitors might have extended their lead early in the second half when Mateta exchanged passes with Zaha before running into the left side of the penalty area, from where instead of squaring to Olise he attempted a shot that rolled along the byline and out for a throw-in. Instead they had to wait until the last five minutes, when Zaha brought the game to a joyful conclusion. Vieira described this as Zaha’s “best performance since I’ve been at the club”, while Hodgson, who after four seasons at Selhurst Park knows the player a little better, said “the bottom line is Wilf, what he did tonight, that’s what he does”. In the 85th minute the substitute Jordan Ayew chipped in a cross that Zaha controlled, cleverly shifted away from Femenía and finally lashed past Foster with his left foot. Five minutes later, home stands already emptying, he was played into space on the left, cut inside and bent a shot into the far corner from the edge of the area.Liverpool blew away Leeds to such a degree at Anfield that Pep Guardiola might have felt their breath on the back of his neck in Manchester. City’s commanding 12-point lead at the top of the Premier League is a distant memory and Jürgen Klopp’s “pain in the ass” are closing in. The Liverpool manager celebrated this rout with six punches in front of the Kop: one for each goal his rampant team swept past the ludicrously exposed Leeds goalkeeper, Illan Meslier. “I got a little bit carried away,” Klopp admitted. He had every reason. The identities of the goalscorers were in keeping with an all-round relentless attacking display – two forwards and two central defenders. Mohamed Salah and Sadio Mané scored two apiece while Joel Matip and Virgil van Dijk were also on the mark. Matip’s fine finish made it 17 different goalscorers for Liverpool this season, equalling the club record for a third time under Klopp. The title contenders have also scored 106 goals in all competitions this term. They turned their game in hand on City into a statement of intent for the title race and an ideal preparation for the Carabao Cup final against Chelsea on Sunday. “We go on the front foot but we don’t chase City, we just try to win all our games,” Klopp said. “We have a cup final at the weekend and City play, I don’t know who [Everton], but they will probably win this game and then it is six points again. We don’t have to count these things, we just have to win our games. It is an interesting period of the season coming up. So many things can happen. We just have to stay really focused and go for it with all we have.” Liverpool’s hunger was evident from the start as Fabinho and the recalled Curtis Jones snapped into tackles while Luis Diaz swept down the left. So, too, was Leeds’s defensive vulnerability. That was also unsurprising given an injury list that forced Marcelo Bielsa to deploy Luke Ayling as a makeshift centre-half and switch Stuart Dallas to right-back but his commitment to attack represented an open invitation to Salah, Mané and company. Leeds conceded 54 Premier League goals last season. It is 56 in 25 league games this season. “Of course I question myself,” Bielsa said. “You ask yourself why the things that are happening to us keep happening, but I don’t think a change of style is going to change what is happening to us.” He needs a solution soon. His porous team are slipping into trouble. The hosts started the rout from the penalty spot after Jones’s quick free-kick to Fabinho caught the visitors asleep. Andy Robertson received possession on the left and drilled in a cross that struck Dallas’s outstretched arm. The referee Michael Oliver had no hesitation in awarding a spot-kick and Salah sent Meslier the wrong way. Leeds thought they had levelled from a superb team move that flowed back to front through Dallas, Klich, James and Rodrigo before Jack Harrison centred for Raphinha to convert at the back post. Their celebrations were curtailed by a correct offside call against Raphinha and, moments later, Leeds’s night deteriorated further. Not that Anfield or Matip saw it that way. The Liverpool central defender strolled out from the back, as he was invited to do all night, before finding Salah and darting into the area. Salah returned an exquisite pass between the legs of Junior Firpo for Matip to clip a fine first goal of the season beyond Meslier. Liverpool needed no assistance to confirm their superiority but were awarded a second penalty when Ayling was adjudged to have clipped Mané as he raced through on goal. The Leeds captain had a reasonable case that Mané caught him while cutting in front but, once VAR confirmed contact was made inside the area, Oliver’s initial decision was upheld. Salah went the same way with his penalty and Meslier went the right way on this occasion, but did not get near the Egypt international’s effort as it flew over him. Leeds were in danger of unravelling as the interval approached. Heads dropped, simple passes went astray and their defensive structure vanished. Salah was understandably desperate for a hat-trick to polish his immaculate performance but was denied on the goal-line by Firpo and blazed over following unselfish work by the impressive Jones. The fourth arrived in style, Salah finding Jordan Henderson with another superb pass and the substitute crossing for Mané to finish emphatically. Mané claimed his second when Meslier saved at the feet of Divock Origi only for the ball to spin loose to the striker in front of goal. Van Dijk completed the scoring with a free header from Robertson’s corner and Liverpool, once almost out of sight, now loom large in City’s rearview mirror.Where did that come from? Manchester United had laboured sorely, the errors and the looseness coming from a variety of players. Atlético Madrid appeared happy and comfortable with a 1-0 scoreline and it was easy to think this was set to be another Champions League misstep from United, who have won only two knockout ties since their run to the final in 2011 – Olympiakos (2014) and Paris Saint-Germain (2019). Ralf Rangnick’s players had created next to nothing, although they were slightly better in the second half after a torrid opening period when João Félix’s lovely header had been scant reward for Atlético. And then it happened. Rangnick had introduced the 19-year-old winger Anthony Elanga in the 75th minute and, with his first involvement, he scored the goal that turned this last-16 tie upside down, breathing hope back into his team. It was Bruno Fernandes who picked the pass – finally, after a hugely difficult evening. And when Reinildo Mandava, the Atlético central defender, gambled and lost – stretching for the interception only to miss the ball – Elanga was away. The finish was pulled low into the far corner, the angles perfect to beat Jan Oblak, and the United support could salute a new hero. After Premier League goals at Brentford and Leeds, this was the moment when Elanga announced himself on the most glittering stage. And with such breathless composure. “Woah, it’s Elanga,” chorused the travelling fans, giddy at the escapology. It was dream-come-true stuff on every level. There would still be time for Antoine Griezmann, on as a substitute for Atlético, to rattle the crossbar and it was not the first time the woodwork had denied his team. At the end of the first half, a Sime Vrsaljko header had hit Victor Lindelöf and come back off the crossbar. It turned into United’s night. And that of Elanga. They will have to play an awful lot better than this in the second leg if they are to advance and, remember, away goals no longer count double in the event of an aggregate draw. But in the emotion of the moment, it felt glorious simply to be all square. It was United’s biggest game of a troubled season and Rangnick’s greatest test after a relatively gentle run of introductory fixtures at the club. The tone had been set by the raucous welcome with which the home support greeted the Atlético team bus – flares lit, songs belted out – while the slogan on the massive tifo unfurled before kick-off read: “Vuela Atleti”. Fly Atleti. United crashed. Rangnick would say that he could not believe how bad his team were in the first half – nobody could – and the path to Félix’s early goal had been well lit, albeit in a short space of time. United were all over the place in the opening minutes. There was a needless corner concession by Harry Maguire, Fernandes gave the ball away three times in what felt like the blink of an eye and David de Gea scuffed a clearance into touch. After one of Fernandes’s mistakes, Lindelöf – who struggled at right-back – needed to jump into a brave block to keep out a José María Giménez shot. The breakthrough came after Lindelöf had cleared from a corner. Atlético worked it to Renan Lodi and his wonderful cross from the left was an invitation for Félix to throw himself at the ball. He accepted it, the diving header a moment of the highest quality, all hang time and perfect body shape. The ball kissed the inside of the near post and went in. Maguire was the nearest United defender and he was not very near. United’s response was to try to dig out a foothold by keeping possession, putting a few passes together. They did not go anywhere with them but it did not seem to matter. Anything to distil a few dregs of confidence. And yet they continued to make basic errors for the remainder of the first half, surrendering possession, further scarring the performance. It really was the toughest of watches. Maguire hammered a pass at Fred, which he could not control – the midfielder was fortunate to be given a free-kick after Geoffrey Kondogbia swooped in – while one moment on the half-hour seemed to encapsulate United’s lack of focus. De Gea rolled the ball to Raphaël Varane on the six-yard line but the defender did not seem to know that it was there for him. He woke up just in time. It was a heart-stopper. The only mercy for United was that the half-time damage was not heavier. It would have been had Vrsaljko converted from another excellent Lodi cross. With Cristiano Ronaldo struggling – much to the delight of the home crowd, whom he had tormented many times previously – United lived on their nerves. The feeling was that United could not be as poor and as aimless in the second half, although Fernandes continued to struggle. He was not alone. Paul Pogba was anonymous. Marcus Rashford could get nothing going. The tide began to turn when Rangnick made a triple change in the 66th minute; Nemanja Matic for Pogba; new full-backs, Aaron Wan‑Bissaka and Alex Telles, for Lindelöf and Luke Shaw. They made a difference and, despite it all, United retained a puncher’s chance. How Elanga would make it count.One of the most aggressive criminal investigations against Donald Trump appears to be running into the sand after the two leading prosecutors in the Manhattan district attorney’s office investigating the former president’s finances resigned. The inquiry by Manhattan prosecutors into the operations of Trump and the Trump Organization has been among the most dangerous of the many legal perils facing him. The investigation, which began in August 2018 under the former district attorney Cyrus Vance and continued under incumbent Alvin Bragg, has dug ever deeper into alleged discrepancies in the value of the family’s assets in an effort to show a pattern of fraudulent behavior. According to the New York Times, the two top prosecutors on the case, Carey Dunne and Mark Pomerantz, quit the proceedings amid signs that the move on Trump is stalling as it reaches a make-or-break moment. The Manhattan district attorney’s office confirmed to the Guardian that Dunne and Pomerantz had resigned. They said in a statement that they were “grateful for their service”. The statement also insisted that the investigation into Trump finances was “ongoing”. The newspaper reports that a grand jury convened under the Manhattan investigation as the first step towards indicting the former president has gone silent for the past month, with no witnesses called before it. Anonymous sources told the Times that Bragg, who took over the investigation when he began as DA in January, had indicated that he was uncertain about taking the case to the next level. Whatever Bragg decides to do in the coming days and weeks, it is clear that his office has been under mounting pressure recently as the inquiry reached a critical stage. Prosecutors were aware that the clock is running down as the present grand jury’s term comes to an end in April. It was always going to be a tough call whether or not to pursue Trump all the way to court. As a criminal proceeding, the standard of proof is high – not only would Trump have to be found guilty “beyond a reasonable doubt” but prosecutors would have to show that he willfully committed the crime – hard to do in cases of alleged financial fraud. Should the criminal investigation of Trump and his family business collapse, that still leaves the civil investigation that is being conducted by the New York state attorney general, Letitia James. For several months the two cases have been run in tandem, with the prosecutorial teams working closely together. In January James opened a window on what the two teams of prosecutors had come up with when she alleged that Trump and his family business had “falsely and fraudulently” valued multiple assets. They included golf clubs, hotels and real estate holdings which James alleged were either inflated in value to attract loans or undervalued to reduce the company’s tax burden. Trump and his lawyers have consistently denied any wrongdoing, and decried the parallel probes against him as a politically motivated witch-hunt. Both Bragg and James are Democrats, while Trump arguably remains effective leader of the Republican party. The news that the criminal investigation might be running into difficulties is the first piece of potentially good news for Trump in several weeks relating to the many legal threats he is facing. In recent days he has been battered by a succession of dire developments on multiple fronts. Last week his longtime accounting firm broke off relations with the Trump Organization saying that a decade of financial statements it had approved were no longer reliable. Days later a New York judge ruled that Trump and two of his children – Donald Jr and Ivanka – had to testify under subpoena in the James investigation. With regard to on-going investigations into his role in the insurrection at the US Capitol on January 6, which are also gathering pace, the US supreme court delivered Trump a blow last month. It allowed White House documents which Trump had been trying to block to be turned over to the House committee investigating the events of that day. In addition to the James investigation, Trump faces several other potentially serious legal actions. He is being sued for defamation by the journalist E Jean Carroll who has alleged that he sexually attacked her in the 1990s; a federal judge this week sounded dismissive of attempts by Trump’s legal team to counter-sue Carroll. The former president is also the subject of a grand jury in Georgia which is looking into whether he criminally violated election laws when he urged the state’s chief elections administrator to “find” him 11,780 – one more than would have secured him victory.