When Alice Seabright watched her new BBC One drama Chloe for the first time, she got a “vulnerability hangover”. That, the film-maker explains, is the feeling you get when you’ve said too much on a drunken night out. “The next day you think: why did I tell them all that stuff about me? I felt like that: too exposed, uncomfortable and kind of gross.” On the one hand, that kind of reaction is apparently par for the course when it comes to making film and TV. “It’s a known thing that when you watch an assembly [first cut] you want to puke,” Seabright tells me over Zoom from the plush Bristol flat she has been staying in during Chloe’s production. Yet the show left the 32-year-old feeling more unsettled than usual. This was different from rewatching the episodes of Netflix smash Sex Education she directed, or even her back catalogue of quirky, quietly moving short films. For a start, the responsibility was far greater than anything she had experienced before. Seabright is Chloe’s showrunner: the term imported from the US that refers to the person who oversees the writing, directing, general creative vision and pretty much every other detail of a TV series. “If it’s shit, it’s your fault,” is how Seabright succinctly sums up the job. There’s another reason why Chloe might feel like an act of gut-spillage for its maker. The plot isn’t straightforwardly autobiographical by any stretch: the twisty, multilayered drama revolves around disaffected twentysomething temp Becky, who cons her way into a posh, arty social circle in order to make sense of the death of the title character, an aspirational young woman she followed compulsively on Instagram. Yet Chloe frequently feels like a more abstract kind of confessional. Taking in themes of low self-esteem, anxiety, success (or lack thereof), status, social media obsession and addiction, the show homes in on something strange and unsavoury about being a woman today. You feel it in Becky’s punishing, indulgent Instagram use, scrolling solemnly and hungrily through seemingly perfect existences. It’s in her constant fabrications about her supposedly glamorous life, which mirror the desperate keeping up of appearances that abounds online. It’s also there in her paranoid imaginings of people mocking her and working out who she really is. “I feel like everyone who works on the show relates to Becky,” says Seabright. “Even though none of us have ever infiltrated the life of our dead ex-best friend.” There are downsides to making such a viscerally contemporary drama: namely, the fact you have to work extensively with phones. Forget children and animals, screens are the 21st-century film-maker’s bete noire. “I feel like I never want to see a phone again – it was a fucking nightmare,” says Seabright, referring to the finicky business of incorporating a smartphone screen into a shot. Integrating phones into the plot was another challenge. “It’s a really, really hard thing to figure out how to storytell through screens,” she says. “But so much of our drama literally plays out on our phones. I couldn’t get around it.” Seabright came up with two clever solutions. The first was to treat Becky’s phone as an object pregnant with meaning. “In mysteries and in detective stories, closeups of clues are really important, so the phone’s a clue a lot of the time, or the computer sequences she’s going through. It’s the same as in an old-fashioned film where they’d pick up a letter and you’d punch in on it.” The second was a technique she calls “still-to-movings”, in which Instagram photos come to life on screen – often to reflect what Becky knows about the context of the picture at any given moment. In one sense, Seabright’s success has been a long time coming; in another, it all seems to have happened unbelievably quickly. She started making films for fun as a teenager living in Toulouse; having grown up near Saffron Walden, she moved back to her French mother’s homeland at the age of 10. At 18, she returned to the UK to study psychology at UCL, joined the film society, met her partner (also now a film-maker), and learned how to use cameras and edit. Jobs in the film industry – editing, administrative roles – followed. In her spare time, Seabright managed to make a handful of shorts with impressive casts that won significant plaudits (2016’s Pregnant Pause, starring Alexandra Roach and Sally Phillips, was longlisted for a Bafta). Yet it wasn’t until 2018, when Seabright started studying at the National Film and Television School, that directing began to seem like a real professional possibility. Then, things moved fast: within a year she was named a Screen International Star of Tomorrow, was hired as a director on Sex Education (she also co-wrote a season three episode with the show’s creator, Laurie Nunn), and began working on Chloe. If you had to identify a thread that runs through Seabright’s work, you might settle on empathy. Many of her films are nuanced takes on women struggling with complicated feelings: the mordant End-O (2019) stars Sophia Di Martino as a woman suffering from endometriosis; Strange Days (2018) is about a woman fixated on a friend who went missing when they were teenagers (Seabright says the latter planted the seed for Chloe). Empathy is, she agrees, one of her animating principles as a film-maker – and as a person. “That’s just how I am, sometimes to my detriment. I always have this tendency to go: let me put myself in this person’s shoes, and sometimes it’s like: ‘They’re a murderer, Alice, don’t do that.’ I find it quite easy to relate to people, even though I’m quite socially awkward.” Now, Seabright is awaiting Chloe’s primetime airing – also with some awkwardness. “I’m not going to lie, I’m a bit worried,” she says. One concern is the show’s distinctly millennial subject matter and tone. “When we first developed it, I thought: well this might be a BBC Three, 10.35pm sort of thing. The closer I get to transmission, the more I’m like: wait a minute, loads of people are going to see it … ” It seems fitting that the creator of a show that pulses with impostorism and self-doubt should be so frank about her own. Let’s just hope the vulnerability hangover isn’t too punishing. Calling the shots: five more showrunners to watch Patrick Somerville After working as a writer on The Leftovers, the Chicagoan cut his showrunning teeth on Netflix’s offbeat Jonah Hill-Emma Stone drama Maniac. His latest project is Station Eleven, a drama set in post-pandemic dystopia that – eerily – began production in 2019 and was about a fifth of the way in when Covid hit. Nida Manzoor As a teen, Manzoor wanted to be a “brown girl Bob Dylan”. Last year, the creator-writer-directer-producer channelled her frustrated rock star ambitions into We Are Lady Parts, her joyous and instantaneously beloved Channel 4 sitcom about a British-Muslim punk band. A second series is on the way. Charlie Covell It was her gloriously droll writing on the 2017 Channel 4 and Netflix hit The End of the F***ing World that marked this Londoner out as a bracing new talent. Now, she is helming her very own series for the streamer: Kaos is a blackly comic take on Greek mythology with “Game of Thrones scale”. Alena Smith By the time the third and final series of Dickinson – the wacky, anachronistic drama based on the life of 19th-century poet Emily – aired on Apple TV+, it was widely considered a seriously creative TV feat. Whatever its writer-producer Smith does next will be well worth watching: she’s signed an exclusive deal with Apple. Jen Statsky Having spent her career writing on great female-led comedies – Parks and Recreation, The Good Place, Broad City – last year the New Yorker finally got to make her own. Hacks, which she co-showruns with Lucia Aniello and Paul W Downs, pairs a young comedy writer with a standup grande dame and has picked up a slew of awards. Chloe is on 6 and 7 February at 9pm on BBC One and on iPlayer; it’s also available on Amazon Prime.Tube workers are to go on strike for two days next month over fears for jobs, pensions and working conditions, threatening widespread disruption across London. The RMT union announced that its members on the tube would walk out on 1 and 3 March. It came as a funding arrangement between the government and Transport for London was extended for two weeks. The arrangement was due to end on Friday. A Transport for London spokesperson said: “We continue to discuss our funding requirements with the government … We have today agreed with the government that our existing funding agreement will be extended until 18 February 2022 so that these discussions can be concluded.” Earlier, the union said it had had no assurances as Transport for London continues to look for ways to balance its finances after passenger numbers and revenue fell drastically during the pandemic, with central government refusing to confirm emergency funding will continue. A ballot of more than 10,000 members resulted in 94% backing industrial action, although TfL said only about 50% of staff had voted. Mick Lynch, the RMT general secretary, said: “Our members will be taking strike action next month because a financial crisis at London Underground (LUL) has been deliberately engineered by the government to drive a cuts agenda, which would savage jobs, services, safety and threaten their working conditions and‎ pensions. “These are the very same transport staff praised as heroes for carrying London through Covid for nearly two years. Staff will not pay the price for this cynically engineered crisis.” TfL said it would be open to talks and urged the RMT to “do the right thing for London and call off this unnecessary action”. Andy Lord said the strike call was “extremely disappointing”. TfL’s chief operating officer said no proposals had been tabled on pensions or terms and conditions, and nobody would lose their jobs. He said: “The devastating impact of the pandemic on TfL finances has made a programme of change urgently necessary and we need the RMT to work with us, rather than disrupting London’s recovery.” TfL has commissioned an independent review of staff pension arrangements, as a condition of the funding released by central government last year. It has also said it will not fill about 250 vacant customer service posts nor replace about 250-350 more when staff leave or retire, cutting the overall numbers by about 10%-12%. Meanwhile, the TSSA union said it would act if Network Rail attempted to make staff compulsorily redundant on the national railway. Network Rail is planning to cut more than 900 further jobs, which the union said were “predominantly professional and technical staff who ensure the safe running of our railways”. Manuel Cortes, the TSSA leader, said: “Tory cuts are bulldozing our rail industry. Their so-called levelling-up is a fallacy. Sadly, the message for passengers is you are paying more for less.” The growing row over deeper cuts to rail – with operators already told to find huge savings – came as the Department for Transport launched its competition to locate the headquarters of the proposed Great British Railways, as part of Keith Williams’ and Grant Shapps’ reforms announced last May. A public poll will influence the decision. Railway towns including Crewe, Derby and York are expected contenders, as well as Milton Keynes, which stands to lose its established Network Rail head office.Turkey recorded 111,157 new Covid-19 infections in the last 24 hours, its highest daily figure of the pandemic, while the daily death toll was its highest in four months, health ministry data showed. The UK has recorded 84,053 new cases of coronavirus and 254 Covid-linked deaths, according to the latest update on the government’s dashboard. Those figures compare to 88,171 new Covid cases and 303 deaths within 28 days of a positive test on Thursday A law requiring most adults in Austria to get vaccinated against Covid is ready to take effect, but the sense of urgency that accompanied its announcement in November has largely evaporated. India’s death toll from Covid-19 has officially crossed 500,000. Yet many health experts say half a million deaths was reached last year but obscured by inaccurate surveys. Russia broke its daily Covid record again on Friday with infections surging to 168,201. Russia, gripped by Omicron, has smashed its daily Covid record practially every day for the past two weeks. Ukraine also registered a record daily high of 43,778 new coronavirus infections over the past 24 hours. Scientists in South Africa are keeping their eyes on the BA.2 Omicron sub-variant, which made up 23% of recent samples, but said there’s no clear sign BA.2 is substantially different to the original Omicron. Spain will lift its outdoor mask mandate from next Thursday, health minister Carolina Darias said. Allies of embattled UK prime minister Boris Johnson came out swinging on this morning’s broadcast round, saying he is “taking charge” amid the partygate row, following a series of departures on Thursday which were dubbed a “meltdown in Downing Street”. Malaysia detected over 7,000 Covid infections for the first time since mid-October, as the health minister said a further Omicron surge is likely. Poland reported 47,534 positive Covid tests in the past 24 hours – near-peak levels – which is a 30% rise on two weeks ago. Africa must boost the vaccination rate against Covid “six times” to reach the target of 70% coverage set for the end of the first half of 2022, the World Health Organization (WHO) said. The vaccine developed by Novavax has been approved by the UK regulator for over-18s. Clinical trials suggest two doses have a roughly 90% efficacy against symptomatic Covid. South Korea extended social distancing rules for an additional two weeks as Omicron variant infections soar, including a 9pm curfew for restaurants and a six-person limit on private gatherings. Police have a photograph of Boris Johnson holding a can of beer at his lockdown birthday party in June 2020, according to reports. It is understood to be among the 300 pictures submitted to the Metropolitan police by Sue Gray for their investigation into social gatherings which breached coronavirus regulations. The UK’s prime minister is pictured with a can of Estrella beer standing next to the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, in No 10’s Cabinet Room, the Mirror has been told. It was reported that the picture was taken by the prime minister’s official taxpayer-funded photographer, who was documenting the event in June 2020. A study in monkeys pitting the current Moderna Inc Covid-19 booster against an Omicron-specific booster showed no significant differences in protection, suggesting an Omicron-specific booster may not be needed, US government researchers reported. The study involved monkeys vaccinated with two doses of Moderna’s vaccine who were dosed nine months later with either the conventional Moderna booster or one specifically targeting the Omicron variant. The researchers tested various aspects of the animals’ immune responses and exposed them to the virus. They found both boosters produced “comparable and significant increases in neutralising antibody responses” against all of the variants of concern, including Omicron, according to the study, posted on bioRxiv ahead of peer review. Both Moderna Inc and BioNTech/Pfizer Inc have started testing Omicron-specific boosters of their vaccines in human clinical trials. “This is very, very good news,” Daniel Douek, a vaccine researcher at the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases who co-lead the study, told Reuters. “It means we don’t need to radically redesign the vaccine to make it an Omicron vaccine.” Brazil recorded 184,311 new coronavirus cases and 493 deaths in the last 24 hours, the country’s health ministry said on Friday, although data was missing from the populous states of Rio de Janeiro and Sao Paulo. Brazil has now registered more than 26 million cases since the pandemic began, while the official death toll has risen to 630,494, Reuters reports. US health officials said they are considering lengthening the recommended interval between the first two doses of the most widely used Covid-19 vaccines to eight weeks to lower the risk of heart inflammation and improve their effectiveness, Reuters reports. Dr Sara Oliver, an official at the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), said the agency was considering making the recommendation for Moderna and Pfizer /BioNTech jabs during a meeting of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices, a panel of outside advisers to the CDC. In the US, the recommended interval between the two Pfizer jabs is three weeks while it is four weeks for Moderna’s vaccine. Wearing any kind of mask indoors is associated with significantly better protection from coronavirus, with N95 and KN95 coverings providing the best chance of avoiding infection, according to a study by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in the US, the Washington Post reported. Police in Canada have vowed to crack down on an “increasingly dangerous” protest by hundreds of truckers who have shut down the centre of the capital Ottawa for eight days to demand an end to Covid-19 vaccine mandates. In the western province of Alberta, where truckers have been blocking a major border crossing with the United States in a similar protest, premier Jason Kenney said ministers would meet early next week to start lifting restrictions, Reuters reports. Blockades are also planned in Quebec City and Toronto, where authorities closed off access to the city centres. “We all want to do everything we can to avoid the situation we are seeing in Ottawa,” said Toronto mayor John Tory. John Souisa had spent five days at sea when relief washed over him – the Australian navy was approaching their boat, which was carrying 53 asylum seekers. After dodging Indonesian patrols, battling rough seas, and warding off hunger, the group had finally made it. And just off the coast of Darwin, a huge warship was there to guide them safely to shore. It was the year 2000 and behind them, John and his son Paul had left a terrible conflict in a remote and rarely visited part of Indonesia, one that led to more than 5,000 deaths and the displacement of 700,000 people. On 16 January this year, John, 78, became one of the 42 South Australians to die from Covid that day. Preventing future pandemics at source would cost a small fraction of the damage already caused by viruses that jump from wildlife to people, according to scientists. Each year on average more than 3 million people die from zoonotic diseases, those that spillover from wildlife into humans, new analysis has calculated. The scientists heavily criticise approaches by global bodies and governments that focus only on preventing the spread of new viruses once they have infected humans, rather than tackling the root causes as well. Police in Canada have promised tougher action against the “unlawful and unacceptably dangerous” protests in the nation’s capital, but admitted the situation was increasingly out of their control. With 400 more trucks and 2,000 protesters expected to arrive in the city this weekend, Ottawa police on Friday announced that 150 additional officers will be deployed and concrete barricades set up to prevent more vehicles from reaching the city’s downtown core. Illegally parked vehicles will be towed and highways and bridges could be closed. Hundreds of trucks have remained outside parliament for nearly a week in protest against public health measures. Sloly said that the police force took “no solace” in the fact that the current police strategy has so far prevented “riots, injuries and death”. France has recorded 104,804 coronavirus deaths in hospital, up by 355. It also reported 3,618 people are in intensive care units with Covid-19, down by 25, Reuters reports. Turkey recorded 111,157 new Covid-19 infections in the last 24 hours, its highest daily figure of the pandemic, while the daily death toll was its highest in four months, health ministry data showed on Friday. In late December, daily cases stood at about 20,000 but have since surged due to the highly transmissible Omicron variant of the coronavirus. The data also showed 248 people died due to Covid-19 in the same 24-hour period, the highest daily toll since Oct. 4 when there were also 248 deaths, Reuters reports. Of the 377 local areas in the UK, 111 (29%) have seen a week-on-week rise in Covid-19 rates, 264 (70%) have seen a fall and two are unchanged. Lisburn &amp; Castlereagh in Northern Ireland has the highest rate in the UK, with 2,871 cases in the seven days to January 31. Armagh City, Banbridge &amp; Craigavon in Northern Ireland has the second highest rate, up slightly from 1,924.2 to 1,942.6, with 4,220 cases. Cambridge has the third highest rate, down slightly from 1,812.7 to 1,796.7, with 2,247 cases, PA reports. The UK has recorded 84,053 new cases of coronavirus and 254 Covid-linked deaths, according to the latest update on the government’s dashboard. Those figures compare to 88,171 new Covid cases and 303 deaths within 28 days of a positive test on Thursday. On Friday last week, the UK reported 89,176 new cases of coronavirus and 277 deaths within 28 days of a positive test Police in the Canadian capital of Ottawa have promised tougher action against hundreds of truckers who have blockaded the city centre for eight days as part of a protest against Covid vaccine mandates. To the increasing fury of residents, police have so far largely stood by and watched as some protesters smashed windows, threatened reporters and abused racial minorities. The Ottawa police service said it would put more officers on the street and was “implementing a surge and contain strategy” to restore order, Reuters reported. “The hatred, violence, and illegal acts that Ottawa residents and businesses have endured over the last week is unacceptable in any circumstance,” it said in a statement. “The Ottawa Police Service and the City of Ottawa are bringing significantly greater resources to restore order, hold offenders to account and protect our neighbourhoods.” Police will order some truckers to move and if they refuse, their vehicles will be towed, it said. The Omicron variant is causing record numbers of new Covid infections in Russia and Ukraine, threatening to impact military calculations over Russia’s continued troop buildup. Analysts have cited various factors as possible contributors to whether and how Russia will launch an assault on Ukraine, ranging from Vladimir Putin’s psychological state to the strength of the western response and even the firmness of the ground during a mild winter in the region. Covid is emerging as another element that may complicate plans for the Russian and Ukrainian armies, as record case numbers in both societies are replicated among the troops. There is a realistic possibility of large waves of Covid infection in the future in Britain and such waves might even be considered likely, epidemiologists who model the Covid pandemic to inform government advice have said. Prime minister Boris Johnson has ditched legal restrictions in England, saying that, while the pandemic was not over, Britain needs to learn to live with Covid, Reuters reported. The Scientific Pandemic Influenza Group on Modelling, Operational sub-group (SPI-M-O) said the emergence of new viral variants was the biggest unknown factor in the medium-to-long term, along with waning population immunity and changes in mixing patterns. “Large future waves of infection that need active management to prevent detrimental pressure on the health and care sector are, at least, a realistic possibility (high confidence) or likely (medium confidence),” SPI-M-O said in a consensus statement published on Friday. Britain has reported 157,730 deaths from Covid, the seventh highest total globally, and Johnson has faced heavy criticism for his handling of the pandemic, which has seen three national lockdowns. The US economy appeared to shake off the Omicron in January with employers adding 467,000 new jobs, the labor department reported on Friday. Data for the report was collected in mid-January when the Omicron variant was at its peak in the US and while some economists – and the White House – had predicted a dramatic slump in jobs growth, the number of jobs added was far better than expected. Nearly 9 million people reported they were not working because they were sick or were caring for someone who had fallen ill between 29 December and 10 January, according to the Census Bureau’s Household Pulse Survey, the highest figure the survey has reported since it began in 2020. The unemployment rate remained low overall at 4%, down from a pandemic high of 14.8% in April 2020. The estimated range of England’s Covid reproduction “R” number has risen to between 0.8 and 1.1, returning to its value of two weeks ago, the UK Health Security Agency said on Friday, adding that the number of cases each day could be rising. An R number between 0.8 and 1.1 means that for every 10 people infected, they will on average infect between eight and 11 other people. Last week, the range was 0.7 to 0.9, however, the week before the range was also 0.8 to 1.1. The daily growth of infections was estimated at between -3% to +1%, compared with -6% to -2% the previous week. In Scotland, a community hospital is taking no new admissions due to an outbreak of coronavirus. Invergordon County Community hospital announced its closure to new patients and visitors on Friday after it detected a small number of positive cases on site, PA Media reported. Staff said contacts of those who have tested positive have been identified and given advice, and patients in the hospital are being monitored, with in-patient care continuing as normal. A spokesperson for the hospital said: All appropriate infection prevention and control measures have been put in place. We have not reached this decision lightly and recognise that this could cause a great deal of concern and anxiety for patients and their loved ones during this time. These measures will be reviewed on a regular basis. If your visit is essential please contact the ward your relative or loved one is in, and the staff will support you with arrangements. Please do not visit any of our hospitals or care home settings if you or anyone else in your household has tested positive for Covid-19 or has any symptoms. The UK’s transport secretary Grant Shapps has tested positive for coronavirus. Shapps is the second British cabinet minister to test positive in the space of five days following foreign secretary Liz Truss, who revealed she was isolating on Monday. Writing on Twitter, Shapps said: “Have tested positive for £COVID19 so am self-isolating and testing as required.” A law requiring most adults in Austria to get vaccinated against Covid is ready to take effect, but the sense of urgency that accompanied its announcement in November has largely evaporated. Few other countries look likely to go as far as attention turns to loosening restrictions, the Associated Press reports. The Austrian mandate for residents 18 and over to get vaccinated — the first of its kind in Europe – cleared its last legislative hurdle Thursday when parliament’s upper house approved what health minister Wolfgang Mückstein called “a forward-looking and active step”. It’s expected to become law in the coming days but it will be a while before Austrians notice any practical change. And it isn’t clear when or even whether the toughest part of the plan, which was watered down from the initial proposal, will take effect. Only in mid-March will police start checking people’s vaccination status during traffic stops and checks on coronavirus restrictions. People who can’t produce proof of vaccination will be asked in writing to do so, and will be fined up to €600 ($680) if they don’t; fines could reach €3,600 if people contest their punishment and full proceedings are opened. The risk of death involving Covid is 93% lower for people who have had a booster or third dose of vaccine compared with unvaccinated people, research suggests. Mortality rates for coronavirus deaths were found to be “consistently lower” across all age groups for those who had received an extra dose compared with those who had received no doses, according to the the UK’s Office for National Statistics (ONS). The research used age-standardised mortality rates, which take into account differences in age structure and population size, to allow for comparisons between vaccination groups, the Press Association reports. Among fully vaccinated people in England who had received a booster or third dose at least 21 days previously, the age-adjusted risk of death involving Covid between July and December last year was 93.4% lower compared with unvaccinated people, while it was 81.2% lower for those who had received only two doses. For much of 2021, mortality rates for death involving Covid for people who had received two doses of vaccine remained well below the equivalent figures for people who were unvaccinated, the ONS found. But rates among double-jabbed people started to increase at the end of last year, jumping from 92.0 deaths per 100,000 in October to 221.1 in November and 367.7 in December. This may have been driven by a change in the composition of the double-jabbed group, with most older people having received a booster or third dose by this point, the ONS said. It might also be connected to “waning protection from prior vaccination”. Hong Kong plans to roll out rapid antigen tests for Covid to all of its 7.5 million population in the near future, city leader Carrie Lam said today. It comes as the increasingly isolated global financial hub tries to control a new outbreak, the Reuters news agency reported. Lam told reporters her government was working on increasing testing, contact tracing and vaccination capacity and making plans to send hospitalised asymptomatic patients to a quarantine facility reserved for close contacts as infections add up. Amid worries of invisible transmissions in the city, Lam said the government was procuring tens of millions of rapid antigen tests, but did not specify when and how the government will deploy them for voluntary universal testing. On Friday, Hong Kong reported 131 positive cases, compared with 142 on Thursday. Some 195 tested “preliminary positive” and may be added to the count in coming days subject to further tests. The previous record was 164 cases in late January. “This latest outbreak is the worst we have seen in the past two years,” Lam said. “Our strategy is the same: we aim to cut transmission chains as soon as possible.” Hello, I’m Tom Ambrose and I’ll be bringing you all the latest Covid news from around the world over the next five hours or so. Let’s start with the news that direct international flights to Bali have resumed for the first time in two years as Indonesia opens the resort island to foreign travellers from all countries. However, mandatory quarantine remains in place for all visitors, the Associated Press reported. Officials had said in October that Bali would welcome foreign arrivals from 19 countries that meet World Health Organization criteria, such as having their Covid cases under control. But there were no direct international flights to Bali until Thursday, when Garuda Indonesia operated its first such flight in two years from Tokyo. Singapore Airlines will introduce a regular direct route to and from Denpasar in Bali starting 16 February, said Taufan Yudhistira, the public relations manager at Bali’s international airport. Fully vaccinated travellers need to quarantine for five days in a hotel or on a live-onboard boat certified by the ministry of tourism and creative economy, and travellers who have received one dose of Covid vaccine must quarantine for seven days. Indonesia reported 27,197 new coronavirus infections and 38 deaths on Thursday in the latest 24-hour period. Here’s a round-up of today’s Covid news from around the world so far. India’s death toll from Covid-19 has officially crossed 500,000. Yet many health experts say half a million deaths was reached last year but obscured by inaccurate surveys. Russia broke its daily Covid record again on Friday with infections surging to 168,201. Russia, gripped by Omicron, has smashed its daily Covid record practially every day for the past two weeks. Ukraine also registered a record daily high of 43,778 new coronavirus infections over the past 24 hours. Scientists in South Africa are keeping their eyes on the BA.2 Omicron sub-variant, which made up 23% of recent samples, but said there’s no clear sign BA.2 is substantially different to the original Omicron. Spain will lift its outdoor mask mandate from next Thursday, health minister Carolina Darias said. Allies of embattled UK prime minister Boris Johnson came out swinging on this morning’s broadcast round, saying he is “taking charge” amid the partygate row, following a series of departures on Thursday which were dubbed a “meltdown in Downing Street”. Malaysia detected over 7,000 Covid infections for the first time since mid-October, as the health minister said a further Omicron surge is likely. Poland reported 47,534 positive Covid tests in the past 24 hours – near-peak levels – which is a 30% rise on two weeks ago. Africa must boost the vaccination rate against Covid “six times” to reach the target of 70% coverage set for the end of the first half of 2022, the World Health Organization (WHO) said. The vaccine developed by Novavax has been approved by the UK regulator for over-18s. Clinical trials suggest two doses have a roughly 90% efficacy against symptomatic Covid. South Korea extended social distancing rules for an additional two weeks as Omicron variant infections soar, including a 9pm curfew for restaurants and a six-person limit on private gatherings. That’s all from me, Jem Bartholomew, for today. I’ll be back next week. Over to my colleague Tom Ambrose for the next few hours. Bye for now. Malaysia detected more than 7,000 Covid infections for the first time since mid-October, local media the New Straits Times reports. The country clocked 7,234 positive tests in the past 24 hours, a 79% climb on the 4,046 cases recorded on Friday two weeks ago. Health minister Khairy Jamaluddin said on Thursday cases are likely to continue surging – due to the virulence of Omicron – but said the public should not be alarmed as the country’s vaccination rate is high. Malaysia’s total deaths from Covid-related causes are above 32,000, the 29th highest worldwide. (It has the 45th highest population.) Poland reported 47,534 positive Covid tests in the past 24 hours, Polskie Radio reports, a 30% rise on the 36,664 new cases on Friday two weeks ago. Poland is experiencing a surging Omicron wave and infections are at near-peak levels of over 50,000. Health minister Adam Niedzielski has warned infections could approach 140,000 a day by mid-February. Public sector workers have been told to work from home. A further 246 people were reported to have died from Covid-related causes, compared with 248 two weeks ago. That takes the country’s death toll to 106,306, the world’s 15th highest. (Poland has the 38th highest population.) Researchers at the UK’s University of Oxford will seek to repurpose existing anti-viral therapies to treat Covid as part of a small project, Reuters reports. Scientists will initially screen 138 drugs with known antiviral activity against the Covid-causing Sars-CoV-2 virus to study and identify combinations which would boost their potential, the university said in a statement. Promising combinations will be submitted to UK authorities for clinical trials. “There are multiple benefits with discovering new treatments in this way,” said Ultan Power, one of the principal investigators of the project. “They have been through all the necessary checks so we know they are safe and readily available, they can be self-administered and used at home, helping to reduce the burden on the healthcare system.” The £1.6 million pound project is led by Queen’s University Belfast, with experts from Queen’s, the University of Liverpool and Oxford. It is being funded by Britain’s Medical Research Council. Israel detected 46,347 new Covid cases in the past 24 hours, the Jerusalem Post reports, taking the number of active infections to 373,160. Israel experienced spiking cases last month driven by the highlyinfectious Omicron, but infections appear to be receding. The R rate is 0.9, the Post reports. The country has reported a total of 9,080 people dying from Covid-related causes, the 61st highest worldwide. (Israel has the 100th highest population.) Spain will lift its outdoor mask mandate from next Thursday, health minister Carolina Darias said. The measure intended to compress the Omicron strain was introduced in December. Reuters reports the details: In the past two weeks, Covid-19’s contagion rate, measured over the past 14 days, has been steadily falling to 2,421 cases per 100,000 people on Thursday down from almost 3,400 in early January. Despite the surge in cases between November and January as Omicron spread, hospital admissions and deaths remain well below those seen in earlier waves of the pandemic, thanks in large part to Spain’s high vaccination rate. Spain reported 74,368 new infections on Thursday, down 53% from the 157,447 new cases on Thursday two weeks ago. The country has a death toll of 94,040 people dying from Covid-related causes, the 18th highest worldwide. (Spain has the 30th highest population.) Allies of embattled UK prime minister Boris Johnson came out swinging on this morning’s broadcast round, after a series of departures on Thursday were dubbed a “meltdown in Downing Street”. Greg Hands, the energy minister, said Johnson is taking charge of his Downing Street team by making changes after the ”partygate” row. It comes after the resignation on Thursday of four key No 10 officials – policy chief Munira Mirza, chief of staff Dan Rosenfield, Martin Reynolds, Johnson’s principal private secretary, and director of communications Jack Doyle. “Resignations have been made, resignations have been accepted,” Hands told Sky, adding: “This is the prime minister taking charge.” After Mirza’s departure and criticism of Johnson – her colleague and ally of 14 years – the three other resignations were then announced in quick succession on Thursday night, in what was seen widely in Westminster as an attempt to regain control. On Friday morning, another adviser reportedly quit. Elena Narozanski, a special adviser to the prime minister on women and equalities, Department for Culture, Media and Sport, and extremism, has resigned, according to Paul Goodman, the editor of Conservative Home. Russia broke its daily Covid record again on Friday with infections surging to 168,201, Reuters reports. That’s a 242% jump on the 49,127 cases detected on Friday two weeks ago, which was itself a record-breaker. Russia, gripped by Omicron, has smashed its daily Covid record practially every day for the past two weeks. Thursday saw 155,768 cases. The labour ministry has recommended working from home. But the Kremlin has ruled out a national lockdown. Meanwhile, at the local level some cities have imposed restrictions to crimp the virus’s spread. A further 682 deaths from Covid-related causes were reported in the past 24 hours. Russia has the world’s 2nd highest Covid death toll of over 700,000, according to a Reuters estimate, behind only the US. (Russia has the 9th highest population worldwide.) Scientists in South Africa are keeping their eyes on the BA.2 Omicron sub-variant, which is appearing in greater numbers in the country, but said there’s no clear sign BA.2 is substantially different. BA.2 accounted for 23% of 450 January samples collected via genomic surveillance, compared with 75% for the original Omicron strain. (BA.2 accounted for 4% of 2,243 December samples.) “We are seeing this increase with the BA.2, we are still trying to get more information on this particular sub-lineage … and so we are increasing sequencing,” said Michelle Groome, from the National Institute for Communicable Diseases. “At this stage, there is no indication that there would be … differences between these different sub-lineages of Omicron. As we saw with Delta there were lots of lineages and we didn’t see a lot of difference between them, but we will keep monitoring,” she added. Bulgaria reported 8,142 new Covid infections yesterday, public broadcaster BNT reports, taking the country’s 7-day average to 8,134 cases a day. That’s near last week’s peak of over 12,000, as Omicron has jolted infections up to record levels recently. There are 6,124 Covid patients in hospital. A further 96 people died from Covid-related causes – 88.5% of which were not vaccinated, BNT reports – taking the 7-day average to 82 people dying a day. Bulgaria, the European Union’s least-vaccinated country, has recorded a death toll of over 33,500, the 28th highest globally. (Bulgaria has the 107th highest population.) In the US, as the wave driven by the highly-infectious Omicron variant spikes, about 80% of hospitals are still under ‘high or extreme stress,’ The Guardian reports. That’s according to data compiled by National Public Radio using a framework from the Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation at the University of Washington. “Everyone of us said if we could go back, we would choose a different career,” said Dr Brian Resler, an emergency physician in the San Francisco Bay Area, adding: “Most people got into healthcare because they wanted to help people and make a difference, and I think at this point, it’s just broken beyond repair.” My colleague Eric Berger reports the details: In Missouri, the second worst state in the country for hospitalizations, 79% of the hospitals are under extreme stress. At Mercy hospital in Springfield, in the south-western part of the state, about 28% of their hospitalizations are Covid-19 patients, according to Erik Frederick, the hospital’s chief administrative office. ... “It creates a lot of stress on the healthcare system,” Frederick said. Every few hours at University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, the house supervisor, who coordinates care for patients, sends out alerts about the numbers of available beds in particular units. “When those numbers get small, it means that we have to make some hard decisions,” said Dr Rachel Pearson, assistant professor of pediatrics and the medical humanities at UT Health San Antonio. “Sometimes that means kids who I would prefer to be upstairs with my hospital pediatrics team are stranded in the [emergency department].” Read the full report here. Let’s take a look at the UK’s Covid figures in context. Cases have spiked from recent Omicron-driven peaks, but the Office for National Statistics warned on Wednesday cases have stopped falling, and in some areas are climbing: Hospitalisations rose, although much less significantly than last year’s wave, and are now falling: When it comes to deaths from Covid-related causes, the Omicron wave did see an uptick, but the strong link between infections and deaths has been broken after the vaccine drive: This is Jem Bartholomew in London taking charge of the global Covid blog for today. Do get in touch via email or Twitter with tips from around the world. Ukraine registered a record daily high of 43,778 new coronavirus infections over the past 24 hours, reports Reuters. Ukraine’s health ministry revealed the figure on Friday, just one day after the country’s previous record daily high of 39,620 cases was reported. Ministry data on Friday showed 174 new related deaths. Ukraine’s total infections in the pandemic stands at 4.2 million so far, with 100,983 deaths. South Korea has extended Covid-19 social distancing rules on Friday for an additional two weeks as Omicron variant infections soar, including a 9pm curfew for restaurants and a six-person limit on private gatherings, Reuters reports. The restrictions were due to end on Sunday but South Korea’s prime minister, Kim Boo-kyum, said the extension was necessary to slow the spread of Omicron amid fears the Lunar New Year holiday, which ended on Wednesday, may have fuelled infections. “Slowing the pace of the Omicron’s spread, which is heading to its peak day after day, is a priority in this difficult circumstance,” he said at a televised government response meeting. New daily cases have tripled over the past two weeks, but the number of deaths and serious infections have remained relatively low in the highly vaccinated country. South Korea reported a record daily increase of 27,443 new Covid-19 cases, with 24 new deaths, the Korea Disease Control and Prevention Agency said on Friday. Nearly 86% of the country’s 52 million population are fully vaccinated, with 53.8% having received booster shots. To handle the surge in cases, the government has rolled out a new testing regime under which only priority groups take a PCR tests while others can get a rapid antigen test at a clinic for faster initial diagnosis. It also reduced the mandatory quarantine time for vaccinated people who test positive from 10 days to a week, and allowed more people with few or no symptoms to be treated at home. Overall South Korea has reported 934,656 Covid-19 cases, and 6,836 deaths since the pandemic began. Austria’s planned Covid-19 vaccine mandate was approved by the upper house of parliament Thursday evening, clearing one of the final hurdles before it can take effect, Associated Press reports. The chamber voted overwhelmingly in favour of the mandate, 47 to 12, following a vote in the lower chamber of parliament on Jan. 20. It will now be sent to president Alexander van der Bellen for signing. “Today is an important day,” health minister Wolfgang Mueckstein said during the parliamentary debate. With the vaccine mandate, he said Austria “isn’t simply reacting, but we are taking a forward-looking and active step.” Under the law, the first of its kind in Europe, all adults aged 18 and older will be required to be fully vaccinated against the coronavirus. Once the mandate goes into effect, authorities will write to every household to inform them of the new rules. From mid-March, police will start checking people’s vaccination status during routine checks; those who can’t produce proof of vaccination will be asked to do so in writing, and will be fined up to €600 ($676) if they don’t. Officials originally announced the mandate would take effect on Tuesday 1 February, but the law still needed to be debated and approved by the upper house of parliament. The news comes just as Austria plans to loosen many of its pandemic-related restrictions. Over the course of February, the country will ease restrictions on unvaccinated people entering shops, restaurants and other areas of public life from which they’ve been effectively barred since November. Not all states will follow the national government’s lead, however: Vienna mayor Michael Ludwig announced Thursday that the capital will continue requiring proof of vaccination or recovery to enter restaurants. After weeks of rapidly rising cases, Austria’s surge fuelled by the omicron variant of the virus shows some signs of slowing. The country reported 38,135 new infections on Wednesday, bringing its seven-day case rate down slightly to 2,597 per 100,000 inhabitants. New Zealand has surpassed more than 200 new daily cases of Covid-19 in the community for the first time since November. There were 209 cases reported across eight regions, with nine in hospital. On Friday, people queued at vaccine centres, as a million more New Zealanders became eligible for the booster shot, following the government’s announcement earlier in the week it was reducing the interval between the second and third dose of the Pfizer vaccine. While visiting a vaccination centre in Auckland today, prime minister Jacinda Ardern commented on Thursday’s border announcement, saying that the decision was a “carefully balanced” one. She said: The most important thing we can do for New Zealanders right now is, unlike other countries, use the time we have before a large-scale outbreak, to be boosted. Very few countries have had that chance. We do. That’s why we’ve deliberately timed the reopening to a point where 92% of New Zealanders will have been eligible to be boosted and therefore we’ll be as ready as we can be.” New Zealand’s vaccination rates are continuing to creep up, with 94% of the population over 12 years old now double vaccinated, and Māori just 142 doses away from hitting the 90% first dose mark, the Ministry of Health announced. Canada’s prime minister, Justin Trudeau, has said a military response to the ongoing Ottawa protest against Covid-19 measures is “not in the cards right now”, Associated Press reports. Ottawa police chief Peter Sloly said this week that all options are on the table, including calling in the military, to end the ongoing demonstration that was being called an “occupation” by some on the city council. Thousands of protesters railing against vaccine mandates and other Covid-19 restrictions descended on the capital last weekend, deliberately blocking traffic around Parliament Hill. Police estimate about 250 remain. Trudeau said one must be “very, very cautious” about deploying troops on Canadian soil, adding there has been no such request to the federal government. He said any formal requests for assistance from the City of Ottawa or Ontario would be considered. Organisers, including one who has espoused white supremacist views, had raised millions for the cross-country “freedom truck convoy” against vaccine mandates and other restrictions. It has attracted support from former US president Donald Trump. Ottawa’s mayor, meanwhile, is calling on several opposition Conservative lawmakers to apologise for praising the protesters and posing with them. A photo posted by one of the lawmakers shows them some giving the thumbs-up – in front of one of the protest trucks, which have been barricading roads and honking horns in the city almost non-stop since Saturday. Mayor Jim Watson responded on Twitter by calling the action an “absolute disgrace,” saying residents have been harassed by protesters and businesses have been forced to close. “We have no intent to stay one day longer than necessary. Our departure will be based on the prime minister doing what is right, sending all mandates and restrictions on our freedoms,” Tamara Lich, one of the protest organisers, said in a statement. “Our movement is growing in Canada and across the world because common people are tired of the mandates and restrictions in their lives that now seem to be doing more harm than good.” Lich declined to take questions. The protesters are also calling for the removal of Trudeau’s government, though it is responsible for few of the measures, most of which were put in place by provincial governments. A protest is planned in the provincial capital of Toronto on Saturday. The Ontario legislature is in close proximity to many along University Avenue. India’s death toll from Covid-19 has crossed 500,000, Reuters reports, a level many health experts say was breached last year but obscured by inaccurate surveys and unaccounted dead in the hinterlands, where millions remain vulnerable to the disease. The country, which has the fourth-highest tally of deaths globally, recorded 400,000 deaths by July last year after the devastating outbreak from the Delta variant of the coronavirus, according to official data. Some experts believe the figures were much higher. “Our study published in the journal Science estimates 3 million Covic deaths in India until mid-2021 using three different databases,” Chinmay Tumbe, an assistant professor at the Indian Institute of Management, Ahmedabad who co-authored the study, told Reuters. Last month, the Indian government dismissed the study as baseless in a notification saying there is a robust system of birth and death reporting. India’s states record deaths from Covid-19 after collating data from their districts. In the last few months, several states have updated the number of deaths, some under pressure from the country’s top court. In most instances, authorities said there were lapses due to delayed registrations and other administrative errors. India is currently in the midst of a third wave of the coronavirus led by the Omicron variant, which some top experts say is already in community transmission although federal officials say most cases are mild. Last month, the government eased testing norms and told states to drop mandatory testing for contacts of confirmed cases unless they were old or battling other conditions. But, with the number of tests falling, the government issued a revised circular warning states they would miss the spread of the virus. But, as many infected people took the option of not testing at all, total infection numbers may not reflect the extent and severity of cases, said Gautam Menon, a professor of physics and biology at Ashoka University near the capital who has been tracking the spread of the virus. According to official figures, India’s overall number of Covid-19 infections has reached 41.95 million, the second-highest globally behind the United States. India’s cumulative tally of 500,055 deaths on Friday included 1,072 fatalities reported over the last 24 hours, according to the federal health ministry. Out of this, 335 deaths were reported from the southern state of Kerala that has, for weeks, been updating data with deaths from last year. Hello and welcome to the Guardian’s live coverage of the coronavirus pandemic with me, Helen Livingstone. India’s death toll from Covid-19 has crossed 500,000, a level many health experts say was breached last year but obscured by inaccurate surveys and unaccounted dead in the hinterlands, where millions remain vulnerable to the disease. Canadian prime minister Justin Trudeau has said a military response to the ongoing Ottawa protest against Covid-19 measures is “not in the cards right now” after Ottawa police chief Peter Sloly said that all options were on the table. Tensions in societies around the world over the current Covid situation are going to be very difficult to handle, one of Britain’s most senior scientific figures has warned. Sir Jeremy Farrar, who stepped down as a government scientific adviser in November last year, warned the idea of simply “exiting” a pandemic was not realistic. Frustrations are boiling over in Canada’s capital as a protest by truckers against Covid-19 vaccine mandates has clogged downtown Ottawa for a week and shows no sign of ending, with many residents angry at police for not breaking it up. Two years after the outbreak of Covid, Europe could soon enter a “long period of tranquility” due to high vaccination rates, the milder Omicron variant and the end of winter, the WHO has said. Africa must boost the vaccination rate against Covid-19 “six times” to reach the target of 70 percent vaccine coverage set for the end of the first half of 2022, the World Health Organization (WHO) said The number of adults in Denmark infected with Covid may be double the official tally, Danish scientists said on Thursday, after releasing data suggesting one third of the adult population has been infected in the past three months. The Covid-19 vaccine developed by Novavax has been approved by the UK regulator for use in people over the age of 18. Clinical trials suggest two doses of the Novavax jab have an efficacy of about 90% against symptomatic Covid, similar to the other approved UK vaccines. Palestinians are facing a winter coronavirus surge driven by the Omicron variant, placing stress on the medical system even though vaccines are widely available. More than 70,000 active cases in the Israeli-occupied West Bank, annexed east Jerusalem and the Gaza Strip on Thursday, more than twice the number at the height of previous increases. South Africa’s Afrigen Biologics has used the publicly available sequence of Moderna’s Covid mRNA vaccine to make its own version of the shot, which could be tested in humans before the end of this year, Afrigen’s top executive has said.Ralf Rangnick blamed Manchester United for their 8-7 penalty defeat to Middlesbrough, the interim manager saying that being knocked out of the FA Cup was “our own fault”. The fourth-round loss at Old Trafford all but ends United’s hopes of ending a five-year trophy drought as Rangnick’s misfiring team are outsiders for the Champions League and 19 points behind Manchester City in the Premier League. While Anthony Elanga missed the crucial spot-kick, Rangnick contended that Matt Crooks’s second half equaliser should not have stood after Duncan Watmore’s handball in the lead-up to the goal was adjudged accidental by Anthony Taylor and VAR. “How can it be accidental if he controls the ball up in the air with his hand? It was clear it should not stand but in the end I was really surprised it stood,” said Rangnick. Watmore said: “If I’m honest, it was completely accidental. I know it touched my hand but it wasn’t intentional at all. I was hoping it wouldn’t be handball and wasn’t expecting it but I haven’t seen it back and it doesn’t feel like it at the time.” Rangnick was clear, though, that United were culpable for the loss. “In the first half we should have easily been 3-0 up and second half we had chances too. We should have won the game in normal time. On penalties it can happen what happened today,” he said. “We have to take our chances better and with more quality than we did today. It was our own fault – we should not have gone into extra time and penalties. For example, Bruno [Fernandes] chance [near the end] – if he has 10 of these in a match he scores nine. “Today he hit the post, tried to place it too exactly – these things can happen, obviously he didn’t do that on purpose.” Middlesbrough’s manager, Chris Wilder, said: “The FA Cup is alive and kicking – I told the players it was all about making memories. We rode our luck and took our chances. I thought straight away it was handball – I thought it would be chalked out and delighted it wasn’t.”Donald Trump called for the House committee tasked with investigating the 6 January 2021 insurrection on the US Capitol to “stop its work immediately”. The former president, who encouraged his supporters to “fight like hell” before they headed to the Capitol, falsely claimed the committee was a coverup for “Biden’s failed administration”. The US surpassed 900,000 Covid-19 deaths, the highest highest reported death toll of any country. The new figures come less than two months after Covid deaths in the US reached 800,000 as the highly contagious Omicron variant led to a surge in cases this winter. The Republican National Committee approved a resolution censuring Liz Cheney and Adam Kinzinger, the two Republican members of the House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection. The resolution refers to the violent insurrection, which resulted in several deaths and hundreds of arrests, as “legitimate political discourse”. The RNC’s mischaracterization of the insurrection sparked bipartisan outrage, with many accusing the party of attempting to normalize political violence. Cheney shared a video that included footage from the insurrection, showing rioters attacking police officers with chemical spray and flag poles. “This was January 6th. This is not ‘legitimate political discourse,’” Cheney said in her tweet. Mike Pence rejected Donald Trump’s claims that he could have overturned the results of the 2020 election. Trump and some of his allies have argued Pence could have overruled the Electoral College as the vice-president oversaw the congressional certification of Joe Biden’s victory on January 6. “President Trump is wrong. I had no right to overturn the election,” Pence said at a Federal Society event today. “The presidency belongs to the American people and the American people alone.” The House select committee investigating the insurrection has reportedly gathered evidence that Trump spoke to Republican congressman Jim Jordan the morning of the Capitol attack. According to CNN, call records show Trump spoke with Jordan for 10 minutes on the morning of January 6. The select committee has asked Jordan to voluntarily provide information on the events of January 6, but he has so far refused to do so. Biden celebrated the strong January jobs report, which showed that the US economy added 467,000 jobs last month. In a speech this morning, Biden noted that 6.6m jobs have been created in the year since he took office, as the country continues to recover from the coronavirus pandemic. “America is back to work,” Biden said. “History’s been made here.” -Joan E Greve and Dani Anguiano Tucker Carlson has been accused of promoting “antisemitic tropes” in his documentary Hungary vs Soros: The Fight for Civilization, which attacks the billionaire Democratic donor – and frequent target of antisemitic hate – George Soros. The film, which aired last week, sees Carlson, a Fox News host with a long history of inflammatory rightwing rhetoric, travel to Hungary, where he tees up a selection of politicians and commenters to attack Soros, a wealthy philanthropist who has donated billions of dollars to Democratic causes. Soros, who is Jewish and was born in Hungary, has been subjected to antisemitic attacks from conservatives for decades. Far-right activists and believers in the QAnon conspiracy theory have accused Soros of funding violent protests, of supporting an imagined global ring of pedophiles and of driving illegal immigration, a recurring theme in Carlson’s film. Carlson claims in the documentary that Soros has “spent decades” waging “a kind of war, political, social and demographic war on the west”. Carlson’s narration is accompanied by black and white images and screeching, dystopian music. “Unlike the threats from the Soviets and the Ottoman empire, the threat posed by George Soros and his nonprofit organizations is much more subtle and hard to detect,” Carlson says. Later, he claims that Soros has plotted to “oust democratically elected leaders” and “install ideologically aligned puppets”, nodding to antisemitic tropes about a global cabal which controls the world’s politics and finances. Soros has given at least $18bn to his Open Society Foundations organization, which offers financial grants to groups around the world, and has been a key donor to Democratic politicians and causes. He has long been a target of the political right, which has projected an array of conspiracy theories about the billionaire. In 2018 a pipe bomb was delivered to Soros’s home in Bedford, about 40 miles north of New York City. Full story: US surpasses 900,000 Covid deaths About two years into the pandemic, more than 900,000 people have died of Covid in the US, according to data from Johns Hopkins University. The new total – the highest reported death toll of any country – comes less than two months after Covid deaths in the US reached 800,000 as the highly contagious Omicron variant led to a surge in cases this winter. “It is an astronomically high number. If you had told most Americans two years ago as this pandemic was getting going that 900,000 Americans would die over the next few years, I think most people would not have believed it,” said Dr Ashish K Jha, dean of the Brown University School of Public Health. While new case rates appear to be falling across much of the country, the pandemic has tested the limits of the US healthcare system. Experts have warned for months that increasing vaccination rates is key to fighting the pandemic and preventing new variants. Sixty-four percent of Americans are vaccinated, according to the CDC. More here: Hours after Mike Pence offered his strongest rebuke of Donald Trump yet, the Democratic National Committee criticized the former vice-president for standing “silent as Trump undermined our democracy”. “Let’s be very clear – former vice-president Mike Pence doesn’t deserve credit for ‘breaking’ with Trump after standing shoulder to shoulder with him for nearly six years ... he surely could have done more before Trump incited a mob to attack the Capitol, assault police officers, and try to overturn an election,” said the DNC spokesperson Adonna Biel, calling his remarks “a day late and a dollar short”. At an event for the conservative legal group the Federalist Society on Friday, Pence pushed back against Trump’s false claims that the vice-president had the ability to overturn the results of the 2020 election. “President Trump is wrong. I had no right to overturn the election,” Pence said. “The presidency belongs to the American people and the American people alone. Frankly there is no idea more un-American than the notion that any one person could choose the American president.” A jury found high-profile attorney Michael Avenatti guilty of cheating the adult film star Stormy Daniels out of nearly $300,000 she was supposed to get for writing a book about an alleged tryst with Donald Trump. The lawyer, who rose to fame as one of Trump’s leading critics on cable news early in his administration, has faced a host of legal problems in recent years including a two-and-a-half-year prison sentence for trying to extort up to $25m from Nike. Prosecutors said Avenatti spent a share of Daniels’ money on airfare, food and payroll for his debt-ridden law firm, and repeatedly lied to her when she pressed him on when she would get an installment she was owed on the $800,000 book deal. More here: Greetings from Los Angeles, readers. I’m Dani Anguiano and I’ll be taking over the Guardian’s live coverage of US politics for the next few hours. Donald Trump called for the House committee tasked with investigating the 6 January 2021 insurrection on the US Capitol to “stop its work immediately”. His statement was released Friday shortly after Mike Pence offered a strong rebuke of the former president and Republicans voted to censure Liz Cheney and Adam Kinzinger for their involvement with the 6 January House committee. The former president, who encouraged his supporters to “fight like hell” before they headed to the Capitol, blamed Pelosi for security issues on 6 January and falsely claimed the committee was a coverup for “Biden’s failed administration”. Capitol security is the responsibility of the Capitol police board, not the speaker of the House. Meanwhile, the Republican party on Friday sought to frame Trump’s attempt to overturn the results of the 2020 election defeat and the US Capitol attack as “legitimate political discourse”. Seven people died in the attack on the US Capitol and more than 100 police officers were injured. Trump, who was impeached by the House for inciting an insurrection, has promised pardons for 6 January rioters if he is elected again. That’s it from me today. My west coast colleague, Dani Anguiano, will take over the blog for the next few hours. Here’s where the day stands so far: The Republican National Committee approved a resolution censuring Liz Cheney and Adam Kinzinger, the two Republican members of the House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection. The resolution refers to the violent insurrection, which resulted in several deaths and hundreds of arrests, as “legitimate political discourse”. The RNC’s mischaracterization of the insurrection sparked bipartisan outrage, with many accusing the party of attempting to normalize political violence. Cheney shared a video that included footage from the insurrection, showing rioters attacking police officers with chemical spray and flag poles. “This was January 6th. This is not ‘legitimate political discourse,’” Cheney said in her tweet. Mike Pence rejected Donald Trump’s claims that he could have overturned the results of the 2020 election. Trump and some of his allies have argued Pence could have overruled the Electoral College as the vice-president oversaw the congressional certification of Joe Biden’s victory on January 6. “President Trump is wrong. I had no right to overturn the election,” Pence said at a Federal Society event today. “The presidency belongs to the American people and the American people alone.” The House select committee investigating the insurrection has reportedly gathered evidence that Trump spoke to Republican congressman Jim Jordan the morning of the Capitol attack. According to CNN, call records show Trump spoke with Jordan for 10 minutes on the morning of January 6. The select committee has asked Jordan to voluntarily provide information on the events of January 6, but he has so far refused to do so. Biden celebrated the strong January jobs report, which showed that the US economy added 467,000 jobs last month. In a speech this morning, Biden noted that 6.6m jobs have been created in the year since he took office, as the country continues to recover from the coronavirus pandemic. “America is back to work,” Biden said. “History’s been made here.” Dani will have more coming up, so stay tuned. Constitutional law experts have consistently rejected claims from Donald Trump and his supporters that the vice-president can overturn the results of a presidential election while overseeing the congressional certification process. “Any claim that the vice-president can unilaterally overturn the results of a presidential election is patently absurd,” Matthew Hall, a professor of constitutional studies and political science at the University of Notre Dame, recently told USA Today. “If the vice-president had total discretion to overturn election results, the party that controls the White House could simply refuse to surrender power when they lose an election. Such an arrangement would completely undermine the integrity of our democratic system.” Mike Pence’s comments come days after Donald Trump reiterated the baseless claim that the vice-president could have overturned the results of the 2020 election on January 6. In a Sunday statement, Trump criticized efforts to reform the 1887 Electoral Count Act, which outlines how the results of presidential elections are meant to be certified by Congress. A bipartisan group of lawmakers is pushing to change the law to clarify, among other things, that the vice-president’s role overseeing the certification process is purely ceremonial. “Actually, what they are saying, is that Mike Pence did have the right to change the outcome, and they now want to take that right away,” Trump said. “Unfortunately, he didn’t exercise that power, he could have overturned the Election!” Pence has now rejected Trump’s claims, saying he had no authority to overturn the results of the election. And that view is supported by constitutional law experts. Mike Pence has pushed back against Donald Trump’s baseless claims that the vice-president had the ability to overturn the results of the 2020 election as he oversaw the congressional certification of Joe Biden’s victory on January 6. Speaking at an event for the Federalist Society, a conservative legal group, Pence said the Constitution does not give the vice-president any authority to override the Electoral College. “I heard this week that President Trump said I had the right to overturn the election. President Trump is wrong. I had no right to overturn the election,” Pence said in Lake Buena Vista, Florida. “The presidency belongs to the American people and the American people alone. Frankly there is no idea more un-American than the notion that any one person could choose the American president.” Pence then pivoted to discussing the next presidential election, saying, “Under the Constitution, I had no right to change the outcome of our election. And Kamala Harris will have no right to overturn the election when we beat them in 2024.” Pence has been named as a potential presidential candidate for the 2024 race, but his direct criticism of Trump will likely irk the former president’s supporters, who make up much of the Republican base. Liz Cheney also sharply criticized the Republican National Committee for referring to the Capitol insurrection as “legitimate political discourse”. The Republican congresswoman, who was censured by the RNC over her work for the House select committee investigating the insurrection, shared a video of some of the violence that occurred on January 6. The tweeted video shows insurrectionists assaulting police officers and attacking them with chemical spray and flag poles as they storm the Capitol. “This was January 6th. This is not ‘legitimate political discourse,’” Cheney said in her tweet. Government watchdog groups are fiercely criticizing the Republican National Committee for characterizing the Capitol insurrection as “legitimate political discourse” in its resolution censuring Liz Cheney and Adam Kinzinger. “January 6 was an insurrection that left dead and scores of seriously injured in its wake. It was not legitimate political discourse no matter what the GOP says,” said Karen Hobert Flynn, the president of the group Common Cause. “It was a violent attempt to overturn the legitimate results of the 2020 presidential election and ignore the will of the people. It was a dangerous and irresponsible attempt to try to intimidate Congress with an angry racist mob assembled and then set loose by a man who had just lost the presidential election.” Flynn accused the RNC of attempting to normalize political violence, and she described the vote to censure Cheney and Kinzinger over their work investigating the insurrection as “anti-democratic”. “There is no room for ambiguity when it comes to an attack on the peaceful transfer of power and our democratic system of government,” Flynn said. “January 6 was an attack on the rule of law, the very concept of free and fair elections, and it was an attack on America. Elected leaders who endorse political violence have no business governing in the name of the American people.” Meanwhile, Joe Biden has just signed an executive order aimed at improving the timeliness and lowering the costs of federal construction projects. The president signed the executive order at Ironworkers Local 5 in Upper Marlboro, Maryland, and he praised the workers present as some of “the best in the world”. The executive order will require the use of project labor agreements on federal construction contracts above $35 million, and the White House has said that the policy will help alleviate delays to ensure projects are completed on time. “The executive order I’m going to sign today is going to help ensure that we build a better America, we build it right and we build it on time [and] we build it cheaper than it would have been otherwise,” Biden said. The president said that the expanded use of project labor agreements would lead to highly-skilled workers overseeing the most important projects, resulting in fewer work stoppages and a smaller bill for the federal government. “When big construction projects are completed efficiently and with the highest degree of professionalism, it’s good for the American taxpayer,” Biden said. “We don’t talk about how y’all save the American taxpayers’ money.” Weeks after the 2020 election, Donald Trump reviewed a draft executive order that authorized the national guard to seize voting machines and verbally agreed to appoint Sidney Powell, a campaign lawyer and conspiracy theorist, as special counsel to investigate election fraud. The two previously unreported actions of the former president – which is certain to interest the House select committee investigating the Capitol attack and Trump’s efforts to overturn his defeat – came during a contentious White House meeting on 18 December 2020. Trump never followed through with issuing a formal executive order authorizing the seizure of voting machines or appointing a special counsel. But four sources with detailed knowledge of what transpired during the 18 December meeting described to the Guardian how close he came to doing so. The draft executive order Trump reviewed was one of the final versions Powell had prepared. An early version of the document was published by Politico. Another version, obtained by CNN, empowered the Department of Homeland Security instead of the Department of Defense. But all versions included language that would have allowed Trump to appoint a special counsel to investigate claims of foreign interference in the 2020 election, which the Department of Justice had already determined were without foundation. Read the Guardian’s full report: As Liz Cheney and Adam Kinzinger are censured over their involvement with the House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection, the panel is gathering some new information about Donald Trump’s communications on the morning of the attack. CNN reports: The House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection is now in possession of White House records that provide new details about a phone call Donald Trump made to Republican Rep. Jim Jordan on January 6, 2021 -- as the investigation drills down on the former President’s communications that day and questions have long swirled around calls between him and lawmakers. Two sources who have reviewed the call records tell CNN that Trump spoke on the phone at the White House residence with Jordan for 10 minutes on the morning of January 6. That afternoon, Jordan took to the House floor to object to the certification of President Joe Biden’s Electoral College win, and pro-Trump supporters attacked the US Capitol. The select committee has asked Jordan to voluntarily appear before investigators to provide testimony about the insurrection, but he has refused to do so. The latest details about Jordan’s call with Trump hours before the attack unfolded may give the select committee justification to move forward with a subpoena of the Republican congressman. Some Republican lawmakers are expressing dismay over their party’s decision to censure Adam Kinzinger and Liz Cheney for their work with the select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection. “The GOP I believe in is the party of freedom and truth,” said Maryland Governor Larry Hogan, who has frequently criticized Donald Trump and his hold over the Republican party. “It’s a sad day for my party—and the country—when you’re punished just for expressing your beliefs, standing on principle, and refusing to tell blatant lies.” In a show of loyalty to former president Donald Trump, Republicans on Friday censured two of its own, US Representatives Liz Cheney and Adam Kinzinger. The move was a response to their involvement in the House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection on January 6 last year. The resolution also referred to the Capitol insurrection, which resulted in the deaths of several people and has already led to hundreds of arrests, as “legitimate political discourse”. The censure of Cheney and Kinzinger passed on a voice vote as 168 members of the RNC gathered for their winter meeting in Salt Lake City, Utah. The yes votes were overwhelming, with a handful of nays, according to reporters at the meeting. The resolution said their actions have damaged Republican efforts to win back majorities in Congress. Both lawmakers issued statements in anticipation of Friday’s vote. “The leaders of the Republican Party have made themselves willing hostages to a man who admits he tried to overturn a presidential election and suggests he would pardon January 6 defendants, some of whom have been charged with seditious conspiracy,” Cheney said, referring to the hundreds of Trump supporters accused of various crimes in the violent attack. Not all Republicans backed the censure. Republican Senator Mitt Romney praised Cheney and Kinzinger as honorable in a Twitter post on Friday. “Shame falls on a party that would censure persons of conscience, who seek truth in the face of vitriol,” he wrote. Congressional staff have declared their efforts to unionize offices and committees in Congress. In a statement on Friday, the Congressional Workers Union said a survey distributed by the Congressional Progressive Staff Association found that 91% of staff surveyed “want more protections to give them a voice at work”. The new union plans come as a result of a volunteer group of congressional staff organizing for more than a year. “Now, in the midst of this momentous resurgence of the labor movement, and on the heels of Speaker Nancy Pelosi’s commitment to ‘fully support’ any organizing efforts by Congressional staff, it is time for Democrats to lead by example,” the statement said. On Thursday, Pelosi’s office expressed her support for the union, with spokesperson Drew Hammill saying: “Like all Americans, our tireless Congressional staff have the right to organize their workplace and join together in a union. If and when staffers choose to exercise their right, they would have Speaker Pelosi’s full support.” Representative Andy Levin, a Democrat from Michigan, also threw his weight behind the union drive. “At the request of the new union, next week we will take legislative action to afford congressional staff the freedom to form a union - a fundamental right for all workers,” he tweeted. Here’s where the day stands so far: Joe Biden celebrated the strong January jobs report, which showed that the US economy added 467,000 jobs last month. In a speech this morning, Biden noted that 6.6 million jobs have been created in the year since he took office, as the country continues to recover from the coronavirus pandemic. “America is back to work,” Biden said. “History’s been made here.” The House passed a bill to bolster the US production of semiconductor chips. The COMPETES Act passed the House in a vote of 222 to 210, which fell almost entirely along party lines. The Senate has passed a similar bill on economic competitiveness, and the two chambers must now work on a compromise measure before it can go to Biden’s desk. The Republican National Committee is expected to approve a resolution censuring Liz Cheney and Adam Kinzinger, the two Republican members of the House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection. In a draft version of the resolution, the RNC accused Cheney and Kinzinger of engaging in behavior that is “destructive to the US House of Representatives, the Republican Party and our republic”. The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned. A reporter asked Jen Psaki why the Biden administration is trying to get out in front of Russia’s alleged plans to stage an attack in Ukraine to use it as a pretext for an invasion. The reporter noted that this White House has been more forthcoming than past administrations in terms of sharing intelligence assessments about Russia’s potential actions in eastern Europe. “Over the past several months, we but also a number of our allies have developed a significant amount of credible intelligence about Russian efforts to use a false pretext to justify an invasion of Ukraine, and this evidence mirrors both public reporting and Russian accounts and past conflicts,” Psaki said. The press secretary noted that Russia has used a similar strategy in recent years, such as when the Kremlin accused the US of running a biological weapons lab in the country of Georgia to destabilize the government there. “It doesn’t mean it’s guaranteed to repeat, but it is important for people to understand contextually what they’re capable of and what tactics they’ve used in the past,” Psaki said. “And sometimes you do see repetition of that.” The White House press secretary, Jen Psaki, is now holding her daily briefing, and she was asked about tension between the administration and reporters over questions on foreign policy. Yesterday, both Psaki and State Department spokesperson Ned Price clashed with reporters who pressed for evidence to substantiate US claims about the recent raid in northern Syria targeting an Islamic State leader and Russia’s alleged plans to stage an attack in Ukraine as a pretext for invasion. Both Psaki and Price declined to provide additional evidence to substantiate the administration’s claims, and they appeared to bristle at suggestions that claims from the US military should be closely scrutinized. “We welcome tough questions and good faith scrutiny. Otherwise I wouldn’t come out here,” Psaki said. Specifically on the issue of the Syria raid, Psaki said, “We’re less than 48 hours from the end of the mission. So the Department of Defense is still conducting after-action assessments. That’s a natural part of the process that occurs.” As he celebrated the strong January jobs report, Joe Biden also applauded the House for passing the COMPETES Act, a bill aimed at bolstering US production of semiconductor chips. The president noted that Intel is already working on a semiconductor production facility in Ohio, which will create thousands of jobs in the state. “Making sure every American has a job is a great start, but it’s not the finish,” Biden said. “We need even more high-paying jobs - jobs you can raise a family on and have some breathing room.” After wrapping up his prepared remarks, Biden walked away from his podium without answering any of reporters’ shouted questions. Joe Biden touted the 6.6 million jobs that have been added to the US economy in the year since he took office, describing it as a historic recovery. “It comes alongside the largest drop in unemployment rate in a single year on record, the largest reduction in childhood poverty ever recorded in a single year and the strongest economic growth this country has seen in nearly 40 years,” Biden said. But the president also acknowledged that many American families have not been able to fully enjoy the country’s economic recovery because US prices have increased sharply as businesses have reopened. “Average people are getting clobbered by the cost of everything,” Biden said. “Gas prices at the pump are up. We’re working to bring them down, but they’re up. Food prices are up. We’re working to bring them down as well.” The White House has pledged to enact policies aimed at tackling inflation, which has become a major concern for Americans and could be a drag on Democrats’ midterm prospects. Joe Biden is now delivering remarks on the strong January jobs report, which showed that the US economy added 467,000 jobs last month. The president pointed to the report as the latest evidence of how the US economy is recovering from the effects of the coronavirus pandemic, applauding the “extraordinary resilience and grit of the American people”. “America is back to work,” Biden said. “History’s been made here.” Joe Biden has still not appeared for his remarks on the January jobs report, but the House has just passed an important bill that the president may address in his speech. In a vote of 222-210, the House passed the COMPETES Act, a bill aimed at helping the US keep up with China in the semiconductor chip industry. Every House Democrat every Stephanie Murphy supported the bill, while every Republican member except Adam Kinzinger opposed the bill. CNN has more details on the legislation: The legislation put forward by House Democrats -- called the America COMPETES Act of 2022 -- addresses pressing economic issues facing the Biden administration, including supply chain disruptions and a global shortage of semiconductor chips, which are essential for the production of smartphones, medical equipment and cars. Additionally, the bill calls for a number of changes to US trade rules, aiming to level the playing field for American businesses and combat China’s market-distorting trade practices. The Senate passed its own legislation last year aimed at countering China’s influence by investing in American technology, science and research -- with bipartisan support. While the House bill also seeks to increase US competitiveness abroad, it is not an identical piece of legislation. An aide for the majority staff of the House Science Committee told CNN the expectation is that differences between the House and Senate legislation will ultimately be reconciled in order to get a bill to the President’s desk as soon as possible. As we await Joe Biden’s remarks on the January jobs report, House speaker Nancy Pelosi has released a statement celebrating the 467,000 jobs added to the US economy last month. “Today’s jobs report makes resoundingly clear that, with nearly half a million new jobs created last month, the Biden economic recovery continues to be historic,” Pelosi said. Pelosi noted that the US economy has added 6.6 million new jobs in the past year, and she credited that progress to “President Biden’s visionary leadership and Democrats’ effective economic plan”. “Now, Democrats are prepared to build on this extraordinary economic momentum: continuing our work to lower families’ costs, strengthen our supply chains, and make more goods in America,” Pelosi said. “Under the leadership of President Biden and House Democrats, our nation will continue to Build Back Better to create more good paying jobs and lower costs for families across America.” Joe Biden is expected to soon deliver remarks at the White House on the strong January jobs report, which showed that the US economy added 467,000 jobs last month. The report was welcome news for the White House, after the past couple of jobs reports missed economists’ expectations and intensified fears over a sluggish recovery from the pandemic. “In 2021, we went from an economy in crisis to the fastest economic growth in nearly 40 years. Let’s keep the progress going,” Biden said on Twitter this morning. The president is scheduled to start speaking at any moment, so stay tuned. Some Republican lawmakers have denounced their party’s plan to censure Liz Cheney and Adam Kinzinger over their work for the House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection. “The RNC is censuring Liz Cheney and Adam Kinzinger because they are trying to find out what happened on January 6th - HUH?” said Bill Cassidy, one of the seven Republican senators who voted last year to convict Donald Trump for inciting the insurrection. Mitt Romney, another one of those seven senators, added, “Shame falls on a party that would censure persons of conscience, who seek truth in the face of vitriol. Honor attaches to Liz Cheney and Adam Kinzinger for seeking truth even when doing so comes at great personal cost.” It’s worth noting that Romney’s niece, Ronna McDaniel, is the chairwoman of the RNC, and she has spoken in favor of the resolution, according to Buzzfeed News. The Republican National Committee is expected to approve a resolution censuring Liz Cheney and Adam Kinzinger, the two Republican members of the House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection. The RNC’s resolutions committee advanced the proposal last night, and all members are expected to vote on the measure later today, as the party holds its winter meeting in Salt Lake City. According to a draft obtained by the Washington Post, the resolution accuses Cheney and Kinzinger of participating in behavior that is “destructive to the US House of Representatives, the Republican Party and our republic”. The resolution also appears to refer to the Capitol insurrection, which resulted in the deaths of several people and has already led to hundreds of arrests, as “legitimate political discourse”. The resolution was originally expected to include a demand for Cheney and Kinzinger to be expelled from the House Republican conference, but that does not appear to be in the latest draft. Cheney, who is already facing a primary challenge over her work with the select committee, released a statement last night criticizing the RNC’s efforts to defend Donald Trump and the violent insurrectionists. “The leaders of the Republican Party have made themselves willing hostages to a man who admits he tried to overturn a presidential election and suggests he would pardon Jan. 6 defendants, some of whom have been charged with seditious conspiracy,” Cheney said. “I’m a constitutional conservative and I do not recognize those in my party who have abandoned the Constitution to embrace Donald Trump. History will be their judge. I will never stop fighting for our constitutional republic. No matter what.” One reason why the January jobs report was so unexpectedly strong has to do with how employers dealt with their seasonal workers, who are usually let go after the holidays. Axios explains: Some of the biggest job gains were in categories that have strong seasonal patterns, normally adding workers in the fall and then cutting those temporary workers in January. But employers, desperate for staff, appear to have held onto those workers in greater numbers than in a normal year. Due to the statistical process of seasonal adjustment, ‘cutting fewer workers than usual for this time of year’ gets translated as ‘adding lots of jobs.’ Later today, Joe Biden will also sign an executive order to “improve timeliness, lower costs and increase quality in federal construction projects”. According to the White House’s fact sheet, the order will require the use of project labor agreements on federal construction projects above $35 million. “The Order will help alleviate the management and coordination challenges that can stymie progress on major construction projects,” the fact sheet says. “This helps projects get completed on time and helps the government get the best value for taxpayers’ dollars.” The White House has said the order could impact up to $262 billion in federal construction contracts and nearly 200,000 workers on those projects, and the departments of defense and labor will lead training for federal employees on the new policy. Earlier this week, in a highly unusual move, the White House sought to manage expectations ahead of the latest jobs figure release. White House officials cautioned that Friday’s jobs report could be “confusing” because of the timing of the survey. Covid infections have fallen sharply across the US since the report was compiled. The government report follows on from a survey conducted by ADP, the US’s largest private payroll supplier, which reported that companies cut jobs in January for the first time in over a year. Payrolls fell by 301,000 for the month with more than half the losses coming from the pandemic-sensitive leisure and hospitality industries. “The labor market recovery took a step back at the start of 2022 due to the effect of the Omicron variant and its significant, though likely temporary, impact to job growth,” said Nela Richardson, ADP’s chief economist. There were signs that the jobs market is still recovering ahead of Friday’s report. On Thursday, the labor department reported that new unemployment claims fell to 238,000 for the final week in January, dropping 23,000 from the week prior, a second straight week of falls. Greetings from Washington, live blog readers. The US economy added 467,000 jobs last month, far surpassing economists’ expectations as the country continues to grapple with the surge in coronavirus cases caused by the Omicron variant. The AP reports: The government’s report Friday also drastically revised up its estimate of job gains for November and December by a combined 709,000. It also said the unemployment rate ticked up last month from 3.9% to a still-low 4%. The strong hiring gain for January, which was unexpected, demonstrates the eagerness of many employers to hire even as the pandemic maintains its grip on the economy. Businesses appear to have seen the omicron wave as having, at most, a temporary impact on the economy and remain confident about longer-term growth. ... The surprisingly healthy hiring figures will likely give the Federal Reserve leeway to raise interest rates more quickly to cool inflation. The Fed has already indicated that it will begin raising rates in March, and it could do so again at its next meeting in May. Biden is scheduled to deliver remarks on the jobs report in about an hour, and he may comment on potential interest rate hikes, so stay tuned.Australia’s deputy prime minister, Barnaby Joyce, has revealed he offered his resignation to Scott Morrison while publicly apologising for calling him a “hypocrite and a liar” in a leaked text message. Joyce told reporters on Saturday that Morrison had rejected his offer to resign as deputy prime minister during a phone call earlier this week after Joyce learned screenshots of the text were being circulated. In the message, dated last March and written before he returned to the Nationals leadership, Joyce wrote he did not “get along” with Morrison, saying: “He is a hypocrite and a liar from my observations and that is over a long time… I have never trusted him, and I dislike how earnestly [he] rearranges the truth to a lie.” The Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, said on Saturday it was now “untenable” for Joyce to continue as deputy prime minister, saying Joyce had been in the same cabinet as Morrison for half a decade when he sent the text. The ABC’s Sunday morning political commentary show Insiders also announced Joyce had pulled out of a scheduled interview with the program. The home affairs minister, Karen Andrews, would take his place. Joyce told reporters on Saturday he “never expected [the text] to end up in the public realm” and said his views at the time were based on “assumption and commentary” from a backbencher. Joyce said: “I offered my resignation and he did not accept my resignation. And that, in itself, is a statement of a person of greater character. That is not one of a person of any form of vindictiveness or a sense of retribution.” Joyce accepted the emergence of the text was damaging to the prime minister, saying “you don’t apologise for things that you don’t think cause harm”. He did not elaborate on what had sparked the text, but said “whatever it is was wrong because it was never from a conversation that I had with the prime minister, because I was never in a job that had a conversation with the prime minister at that stage.” Joyce claimed that since becoming deputy prime minister in July 2021, Morrison had “showed competency” in negotiations within the Coalition and had “honoured every agreement” with the junior Coalition partner. The text had been forwarded by its original unnamed recipient to former Liberal staffer Brittany Higgins, Joyce said. On Friday evening, Morrison did not say a resignation offer had been made, but said in a statement he had accepted Joyce’s apology immediately. He said: “I understand Barnaby was in a different headspace last year, both professionally and personally, and so I know he genuinely no longer feels this way. Relationships change over time. Politicians are humans beings too. We all have our frailties and none of us are perfect.” Parliament is scheduled to return on Tuesday. Albanese told reporters Joyce’s text was “extraordinary” and said the government was “obsessed by their internal hatred and dysfunction”. He said Joyce’s role beside Morrison was now “untenable” and rejected Joyce’s suggestion that his more recent relationship had changed his views on the prime minister. “That was after Barnaby Joyce had served in the cabinet for over half a decade along side of Scott Morrison … The idea that this was just a flippant remark is simply untenable,” he said. The emergence of the explosive message comes just days after a text exchange between former New South Wales premier Gladys Berejiklian and a current federal minister was revealed during questions at the National Press Club. Berejiklian had described the prime minister as a “horrible, horrible person” with the unnamed minister saying Morrison was a “fraud” and a “complete psycho”.China’s ambassador to the UN has called on the United States to be more flexible in its dealings with North Korea, as Beijing joined others in refusing to sign a US-drafted security council joint statement condemning Pyongyang’s missile launches. Kim Jong-un’s regime conducted an unprecedented seven weapons tests in January, including launching its most powerful missile since 2017 as it hinted it could restart long-range and nuclear testing. Washington had proposed a statement decrying those launches, but China and Russia, along with other nations, refused to sign on to it, prompting the US to say the council’s “ongoing silence” would embolden North Korea to further defy the international community. Before a closed-door meeting convened at Washington’s request on Friday, China’s ambassador to the UN, Zhang Jun, said the key to easing tensions with North Korea was in the hands of the US. “If they do want to see some new breakthrough, they should show more sincerity and flexibility,” Zhang said. “They should come up with more attractive and more practical, more flexible approaches, policies and actions and accommodating the concerns of the DPRK,” Zhang told reporters, using the initials of the North’s official name. The Chinese official noted that as a result of former US president Donald Trump’s policy on North Korea, Pyongyang had suspended nuclear tests and international ballistic missile launches. However, in recent months, Zhang lamented, “we have seen a vicious circle of confrontation, condemnation, sanctions”. China and Russia have been blocking council action on North Korea, and last year proposed a resolution that would ease sanctions on Pyongyang on humanitarian grounds, but the draft has not been put to a vote due to lack of support. “At least we are doing something to facilitate further improvement and avoiding the escalation of the tension,” Zhang said. After the meeting, the US envoy to the world body, Linda Thomas-Greenfield, said the Chinese-Russian proposal to ease sanctions would effectively reward North Korea for what she called “bad behaviour”. “There’s no reason for this council to reward them for nine tests in one month and almost as many in the previous years,” she told reporters. “To spend millions of dollars on military tests when your people are starving indicates that this country does not care about its own people.” Asked about Zhang’s call for increased US action and whether Joe Biden should get directly involved in diplomacy, Thomas-Greenfield reiterated that the US was willing to meet with North Korea without preconditions. “But,” she added, “before we can commit our president to meeting, we need to have a better sense of what there is to achieve. I can’t comment on what the Trump administration achieved. We had ballistic missiles testing throughout the past four years. It never stopped him. So we have to keep up the pressure.” She said that so far “we’ve not been able to bring them to the diplomatic table for any discussions whatsoever”. Friday’s meeting on North Korea was the third in the space of a month. In the last one on 20 January, eight council members – Albania, Brazil, Britain, France, Ireland, Norway, the United Arab Emirates and the United States – along with Japan released a joint statement condemning the North’s tests. The other seven members – China, Gabon, Ghana, India, Kenya, Mexico and Russia – refused to sign. On Friday, those same eight countries and Japan, again led by Washington, issued a new statement reiterating a call for North Korea to “cease its destabilising actions and return to dialogue.” “We continue to urge the DPRK to respond positively to the offers from the United States and others to meet without preconditions,” it said. The statement also called out the other members of the security council, saying the “cost of the council’s ongoing silence is too high”. “It will embolden the DPRK to further defy the international community; to normalise its violations of security council resolutions; to further destabilise the region; and to continue to threaten international peace and security,” it said. North Korea on Friday sent “warm congratulations” to its Chinese ally for the Beijing Olympics, a message that experts consider a likely signal for a halt to missile firing during the sporting event. US secretary of state Antony Blinken is scheduled to hold trilateral talks in Hawaii on 12 February with South Korea and Japan on North Korea. Agence France-Presse and Associated Press contributed to this reportVoters in far northern California have solidified the ouster of a Republican county official, giving control of the Shasta county board of supervisors to a group supported by local militia members. Leonard Moty, a retired police chief and Republican with decades of public service, lost his seat in a recall election in one of California’s most conservative counties. The Tuesday recall came as tensions reached a high in the county after two years of threats and increasing hostility toward moderate Republican officials over pandemic health restrictions. “I really thought my community would step up to the plate and they didn’t and that’s very discouraging,” Moty said in an interview with the Guardian earlier this week, warning the recall would shift the area to the “alt-right”. Updated polling numbers released on Friday showed about 56% of 8,752 voters supported recalling Moty. Cathy Darling Allen, the county registrar of voters, said there were about 121 ballots left to count. The results won’t be finalized until next month, but the two candidates in the lead to replace Moty attended a celebration on Tuesday with members of an area militia group, the Sacramento Bee reported. The recall is a win for the county’s ultra-conservative movement in their efforts to gain a foothold in local government in this rural part of northern California and fight back against moderate Republicans they felt didn’t do enough to resist state health rules during the pandemic. Though Shasta county was among the least restrictive in California amid Covid, residents unhappy about state rules and mask requirements have showed up to meetings in large numbers since 2020. Moty and others were subjected to what law enforcement has deemed “credible threats” and personal attacks in meetings – one person told him that bullets are expensive, but “ropes are reusable”. Experts have warned the pandemic and eroding trust in US institutions has fueled extremism in local politics and hostility against officials. In Shasta county, the successful recall campaign will likely set up more conflict between the local government and the state government, said Lisa Pruitt, a rural law expert at the University of California, Davis. Carlos Zapata, a local militia member who helped organize the recall efforts, in 2020 told the board there could be blood in the streets if the supervisors didn’t reject state health rules such as mask requirements. “This is a warning for what’s coming. It’s not going to be peaceful much longer. It’s going to be real … I’ve been in combat and I never wanted to go back again, but I’m telling you what – I will to stay in this country. If it has to be against our own citizens, it will happen. And there’s a million people like me, and you won’t stop us,” he said.A divided North Carolina supreme court struck down the state’s new maps for congressional and general assembly seats on Friday, declaring that state courts had authority to throw out lines engineered to secure a long-term Republican advantage in an otherwise closely divided state. By a 4-3 decision – with the justices who are registered Democrats making up the majority – the state’s highest court directed the GOP-controlled legislature to redraw the plans by 18 February and provide an explanation of how they calculated the partisan fairness of the new boundaries. The court’s decision reversed a ruling last month from a panel of three trial judges to let the maps stand, and declared partisan gerrymandering found in the redistricting approved by the legislature in November violated several provisions in the North Carolina constitution. They include the right to free elections, freedom of speech and equal protections of citizens. “When, on the basis of partisanship, the general assembly enacts a districting plan that diminishes or dilutes a voter’s opportunity to aggregate with likeminded voters to elect a governing majority ... the general assembly unconstitutionally infringes upon that voter’s fundamental right to vote,” read the order of the court’s majority, signed by associate Justice Robin Hudson. The trial judges had found ample evidence that the legislature approved maps that were “a result of intentional, pro-Republican partisan redistricting”. But they declared it wasn’t the judiciary’s place to intervene in mapmaking – a duty left to the legislature – when partisan fairness in those plans was challenged. They called the redistricting process inherently political and said many of the lawsuits’ claims fell outside the scope of legal redress. A majority on the supreme court disagreed, saying it’s the judiciary’s obligation to step in to block lines that skew a party’s control to the detriment of those with opposing viewpoints. Announced candidates for district seats may have to reconsider their decisions if boundary lines are redrawn. Friday’s ruling is a major victory for state and national Democrats and their allies who had invested greatly in overturning the maps and thwarting Republican gains for the next decade. It could also make it harder for Republicans to retake control of the US House this fall. A group associated with the National Democratic Redistricting Committee – led by former US attorney general Eric Holder – supported a bloc of voters who sued. “This is the justice we sought when we filed this lawsuit,” said Carrie Clark, executive director of the North Carolina League of Conservation Voters, which was another plaintiff. “With new, constitutional maps, North Carolinians will have a fighting chance to elect a government that fulfills their desire for environmental justice and climate action.” The lawsuits were bolstered by mathematicians and electoral researchers who presented evidence of their analysis of trillions of map simulations. They testified the new lines were likely to give the GOP 10 of the state’s 14 US House seats as well as state House and Senate majorities in almost any political environment. Republicans currently hold an 8-5 seat advantage. The state gets a 14th seat because of population growth reported in the census. The plaintiffs argued that the enacted maps thwarted the will of the people of North Carolina and the boundaries should produce political outcomes more in line with competitive statewide elections over the past decade. Some plaintiffs also alleged the mapmakers consolidated or fractured Black voters within districts, which reduced their ability to elect preferred candidates, resulting in illegal racial bias. Republican legislators, who did not immediately comment on Friday’s ruling, wanted the trial judges’ ruling to stand, saying a state supreme court decision from the early 2000s said partisan advantage can be considered in mapmaking. They said the redistricting process was transparent and prohibited the use of racial and political data. Friday’s majority order directed lawmakers to use election and population figures to determine whether racially polarized voting is sufficient in areas of the state to determine whether districts must be drawn that protect Black voting strength. Chief Justice Paul Newby, a Republican writing a dissent, said the court’s majority “tosses judicial restraint aside, seizing the opportunity to advance its agenda” with a partisan bias. “By choosing to hold that partisan gerrymandering violates the North Carolina constitution and by devising its own remedies, there appears to be no limit to this court’s power,” Newby wrote. The court’s other two Republicans – associate Justices Phil Berger Jr and Tamara Barringer – joined with Newby.Min Kyeong-seok is not shy about eating in restaurants alone, or staying in luxury hotels by himself, and shares his experiences online in his blog “One happy person”. “I want to show people that I am living a happy life despite being single,” says Min, 37. “South Koreans often view single people as pitiful, lonely, or lacking something be it economically, psychologically or even physically. “But I don’t need to be with others to enjoy a delicious meal. If anything, the service is better.” Opting to engage in activities alone is a growing trend in South Korea. It even has its own word, “honjok”, a combination of the Korean words for “by myself” and “tribe”. People who follow a honjok lifestyle do so willingly and confidently, not caring about the judgement of others. Min is among an increasing number of young people in the country embracing single life. Some have chosen to stay unattached, while others are delaying marriage and children. Some women are taking single living further and ruling out matrimony altogether, a choice known as “bihon”. Single-living boom In 2020, the proportion of single-person households in Korea rose to an all-time high of 31.7%. People in their 20s and 30s constituted the largest age groups of single-person households. Marriage and birth rates in the country are at record lows, as young people blame the high cost of living and home ownership for their reluctance to tie the knot. In South Korea, owning a house is traditionally seen as a prerequisite for marriage and in the past four years, the average price of an apartment in the capital Seoul has doubled. Raising children is also becoming more expensive and the burden of private education - seen by many South Koreans as essential - has put many off plans to start a family. Joongseek Lee, a professor at Seoul National University who researches single-person households, says while South Korea remains a collective and patriarchal society there is a rising tendency “to stay alone or to become independent when one has the chance.” While attitudes are changing, traditional expectations remain. For women, this includes marriage by 30, quitting their jobs to become mothers and full-time housewives. For men, it is providing a house and being the breadwinner. Min says the country’s traditional structures prevent him from being himself, and instead he wants to have a “flexible” life. “In Korean society, you feel as if you are constantly being assigned missions, from going to a good school and university, to getting a job, getting married, and having kids. When you don’t fulfil your set of predetermined missions, you will be judged and asked why not.” The rise of honjok and bihon For Seoul-based university student Lee Ye-eun, rampant gender inequality has influenced her way of life. South Korea has the worst gender pay gap among OECD countries. The country ranked last on The Economist’s Glass Ceiling Index for a ninth consecutive year, measuring where women have the best and worst chances of equal treatment at work. Lee has declared her bihon status, vowing never to marry. “I’m not going to date, I’m not going to marry, and I’m certainly not going to have a baby - even if you give me money,” says the 25-year-old. “I didn’t pledge not to get married because there are no good men, but because society dictates that women be in a more disadvantageous position when they enter a relationship.” New businesses and offerings have emerged to cater for the swelling single and solo-living markets in South Korea. The Seoul city government has created a task-force developing services for single-person households, such as low-cost security cameras, workshops on mental health and opportunities for singles to make kimchi – a staple in any household. Hotels are also trying to attract solo customers with “me-time” single occupancy staycation packages. Eating alone, also known as “honbap” and part of the honjok lifestyle, is predicted to grow as a trend in 2022, including at expensive restaurants. Convenience stores are providing more customised products and services for people living alone. And the pet economy is expected to surge in the coming years, according to Korea Rural Economic Research Institute, as more people opt for pets over parenthood. Expanding the idea of family Lee Ye-eun says embracing single life over the binds of marriage and child-rearing creates room for other pastimes. Time with her close friends has become more precious, and she hopes to create a community of like-minded individuals. Through an app for bihon women, she joined a sports group that she meets with several times a week for activities such as climbing and football. Kang Ye-seul, 27, is a university employee who has also opted never to get married. She says staying single gives her more freedom and allows her to pursue hobbies and hang out with her non-married friends. “I feel like I’m in a completely different world,” Kang says positively of her life decision. “In the past, I longed for happiness, wondered what it was, by what criteria to evaluate it, and curious about other people’s standards,” she says. She remains cautiously optimistic about the place of single people in society. “A sense of freedom and happiness followed after I learned that I could live a bihon life. Now, no matter what I do, it’s a choice only for me, so I don’t feel burdened or afraid of any responsibility that comes with it. I don’t think I’ll ever be as unhappy as before.” Government attitudes and social awareness toward single-person households are still lagging compared to the direction in which society is moving, Kang says. She would like to see a society that is more accommodating to nontraditional household structures such as living together without being married or related to each other. Last year, the government announced it would look into expanding the scope of the term “family” which could eventually include cohabitation and single parenthood, the latter of which continues to be stigmatised. “There are still limitations to the system for single-person households,” Kang told the Guardian. “But I also see things positively given that such households are only going to increase in number.”Peloton is drawing interest from potential suitors including Amazon, the Wall Street Journal reported on Friday, citing people familiar with the matter. The at-home exercise bike maker’s shares surged 40% in extended trading on Friday. Meanwhile, the Financial Times reported late on Friday that Nike was also evaluating a bid for Peloton, citing people briefed on the matter, who said the considerations were preliminary and Nike had not held talks with Peloton. Peloton and Nike did not immediately respond to a Reuters request for comment, while Amazon declined to comment. Last month, the activist investor Blackwells Capital called on Peloton’s board to remove the company’s chief executive, John Foley, and put the company up for sale. Peloton’s success soared during the pandemic while gyms were closed, attracting a well-heeled clientele who could shell out thousands for its signature stationary bike and live-streamed workouts. (The bikes start at $1,495, while the newest model costs $2,495.) But as gyms reopen and after a wave of negative press, Peloton has struggled to keep its numbers up. Less expensive bike models present competition, especially since users can pair them with programming from the Peloton app. And in May, the company was forced to recall its two popular treadmills after dozens of reported injuries and the death of a child. The company has lost roughly $20bn in value since November, when it hinted that demand for its exercise bikes and treadmills was slowing faster than expected. The company’s market value is down to about $8bn from its high of $50bn last year. Peloton is considering lay offs to recover lost revenue. “We now need to evaluate our organization structure and size of our team, with the utmost care and compassion,” John Foley, Peloton’s co-founder and chief executive, wrote in January. “And we are still in the process of considering all options as part of our efforts to make our business more flexible.” According to the Wall Street Journal report, Amazon has been speaking to advisers about a potential deal. However, there was no guarantee the e-commerce giant will follow through with an offer or that Peloton would be receptive, it added. Peloton could be an appealing opportunity for Amazon to expand its health and wellness presence. In 2020, the online retailer made its first major play in the wellness hardware market by launching its Halo band, which tracks users’ exercise and sleep. Acquiring Peloton could be financially in reach for Amazon, which reported stellar quarterly profits of $14.32bn on Thursday. Amazon’s biggest acquisition to date was grocery chain Whole Foods, which it snapped up for $13.7bn in 2017.Early on a suitably idyllic Melbourne morning, 18 Afghan footballers and one referee took to the field at the Darebin International Sports Centre. The group were training under the banner of their nation’s women’s team for the first time since being forced to flee their homeland last August. It was an innocuous session, featuring the warm-ups, drills and team talks replicated at grounds around the world. But there was a palpable sense of joy on display. Though a few have played games here and there since they were granted asylum, Saturday’s session was the first time the team – which was “built to fight” the Taliban’s ideology – had joined together since they sat on the floor of a crowded plane as it took off from Hamid Karzai airport, fleeing Kabul alongside more than 75 other players, relatives and team officials. On that day, their existence as female footballers had made them a target; their safety could not be assured as the Taliban seized control of the country and reimposed their strict interpretation of Sharia law. But on Saturday, there were no such threats, no fears of what awaited them when they went home or if they would be forced to suddenly flee the field. The session represented the beginning of a new chapter – spearheaded by former captain Khalida Popal and current player Fati* – and it is planned they will return to competitive football in their new home of Australia within months. From this foundation, the players hope to mount a case to return to international football by pressuring Fifa and governments around the world to ensure the principles of gender equality are upheld as the Taliban attempts to ban women from playing sport in Afghanistan. “I was with my teammates, my second family,” Fati said after the training session. “The feeling was amazing. I can’t even describe it. I never thought that we would be together again and play together. But this is hope. It’s a new beginning. It’s a big achievement for all my teammates. Because once we thought we lost everything, we’d lost soccer, we’d lost our second family. And today we got it back. We saw each other after a long time. We played together. That is very precious for all of us. The day was even beautiful for all of us.” “It was fantastic,” Frida* added. “I feel like everything has started again. We have a chance to play together again.” In partnership with A-League club Melbourne Victory, which will supply the team with full logistical, administrative and coaching support from their football operations department, the team will spend the coming weeks and months training in anticipation of entering one of the local competitions overseen by Football Victoria. Victory provided the players with brand new training gear and boots for their first unified session on Australian soil, but the offer of a club-branded training top was declined. The players wanted to wear their national team shirts. The session was taken by Football Victoria NTC coach Helen Winterburn, and federation assessors were on hand to begin the process of determining which level would provide the best fit for the coming season. Former Socceroos captain and human rights campaigner Craig Foster, who played a key role in securing the fleeing Afghan footballers’ sanctuary in Australia, said it was imperative that the side be allowed, when they were ready, to represent their nation. “[The players have] made it very clear that they consider themselves the Afghan women’s national team,” Foster said. “And though they’re in exile, they should have the right to continue that. “Fifa has a gender equality provision, and as part of membership of the Global Football body, countries are in a position where they have to, or they’re expected to, field women’s national teams. The Taliban, as the rulers of Afghanistan now, have refused to do that. So the question for Gianni Infantino and Fifa is: what are you going to do about it? Are you going to allow Afghanistan to only field men’s teams? “If you are a member of Fifa, you must field female and male teams. Therefore, this is the Afghan women’s national team, and they should have the right to continue to play. Whilst they don’t abide by the Taliban’s ideology, they are extremely proud Afghan women. And they see themselves as the Afghan women’s national team in exile, and rightly so. “They are a symbol for every Afghan girl and woman, both in Afghanistan and around the world. For their right to equal participation in society, whether that’s education, sport, or any other field of life. So every time they kick the ball Afghan women around the world can see a living symbol of the rights that this group refuses to give up.” “Still I have hopes for our national team,” added Fati. “Me, my friends and my teammates still have hopes for a future in which we will play back under our beautiful flag. This is important. But even if it’s not with the national team, it will be OK. Because we will be together.”Going Out: Cinema The Eyes of Tammy Faye Out now Christianity sure loves a good rise-and-fall narrative, and the story of kitschy 1970s televangelist Tammy Faye Bakker fits to a tee. Starring Jessica Chastain as the woman at the heart of the world’s largest religious broadcasting network, it’s all about the fake eyelashes, Liberace-esque interiors and, of course, the music. The Souvenir: Part II Out now Sequels to independent dramas are relatively rare, but it’s not essential to see the first Souvenir film before diving into this glorious British 1980s coming-of-age movie, which is worth savouring on its own terms, not least for the comic precision writer-director Joanna Hogg employs when anatomising her characters. Jackass Forever Out now Of all the pop culture phenomena currently staging comebacks, Jackass is among the most memorable: a glorious, puerile and oddly heartwarming mixture of violence, stunts and gross-out gags that has only got more appealing with age (unless you hated it first time around, in which case good luck). Belle Out now From Japanese animation director Mamoru Hosoda comes a visually ravishing story that’s more Satoshi Kon than Studio Ghibli. Loosely based on Beauty and the Beast but set in contemporary Japan, Belle interrogates the appeal of virtual personalities in a world where genuine intimacy is under threat. Catherine Bray * * * Going out: Gigs Brockhampton O2 Academy Brixton, London, 7 &amp; 8 February After releasing six albums in four years, the self-proclaimed “best boyband since One Direction” are calling it a day. These two London shows, as well as a slot at Coachella, mark the collective’s final performances before the inevitable slew of solo material and, let’s be honest, a reunion tour in a few years. Michael Cragg Then &amp; Now Purcell Room, London, 6 February The London Sinfonietta premieres works by Luke Lewis and Alicia Jane Turner, both products of its composer development scheme. Lewis’s The Echoes Return Slowly was inspired by the recordings of ethnomusicologist Alan Lomax, while Turner’s Tell Me When You Get Home, for soprano and ensemble, is an immersive exploration of walking alone at night. Andrew Clements Mark Lockheart’s Dreamers Bonington theatre, Arnold, nr Nottingham, 10 February Saxophonist and composer Mark Lockheart, founding member of the gamechanging Loose Tubes and Polar Bear, turns his imagination towards mergers of improv, ambient and hip-hop-influenced music with this new band. Long-time guitar sidekick John Parricelli, depping here for keyboardist Elliot Galvin, adds an intriguing wild card. John Fordham Matt Maltese 9 to 27 February; tour starts Glasgow Reading-born, London-based indie troubadour Maltese (below) scored an unlikely TikTok smash recently with his 2017 apocalyptic love song, As the World Caves In. Expect it to overshadow the lilting songs from his third album, Good Morning It’s Now Tomorrow, on this month-long tour. MC * * * Going Out: Art Thao Nguyên Phan Tate St Ives, 5 February to 2 May The Mekong River is the theme of this show of video, sculpture and paintings. Thao Nguyên Phan finds in this famous river a tide of metaphors and images of modern Vietnamese life. She addresses the environment, industrialisation and traditional beliefs, mixing contemporary art with folklore and finding inspiration in myth. Mike Nelson Matt’s Gallery, London, to 5 March This powerfully imaginative artist revisits his fascination with labyrinths and caverns of urban strangeness in the light of lockdown. It was Nelson’s 2000 installation The Coral Reef at London gallery Matt’s that made his name with its eerie sequence of deserted rooms full of dark symbolism. He returns with an even more claustrophobic maze. Susan Rothenberg Thomas Dane Gallery, London, to 9 April Expressionism comes in waves – in the 1980s it was all the rage, then it was mocked as mawkish in the Hirst era. Now, expressiveness is everywhere in art again, and the late Susan Rothenberg’s dreamlike paintings of horses look more vital than ever in their passionate personal symbolism and fierce colours. The Show Windows Various venues, Coventry, to 1 May George Shaw grew up on a council estate near Coventry, and it is the obsessive subject of his art – a place where the woods are full of litter, the streets chilled by rain. Shaw’s drawings feature alongside work by Elisabeth Frink, Käthe Kollwitz and others in this innovative display. Jonathan Jones * * * Going Out: Stage Wuthering Heights National Theatre, London, to 19 March, then touring Emma Rice’s new take on Emily Brontë’s passionate love story storms into the National. Lit up with powerful music and dance, Lucy McCormick and Ash Hunter are Cathy and Heathcliff. Forgiveness Farnham Maltings, 8 February, then touring Jonny Donahoe premieres a new one-man show after the success of Every Brilliant Thing. With trademark humour and pathos, Forgiveness, about childhood abuse, is his most personal show yet. Miriam Gillinson Acosta Danza: 100% Cuban 9 to 12 Feb; tour starts London The Havana company founded by the great ballet dancer Carlos Acosta brings a distinctive mix of contemporary, classical and Latin American influences to the stage, the dancers bubbling with heat, life and fantastic technique. This tour brings back two existing pieces alongside UK premieres from three Cuban choreographers. Lyndsey Winship Nish Kumar Theatre Royal Margate, 6 February; touring to 17 May Long a scourge of the anti-woke, Kumar became a poster boy for the BBC’s rumoured (and refuted) “leftwing comedy” purge when his satirical show, The Mash Report was cancelled last year. Now back on the road with the archly titled He’ll no doubtYour Power, Your Control, the standup will presumably be making hay out of his embroilment in the culture wars. Rachel Aroesti * * * Staying In: Streaming The Curse 6 Feburary, 10pm, Channel 4 A 1980s crime caper may not be exactly what you’d expect as the People Just Do Nothing gang’s next project, but this comedy – also starring Tom Davis – does continue the feckless pretenders theme. A group of friends accidentally become embroiled in a huge gold heist and get jinxed in the process. Inventing Anna From 11 February, Netflix The audacity of fraudster socialite Anna Sorokin captivated the internet in 2018 thanks to a New York magazine profile. Now the piece has inspired a Shonda Rhimes-helmed drama: Ozark’s Julia Garner plays the scammer, and Veep’s Anna Chlumsky is the journalist behind the exposé. No Return 7 February, 9pm, ITV Sheridan Smith is a mother living out an obscure but potent nightmare on holiday in Turkey in this four-parter from Danny Brocklehurst (Brassic, Safe, The Stranger). When an accusation of sexual assault is made against Smith’s teenage son, the whole family’s future is left hanging in the balance. This Is Going to Hurt 8 February, 9pm, BBC One Adam Kay’s brutal – and brutally funny – memoir about his time working in obstetrics and gynaecology for the NHS has been turned into a droll and incredibly tense comedy-drama. Ben Whishaw stars as the sleep-deprived, underappreciated and overwhelmed author in his junior doctor days. RA * * * Staying In: Games OlliOlli World Out 8 February, PC, PS4/5, Switch, Xbox This rad and adorable skateboarding game gives you a cartoonish utopia and lets you loose on it with a board. Sifu Out 8 February, PC, PS4/5 A stylish and intriguing kung-fu game, in which you punch and kick your way through a modern Chinese city on a martial-arts-movie-style revenge quest. Keza MacDonald * * * Staying In: Albums Mitski – Laurel Hell Out now After the success of 2018’s breakthrough Be the Cowboy and its subsequent tour, Mitski Miyawaki (above) took 2019 off. She sounds suitably replenished on this sixth album, whether unpacking her lopsided work-life balance on the brooding Working for the Knife, or donning Lycra for the galloping 80s synthpop of The Only Heartbreaker. Cate Le Bon – Pompeii Out now Over the course of five albums, Le Bon’s sound has shifted from playful psych rock to something nervier and more oblique. That continues on Pompeii, with the Welsh singer-songwriter and producer (she recently helmed John Grant’s Boy from Michigan) mobilising a plethora of agitated guitars, horror-soundtrack synths and surrealist lyrics to spellbinding effect. Black Country, New Road – Ants from Up Here Out now The experimental post-rock, free-jazz, gonzo-pop septet return with their second album, a year after crashing into the UK Top 5 with their debut, For the First Time. Galloping single Chaos Space Marine recalls both Pulp and Gorky’s Zygotic Mynci, while the near 10-minute Snow Globes sounds like a nightmare (in a good way). Animal Collective – Time Skiffs Out now Six years after the overstuffed Painting With, the avant-garde quartet (below) return with an endearingly loopy 11th studio album. Completed during lockdown, its tone is set by lead single Prester John – two separate songs mashed together – and Walker, a watery, undulating tribute to Scott Walker. MC * * * Staying In: Brain food Human Resources Podcast Journalist Moya Lothian-McLean’s podcast (above) examining the unvarnished truth about Britain’s involvement in the transatlantic slave trade continues for a second season. We begin at the heart of the establishment, taking aim at the royal family’s stance on abolition. The British Museum Online The museum’s YouTube channel is packed with curios, and its Curator’s Corner series is a particular highlight. Experts examine the details of current displays, explaining the significance of everything from Hokusai’s drawings to the Inca system of writing. Imagine: Marian Keyes BBC iPlayer Alan Yentob kicks off a new batch of his peerless arts docs with a visit to bestselling author Marian Keyes, who relays her life story with characteristic charm – from escaping to London to finding fame and love. Ammar KaliaToby on Flo What were you hoping for? To meet someone interesting and lively with a good taste in music. First impressions? Flo was relaxed and friendly; the conversation flowed straight away. She was also completely understanding about me going to the wrong restaurant. I apologised profusely. What did you talk about? South Korean dog grooming. The label PC Music and the artists we both love on it. Turning memes into incredible art. Politics (briefly). Any awkward moments? I ordered the lamb with mushrooms even though I’m not a big fan of mushrooms. They turned out to be the bulk of it. Flo wouldn’t eat them for me. Good table manners? Exemplary. She offered to share her food and was lovely to the staff. Best thing about Flo? She has so much art and design talent; I was blown away by her work. Would you introduce her to your friends? Definitely, we’d have a great night out at a gig together. Describe Flo in three words? Engaging, creative and sparkling. What do you think she made of you? Hopefully as relaxed and easy to talk to as she was. Did you go on somewhere? No, we were at the restaurant until quite late. Time flew by. And … did you kiss? No. If you could change one thing about the evening what would it be? We wouldn’t have forgotten the selfie! Either that or I would have gone to the right restaurant initially. Marks out of 10? 8. Would you meet again? I think so, as friends. I think we’d be great mates – we have lots in common. Flo on Toby What were you hoping for? True love, top grub. First impressions? I liked him immediately. His smile was contagious. What did you talk about? South London. V-neck T-shirts. His love of planes. Hydrogen power. Covers of Kate Bush’s Running Up That Hill. Any awkward moments? When I was told he was going to be late because he had gone to the wrong restaurant. It was actually very sweet. Good table manners? Very good. We shared everything, no spillages. Best thing about Toby? He was very funny and easy to get on with. We had a lot in common. Would you introduce him to your friends? Of course. They’d really like him. Describe Toby in three words? Witty, kind, handsome. What do you think he made of you? I think he really enjoyed hanging out, but I’m unsure whether he fancied me. Did you go on somewhere? No, but we had to frantically meet up again afterwards on Battersea bridge as we’d forgotten to take our selfie. And … did you kiss? I’m afraid not. If you could change one thing about the evening what would it be? I would have left room for dessert and another cocktail. Marks out of 10? A strong 8. Would you meet again? I would be open to the idea. Flo and Toby ate at 28-50 Wine Workshop &amp; Kitchen, London SW3. Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.comI met Karen O’ Donoghue of the Happy Tummy Co at Camp Good Life’s autumn event in North Wales last year, and was astounded by her knowledge of all things sourdough. As part of her bread-making course, she uses leftovers in sourdough, to create a “prebiotic bomb” that’s good for gut health. “The great thing about stuffing leftovers into sourdough breads is that it not only uses them up, it also extends the bread’s shelf life,” she explains. Fridge-raid stuffed sourdough I’ve adapted Karen’s recipe here, which she assures me can be stuffed with sweet or savoury leftovers, and anything from leftover apple crumble and brownies to pesto pasta and roast dinner; my version uses leftover roast pumpkin and kale. Karen warns that stuffed breads such as this can be tricky to master on the first attempt, and says it’s important to make sure the stuffing is all folded into the dough and not stuck to the outside. 400g sweet or savoury leftovers 225g sourdough starter 1kg strong organic stone milled flour – Karen uses a mixture of 650g wholewheat, 200g white and 150g einkorn flour 22g sea salt Put the leftovers in a bowl, roughly mash to a paste and refrigerate. Mix the active sourdough starter with 700ml warm water, then stir in the flourand leave in a warm place to autolyse for an hour. Add the sea salt and another 50ml warm water, then leave for 45 minutes. Stretch and fold the dough by picking up a corner, pulling it across the dough and pressing it down. Fold the other three “corners” of the dough in the same way, then repeat the 45-minute resting and folding process twice more. Thirty-five minutes after the last fold, pre-shape the dough on a worktop. Dust the surface of the dough lightly with flour, flip it over and carefully pull out each corner of the dough out to make a rough square. Pull the top left corner down into the centre of the dough and push down. Repeat from the top right corner, then in turn from the middle left, middle right, bottom left and bottom right. Finish by rolling the knitted dough into a neat ball from the top to the bottom. Set aside to rest for another 30 minutes, then do the final shape: lightly dust the surface of the dough with flour again, flip over and carefully pull out each corner to form a square. Spread the leftovers paste over the dough, then repeat the six folds process above, to knit the dough into a parcel and seal in the paste. Finish by rolling the knitted dough into a neat ball from the top to the bottom and transfer to a proving basket. All the paste should remain inside the dough, so don’t overwork it. Leave the shaped dough for 30 minutes at room temperature, then put in the fridge overnight. After eight to 12 hours, when the dough has risen by half, heat a heavy, cast-iron pot for which you have a lid, or a baker’s cloche or similar in a 240C (220C fan)/475F/gas 9 oven. Lift out the casserole, flip the dough into it, cover and bake for 20 minutes. Turn down the heat to 220C (200C fan)/425F/gas 7, remove the lid and bake for another 20 minutes. Remove the bread and leave to cool before slicing.Charles Dickens was the first to use the popular expression “the queen’s weather” in print, in a humorous account of the opening of parliament on 4 February 1851: “The sky was cloudless; a brilliant sun gave to it that cheering character which – from the good fortune Her Majesty experiences whenever she travels, or appears publicly – has passed into a proverb, as ‘The Queen’s Weather’.” Dickens may have been writing tongue-in-cheek. Two diaries from the Met Office’s archives describe broken cloud and near-freezing conditions in London – “A dry, bitter day,” Mr A Edwin of Islington called it. But the occasion might have been fairly sunny, and people still talked about glorious queen’s weather without irony almost half a century later. Horace Plunkett MP noted on 3 July 1897: “Went to Windsor with the whole House of Commons (except the Nationalists) &amp; their wives to see the Queen. Queen’s weather.” Plunkett’s visit was during the diamond jubilee celebrations, when an anticyclone brought a prolonged spell of warm weather to the country. The sun cannot have shone on Queen Victoria as reliably as it never set on her empire. But a patriotic form of confirmation bias, the mental tendency to remember only what supports our beliefs, may have rooted the association between the queen and fine weather in the public consciousness.At first glance, the town of Woodside may look more like a sprawl of mansions built on big-tech billions than crucial habitat for threatened California mountain lions. But town officials might suggest looking again. The wealthy San Francisco Bay area suburb has said it cannot approve the development of new duplexes or fourplexes to ease the statewide housing shortage because it encompasses the habitat of the elusive wildcats. Residents in Woodside had long bristled at SB 9 – a new California measure that makes it easier to build multi-unit housing in neighborhoods previously reserved for single-family homes. But a clause in the measure exempts areas that are considered habitat for protected species. “Given that Woodside – in its entirety” is habitat for mountain lions that environmental groups are petitioning to list as threatened or endangered under the state’s Endangered Species Act, “no parcel within Woodside is currently eligible for an SB 9 project”, the town’s planning director wrote in a memo on 27 January. Critics of the town council, including many housing advocates, have accused the town of cynically using environmental concerns to avoid compliance with state law. “This is nimbyism disguised as environmentalism,” said Scott Wiener, a California senator who co-authored SB 9. “The notion that building duplexes hurts mountain lions – it’s just ridiculous.” Woodside is not only a habitat for mountain lions, but also for notable tech entrepreneurs including the Intuit co-founder Scott Cook and Oracle co-founder Larry Ellison. The latter modeled his 23-acre Woodside estate on a 16th-century Japanese imperial palace. The median home price in the town is $5.5m, and the median household income is more than $250,000. The landscape is scattered with sizable mansions and estates as well as sprawling ranches. Mountain lions – also called pumas, cougars and panthers – have been known to wander into suburbs and cities across California, and may occasionally traverse the town. “You can see there’s a fair amount of habitat in the undeveloped areas around the city,” said Winston Vickers, director of the Mountain Lion Project at the UC Davis Wildlife Health Center. “Any development should be done with careful consideration of whether it is going to impact a nearby travel corridor, green belt or large adjacent habitat area for mountain lions,” Vickers said. “But to say that any expansion of housing, anywhere in a given city, would likely impact mountain lions is likely a bit of a stretch.” Woodside’s mayor, Dick Brown, declined an interview request from the Guardian. “We love animals,” he told AlmanacNews. “Every house that’s built is one more acre taken away from [mountain lions’] habitat. Where are they going to go? Pretty soon we’ll have nothing but asphalt and no animals or birds.” As far as wildlife biologists know, mountain lions are not especially comfortable on land zoned for single family homes, nor are they particularly put off by two-story apartment buildings. The biggest challenge that mountain lions are facing is “ex-urban development pushing into the wild areas that they need, and major roadways cutting through those habitats,” said Josh Rosenau, a conservation advocate with the Mountain Lion Foundation, one of the organizations seeking to have the mountain lions in the south and central coast listed as threatened or endangered under the California Endangered Species Act. In most cases, “increasing [housing] density where possible, is going to be better for mountain lions ultimately”, he said, than expanding construction further into wildland areas. As California pushes to expand housing amid a crisis of housing affordability and homelessness, communities across the state have resisted efforts to build more densely, often using the state’s strict environmental laws as a shield. With SB 9 taking effect this year, cities across the state also sought to pass design restrictions, or designate historic districts and sites in a scramble to find loopholes in the law. Earlier last month, Woodside had passed an ordinance prohibiting basements in SB 9 developments, capping their size to 800 square feet – the minimum required by the law – and prohibiting their construction in “very high fire severity zones, for health and safety reasons”. “My hope is that Woodside thinks better of its position, and figures out how to comply with this new law,” Wiener said. Or there’s an option that some critics have offered: return all the land to the mountain lions that once prowled there freely.Celebrity Mastermind 7.10pm, BBC One In the first post-John Humphries series of Celebrity Mastermind, it’s new host Clive Myrie’s turn to be dazzled by the trivia knowledge of footballers and ex-boyband stars. David James takes on Roy Lichtenstein, ex Blue-singer Antony Costa tackles Grease the Musical and comic Ellie Taylor answers questions on Geri Halliwell. Most excitingly, though, they’re joined by Zoom supremo Jackie Weaver, who takes on The Chronicles of Riddick. Does she have the authority to win? Alexi Duggins The Masked Singer 7pm, ITV Is Gloria Hunniford a better singer than Heather Small? Does Pat Cash have a more melodious set of pipes than Will Young? Apparently so, judging by the order of evictions on this ever-bananas singing competition. Expect more madcap antics tonight as Joan Collins joins the panel and there’s another double eviction. AD Ant and Dec’s Limitless Win 8.30pm, ITV It’s the last chance for a contestant to bankrupt ITV tonight, as the quiz with a potentially unending pot of prize money reaches its final episode. Brothers Lee and Kye will be the contestants attempting to push the jackpot into the trillions – failing that, they’ll hopefully get at least a few grand. AD Secrets of the Royal Palaces 8.30pm, Channel 5 The odd history of Brighton Pavilion is revealed in tonight’s edition of palace-based tales. It’s joined by the grisly story of the Princes in the Tower, talk of Fergie’s toe-sucking, and the truth behind an iconic Princess Di photo that you never knew you wanted – how the photographer fared against her sons in mid-shoot ping pong. AD Freeze: Skating on the Edge 9pm, BBC Three This stirring documentary series follows the remarkable athleticism of figure skaters. Inevitably, they are a highly strung bunch, all living on a high wire from which it’s a long way down. Expect to find yourself thoroughly invested. Phil Harrison The John Bishop Show 9.35pm, ITV The six-week primetime run for the everyman scouse comic reaches its penultimate show. In many ways, it’s an old school variety night – Bishop begins each week with a topical stand-up routine before sauntering over to the sofa to chat with his special guests. Expect transmissions from the global stand-up scene too, as the host showcases talent from around the world. PH Film choice Collateral, 10.35pm, ITV Michael Mann’s 2004 thriller deserves recognition not only for its pioneering cinematography – shot overwhelmingly on digital before the technology was perfected, Collateral has a gritty, pixellated immediacy – but for Tom Cruise’s white-hot thermite performance. As hired assassin Vincent, tasked with forcing nervous taxi driver Jamie Foxx to chauffeur him around Los Angeles for a night, this is Cruise using his intensity for bad rather than good for once. His shark-like evil sits in heavy contrast to the woozy, insomniac sprawl of the city around him. Stuart Heritage Live sport Six Nations Rugby Ireland v Wales Sat, 1.30pm, ITV First game in the opening round, followed by Scotland v England at 4pm on BBC One. Women’s Super League Football Arsenal v Man United Sat, 12pm, Sky Sports Main Event From Meadow Park. Chelsea play Man City on Sunday at 12.15pm on BBC Two. FA Cup Football Tottenham v Brighton Sat, 7.15pm, ITV 4 The fourth-round tie at Tottenham Hotspur Stadium. Nottingham Forest play Leicester on Sunday at 3.30pm on BBC One.It’s a cold Sunday morning and I’m walking down an alley alongside the Tube tracks, fingers laced round a coffee from the place next to the station. Three quarters of the way down I stop at an anonymous blue door in a brick archway and knock. There is no answer. I push at the door. Nothing happens. One of my favourite parts of being in a band is the rigorously enforced idleness: even if you’re a dawn-greeting, workaholic musician, the guy in charge of unlocking the rehearsal rooms is never going to turn up before 11am. I am permitted to consider myself ambitious for arriving at 10.45. I’m about to walk back to the studio office when I hear faint muttering from the other side of the door. “Hello?” I say. “Hang on,” says the voice. “What? Oh no.” It turns out the fiddle player is already inside, but he can’t figure out how to work the lock. After two minutes of what sounds like fingernails scraping against wood, the door suddenly opens. “Did you sleep here?” I say. “No, the guy just let me in,” he says. “But he didn’t show me how to get out.” “Is it just us?” I say. “So far,” he says. I think: when did I become such a go-getter? One by one the rest of the band drift in. Our stuff is still set up from the night before, so it’s a simple matter of tuning up and playing in our coats until the room gets warm. We are here to rehearse for the initial leg of our first tour in almost three years: Bury, Newcastle, Settle, Bristol, Exmouth, Dorchester. There is a lot to learn – our new album adds 12 more tunes to a large repertoire of songs I cannot remember how to play. If you include the songs I never knew how to play, it must amount to almost 100. We pick something easy for the first song of the day, although it is not easy for me. “Before we start,” I say. “Can you just remind me how it starts? And also, how it ends?” As the song gets under way, I quickly realise there was something I forgot to ask about: the middle. I lose my way about eight bars in and never recover. I have a recurring nightmare in which I find myself sitting an exam for a course I have never attended. Actually it’s more of a traumatic memory than a nightmare, but it still wakes me up three or four times a year, and this stupid song reminds me of it. When it’s over I don’t look up to see if anyone else is looking at me. “I think we should probably do that again,” says the guitar player. Surprisingly, the second time through the song starts to materialise under my fingers; by the end I feel pretty confident. This happens again and again throughout the morning. After just a few hours my playing has improved to the point where I feel able to laugh at the mistakes of others. There is a knock at the studio door. The fiddle player is closest; once again, he struggles with the interior latch mechanism. When the door opens I see my wife standing on the other side of it. I cannot imagine what she’s doing there, but then I remember: I asked her to come. “Hello!” she says, brightly, as the guitar player’s wife follows her inside. “We’ve come for some music!” She has not come for any music. She has come because I asked her to drop off the car so I could ferry my stuff home that evening. She refused, but since then she’s been for a walk with the guitar player’s wife, which has evidently left her in a generous mood. She sits on a fake leather sofa facing me, arms folded, wearing an expectant expression. We launch into the next song on the list. My face reddens as I stare fixedly at the point where the ceiling meets the wall. I find it much easier to play in front of strangers than I do my wife. I think: I wish I was in Bury. Ten minutes later the tables have turned. My wife’s smile is frozen; she doesn’t know how to escape. Fortunately for her, lunch is declared after two songs. She hands me the car keys. “I left it slung across the middle of the alley,” she says. “I hope that’s OK.” “I’ll move it,” I say, following her out. One of my other recurring nightmares involves parking in this very alley, full of tight angles, reversing vans and busy bodywork establishments. But it’s a quiet afternoon, and as I gently scrape the wing mirror along a concrete pillar, I think: this is the least of my problems.Molly Oldfield hosts Everything Under the Sun, a weekly podcast answering children’s questions, out now as a book. Does your child have a question? Submit one hereThe questions 1 Which Paul Newman character ate around 3,750 calories in an hour? 2 Which state was established by the Lateran Treaty? 3 Currently Kathleen Jamie, what is the Scots Makar? 4 Lucifers and Prometheans were early types of what items? 5 What did Lloyd George call “Mr Balfour’s poodle”? 6 Which sportsperson carries a coffin? 7 What is Dorset’s celebrated tombolo? 8 Which big cat’s name comes from the Tupi-Guarani language? What links: 9 Heracles; David; Abishai; Jack? 10 Coelacanths; Elephants; Atlas Lions; Scorpions; Blue Sharks? 11 Princess Beatrice (b 1857); Jean-Claude Duvalier; Frances Houseman? 12 Malaysia (Borneo); Papua New Guinea (New Guinea); East Timor (Timor)? 13 Shiva; New Zealand tuatara; Blinky in The Simpsons? 14 From Here to Eternity; East Is East; Power of the Dog; If … ? 15 Grey; Viviani; Sazonov; von Jagow; Berchtold? The answers 1 Luke Jackson (in Cool Hand Luke: 50 eggs at 75 calories each). 2 Vatican City. 3 National poet. 4 Matches. 5 House of Lords. 6 Cricketer (equipment bag). 7 Chesil beach (spit linking an island to the mainland). 8 Jaguar. 9 Giant killers: Antaeus; Goliath; Ishbibenob; Cormoran. 10 African football nicknames: Comoros; Ivory Coast; Morocco; Gambia; Cape Verde. 11 Known as Baby: by Queen Victoria; Baby Doc, Haitian leader; Baby in Dirty Dancing. 12 Land borders of Indonesia (and the island). 13 Three eyes: Hindi deity; lizard-like reptile with parietal eye; fish. 14 Films with titles borrowed from Rudyard Kipling. 15 Foreign ministers on outbreak of first world war: Britain; France; Russia; Germany; Austria-Hungary.The government’s plan to overhaul the air passenger compensation scheme has been described as a step backwards for consumers, leading to “small amounts of compensation that often won’t be worth claiming”. Earlier this week the Department for Transport (DfT) announced it is consulting on proposals to overhaul the air passengers’ rights rules – but only for flights within the UK. The move, described by the government as “another Brexit win”, will lead to a two-tier system, with the UK scheme operating alongside the original EC 261 rules that were adopted before Britain left the EU, and still apply to international flights in and out of UK airports. The DfT is limited in its ability to change rules around foreign flights because of the international conventions on air travel. Currently, someone on an internal flight from Edinburgh to London is entitled to claim £220 once their flight has been delayed three hours, unless the cause was extraordinary circumstances such as bad weather. The compensation payable is fixed and is not linked to the price paid by the passenger. Long-haul travellers on a flight from Japan to the UK are entitled to £520 if delayed four hours or more, alongside other beneficial terms such as rerouting had the flight been cancelled. The DfT is now proposing a system akin to the train delay compensation scheme for internal flights. On the face of it, passengers could be better off as partial refunds would start at only one hour’s delay. However, the sum paid is related to the fare. The proposed scale is: • One hour to 1hr 59min: 25% of the ticket price. • Two hours to 2hr 59min: 50% of the ticket price. • Three hours and above: a full ticket refund. The change would mean a passenger who had paid £50 for a domestic flight would receive £12.50 back after a 90-minute delay. It is unclear whether the “fare paid” would include any extras such as luggage payments but it is likely it would. Currently, that same passenger would get nothing until a delay of three hours, when they would receive £220. The government has not said whether the extraordinary circumstance get-out would still apply. Most train operators provide refunds for delays that are beyond their control but airlines are subject to far more outside influences, such as air traffic problems, and would probably resist having to pay out where they were not at fault. At the same time, the DfT has proposed that all airlines must sign up to an aviation alternative dispute resolution scheme. This, it claims, would make it easier for passengers to escalate complaints without the need to go to court, although this has a distinctly mixed success rate in the energy sector. Currently, airline membership to ADRs is only voluntary. It also proposes giving the Civil Aviation Authority strengthened powers, including the right to fine airlines directly for breaches. There are also long-overdue improved rights for wheelchair users. Bott and Co, a legal firm that specialises in flight compensation, said the government’s own figures suggest the average compensation payable will drop from £220 to about £23.60. “In theory, the changes expose the airlines to more compensation. However, the consultation acknowledges that, in reality, far fewer people will actually have the impetus to make a claim,” it said. “The net result is that the airlines will save money because passengers will be disincentivised to make a claim. If compensation is going to be reduced to such a low level then it should be paid out automatically.” The consumer advocate Helen Dewdney, who runs the Complaining Cow website, welcomed the move. She argued that the current EU rules disproportionally penalise low-cost carriers. “A fairer system for both business and consumers has to be a good thing,” she said. Rocio Concha, the director of policy and advocacy at Which?, said: “Far too many passengers have felt ignored or had to battle for compensation from airlines when things go wrong, so proposals to give the aviation regulator stronger powers, including the ability to fine airlines that consistently flout consumer law, are welcome. “However, there are concerns that the plans set out in this consultation could be a bad deal for consumers if they result in a system that does not treat all passengers fairly. They could also lead to fewer incentives for airlines to take the rights of consumers seriously and set a bad precedent that could then be extended to international flights. “The government needs to provide passengers with reassurance that they will get fair compensation for the often serious disruption of a delayed flight and must ensure that all eligible passengers actually receive what they are owed through a system with rules that can be enforced.” A DfT spokesperson says: “These changes are about offering consumers easier, simpler routes to compensation than were available under EU rules, with passengers on domestic flights able to claim money back for delays of between one and three hours - which is not currently available. “This is only one of a range of reforms that are being explored, with the overall aim of protecting consumers and ensuring fairness for both passengers and businesses.” Guardian Money has looked at the rules and fears that one of the unintended consequences of the UK adopting its own rules could be that more internal flights are cancelled. Prior to the introduction of the EU rules, airlines would regularly cancel flights at the last minute to save money, sometimes leaving passengers in the middle of nowhere without financial penalty. With two sets of passengers in, say, London and Paris vying for the last available plane, the low-cost carriers could opt to cancel the flight with the least financial loss, which could well be the UK flight.Unless your mortgage is already fixed for the long term, this week’s interest rate rise, following hot on the heels of December’s, is likely to have given you cause for concern. About 2 million borrowers are on variable rate deals of some kind, and many have already seen an increase in their repayments following the last base-rate rise. Thousands more are on fixed-rate deals that come to an end over the next few months. With other living costs rising, remortgaging might be a good bet. Some people will be able to save more than £200 a month, or in excess of £2,000 a year, just by making a fairly simple switch. “Mortgages are the one aspect of good news here, because there is still something you can do about the cost,” says David Hollingworth at the broker L&amp;C Mortgages. “You can ease the pressure elsewhere by taking appropriate action.” What “appropriate action” is, will depend on your circumstances, but you should, at least, start with a look at your current situation. Are you paying your lender’s standard variable rate (SVR), and, if so, how much is it? Are you on a special deal of some sort, and, if so, when does it end? If you jump ship early, are there any redemption charges to pay? These are fees that a lender charges when you pay off your mortgage before the end of a special offer rate, and are usually equivalent to a set percentage of your outstanding mortgage debt. If you are on a lender’s SVR It is likely that you have just been hit with an increase in your monthly bill linked to December’s Bank of England decision, and you now face another 0.25 percentage point rise. But not all borrowers are facing higher costs yet. HSBC is one large lender that has not passed on the increase, and Yorkshire building society has held its SVR, too. The SVRs of these two are quite different: HSBC’s is 3.54%, while Yorkshire’s is 4.49%. If you are on the latter, you could reduce your monthly outgoings considerably by moving to a better deal. Hollingworth gives the example of switching from Yorkshire’s SVR to a market-leading five-year fix at First Direct which has a rate of 1.54% and a £490 fee. That would cut your monthly repayments by £222 and, over 12 months, that would save you £2,169 once you’ve taken the fee into account. However, if you have slipped on to the SVR because your mortgage is nearing an end, you might not be able to benefit. “With a smaller mortgage, even low costs will start to deplete the savings,” Hollingworth says. “If you’ve got, say, two years left to run, you’re probably best off looking to your existing lender to see if it can do a better rate over the remaining time.” If you have a tracker mortgage You will definitely feel the effect of any interest rate rises, and may be getting concerned by predictions that the base rate could hit 1.5% next year. It makes sense to shop around if your deal has no early repayment charges (ERCs) – unless you chose that deal because you wanted the option to pay it off early, or there was another reason why you wanted flexibility that still stands. If you do have ERCs to consider, check how much they are. The percentage usually goes down as the end of the deal looms, so the longer you have had the mortgage, the less you will need to pay. But anything you do pay to escape the mortgage will need to be made up in savings. “You might end up out of pocket,” Hollingworth says. Say, for example, you owe £150,000 and your mortgage comes with a 1% ERC in the final year of the tracker rate, that means you will pay £1,500 to move now. To make the ERC worth paying, you need to think that rates are moving upwards so quickly that whatever you can lock into at the end of your deal will cost you more than that over the term of the next deal you lock in to. If you are in the last year of your tracker rate, you do not need to wait until the end to take up a new deal. Many lenders let you lock in and complete six months later. If you find a deal with free legals and a free valuation and opt to add the arrangement fee to your mortgage, you won’t need to pay a penny now, says Nick Mendes of the broker John Charcol. “If mortgage rates go up, you’ve secured a deal based on what’s on offer today, but you haven’t completed, so if they do go down you can apply for something else,” he says. Hollingworth has one word of caution: if it’s a new fixed-rate, check what the end date is, and “make sure you’re not eating into the benefit period”. If your fixed rate ends this year You are currently cushioned from the rises, but may be starting to worry about what happens next. You also have the option of applying for a new deal up to six months before you need to switch – make sure you check if the lender does have that long a window for completion before you sign up. Mendes says that for anyone looking to remortgage, lenders have loosened restrictions on loans to the self-employed, but are looking closely at affordability. He warns that a flurry of buynow, pay later borrowing could cause a problem if you want to take out a new mortgage. “We are starting to see household incomes stretched and if people turn to other forms of credit that could cause them problems,” he says. The affordable 10-year fix The cost of locking in your mortgage for 10 years has fallen after Lloyds reduced the rate on its decade-long fix to 1.66% for remortgagers. Experts say it is the cheapest 10-year deal they can remember, and could lead to other lenders offering similar rates over the same period. The mortgage has a £1,000 fee and early redemption fees starting at 6% for the first five years and then gradually falling to 1% in the final year. It is available up to 60% loan to value. Home movers can get a rate of 1.68% from Halifax via brokers. “To lock in for 10 years below 2% is amazing,” says L&amp;C’s David Hollingworth. Nick Mendes says that some borrowers feel uncomfortable about locking in for so long because of the charges if things change. However, the mortgage is portable, which means that if you move house, you can transfer it.She is fiercely loyal to Donald Trump. But when the former US president came to her home city and praised coronavirus vaccines, Flora Moore did something she never thought possible. She booed him. “He said take the vaccine but we all booed and said no,” she recalled of Trump’s event with broadcaster Bill O’Reilly in Orlando, Florida. “He heard us loud and clear because the Amway Center was packed. We let him know ‘no’ and a couple of us even hollered out, ‘It’s killing people!’” There is no scientific basis to the claim that the vaccines are killing people. In fact, they have demonstrably saved thousands of lives. But Moore is indicative of the extreme anti-vaccine sentiment consuming the base of the Republican party – a monster that Trump himself can no longer control. America is exhausted by a pandemic still killing more than 2,400 people a day, the overwhelming majority of whom are unvaccinated, bringing the total death toll to 900,000. In more conventional times, Trump’s Operation Warp Speed, which developed vaccines in record time, would be a source of pride for his voters. Even his successor, Joe Biden, has praised the initiative, stating: “Thanks to the prior administration and our scientific community, America was one of the first countries to get the vaccine.” But Trump’s eagerness to claim credit has been undone by conservatives’ backlash against Biden’s efforts to legally require worker vaccinations, which they cast as a threat to individual freedom. The ex-president’s customary applause turned to jeers when he encouraged supporters to get vaccinated and told O’Reilly that he received a booster himself. What was arguably Trump’s most important legacy from an otherwise disastrous pandemic response, and a divisive four-year presidency, has turned into a political liability, threatening to turn his own fans against him. Laurie Garrett, an award-winning science writer, observed: “It’s probably the only time his base has ever booed him about anything. If he can no longer brag about Operation Warp Speed, what can he brag about regarding how he handled Covid?” The anti-vaccine fervor has been stoked by some Republican politicians as well as rightwing media. Last month, Fox News host Tucker Carlson, a notorious sceptic, gave writer Alex Berenson a platform to baselessly proclaim, “The mRNA Covid vaccines need to be withdrawn from the market now. No one should get them. No one should get boosted. No one should get double-boosted.” The web has also become a place for unscientific conspiracy theories to thrive. Moore, the Trump supporter in Florida, said she gets her information from her 30,000 followers on Facebook as well as Telegram, Twitter and YouTube. She said: “I don’t trust the government. I don’t trust the pharmaceutical companies. I’m active in politics here and found out lots of people were having complications and dropping dead. There’s a lot of jobs I wont’t even take because they want me to get a vaccine.” The commercial analyst, who is in her 40s, refuses to wear a face mask in restaurants or at work. Her radical views on the issue outweigh even her faith in Trump. “I trust him on certain things, but he’s not my God,” she said. Trump appears to have heeded the shift and recalibrated. At a rally in Conroe, Texas, last Saturday, where anti-vaccine views were again rampant, he channeled the crowd’s anger towards Biden’s mandate for federal government workers (a similar mandate for businesses was rejected by the supreme court). “It is time for the American people to declare independence from every last Covid mandate,” Trump said to cheers. “We have to tell this band of hypocrites, tyrants and racists that we’re done with having them control our lives, mess with our children and close our businesses. We’re moving on from Covid.” He then added briskly: “We did a great job. Operation Warp Speed has been praised by everybody but it’s now time to move on.” Notably in the remarks he did not use the word “vaccines” at all. It was a pivot that appeared to acknowledge the political threat and it is enough to satisfy voters such as Moore. She commented: “I think he’s gotten the message that he can say he took the vaccine and nothing happened to him and if you desire to take it, take it, but if you don’t want to, leave it alone.” The number of anti-vaxxers in the Republican base is hard to estimate. The Guardian interviewed half a dozen Trump rally attendees last week and found that most had got the shots. They included Jered Pettis, from Phoenix, Arizona, who had changed his mind on the topic. “We were totally anti-vaccine, didn’t really believe in it, didn’t want to get it,” he said. “Then a friend got it pretty severe: he could hardly breathe and felt like his head was going to explode. He didn’t go to the hospital but he was very, very sick to the point where he told me, ‘Hey, Jered. I’m very thankful for every breath of air that I get now’. After I had seen and heard one of my best friends go through that, I changed my mind in a heartbeat.” Pettis received two Pfizer doses, then caught the virus just over a month ago. “So thank God, because I would have been a lot sicker than I was. It was almost like a mild cold. I could just imagine if I was not vaccinated.” The 50-year-old exterior designer describes the recent booing as “absolutely ridiculous” and believes that Trump deserves credit, not criticism, for the vaccines. “Even though you may be anti-vaccine, you’ll change your mind if you get sick or you get somebody around you that dies.” Even so, deep-seated suspicion of the vaccines could deprive Republicans of what might have been a powerful boast going into November’s midterm elections. Garrett, author of The Coming Plague: Newly Emerging Diseases in a World Out of Balance, points out that counties that voted for Trump in 2020 have a far higher mortality rate than counties that voted for Biden. “The Republicans are in a bind,” she said. “They are experiencing a higher death rate in their ranks and it is directly linked to their positions on Covid. The one thing they could claim as a great benefit that was saving lives, vaccination, they’re now being compelled by their own base to renounce.” Vaccine scepticism has never been a solely rightwing stance. Some libertarians on the left have opposed profit-driven big pharma and championed holistic alternatives. But on Covid-19, at least, this group appears to be significantly smaller than the conservative holdouts. Garrett said: “All the polls are showing tremendous partisan differential in everything to do with vaccines and it has been increasing steadily for the last two years. It’s very much driven by the rightwing myths and narratives around Covid. “There still are some of those ex-hippie types that don’t want to get vaccinated, but if you look at the breakdown on political sentiment about vaccination, willingness to get a third booster or even a fourth if it becomes available, it’s so Democrat. It’s incredible” Garrett said. “I never thought in my life I would see something like this. It is an absolute partisan divide and it’s widening.” About nine in 10 Democrats and six in 10 Republicans have been vaccinated, according to a Kaiser Family Foundation survey, while 62% of Democrats and just 32% of Republicans have been both vaccinated and boosted. The trend suggests that Republican candidates for the midterm elections are likely to follow Trump’s lead in attacking Biden’s mandates rather than celebrating Trump’s vaccines. But if any Republican can outflank Trump on the issue ahead of the 2024 presidential election, it may be the governor of Florida, Ron DeSantis, who has refused to say whether he received a booster. The New York Times reported that Patrick Ruffini, a Republican pollster, found Trump’s lead over DeSantis closing to just nine points among party members who like both men. Monika McDermott, a political science professor at Fordham University in New York, said: “They can get disgruntled with Trump, certainly, and DeSantis is the obvious choice for people who are anti-vax. But giving up on Trump is like giving up on their dreams at this point. Trump was their savior. Trump brought about the wholesale remasculization of that portion of the American psyche.” Indeed, despite the possible split with his Make America Great Again movement on vaccines, Trump remains by far the biggest beast in the Republican jungle and this week announced that he is entering 2022 with a staggering $122m in campaign funds. Joe Walsh, a former Republican congressman active on social media, said: “I talk to the extremists all the time and I agree with Trump’s people that they’re locked with him. They’re not going to anybody else.” Walsh finds that 90% of the base are anti-vaccine, do not believe Biden won and either have no problem with the 6 January insurrection or regard it as a patriotic day. “You could not as a Republican candidate run for office if you told people to get vaccinated or if you said Joe Biden won fair and square,” he added. “If you said either one of those two things, you couldn’t win a Republican primary.”Daylight is in short supply, paths are treacherous and the weather is both fickle and ferocious: winter is a challenging season for walking. And yet it is also the time when the landscape is laid bare, when we can appreciate the geology, spot the mosses, lichens and fungi, even see the birds more easily: especially the packs of fieldfares, redwings and waxwings hunting the last few berries in the hedge. The night sky is sharper for the cold, and celestial objects are seen more clearly. We asked six experts in different fields what to look out for on a winter walk, wherever that may be. The weather By Tristan Gooley I like to head up to a location like Black Down in West Sussex for some winter weather watching, but you might try a high vantage point in a city such as Edinburgh or London to see how the urban heat affects cloud formations. There are always plenty of clues about what to expect. First of all: the more types of clouds you can see, the worse the forecast. Clouds that are tall and wide tend to be unstable, so that’s a sign of poor conditions on the way. However, rain from those same tall clouds tends not to last long: like hailstorms – they are never long-lived, although they can be accompanied by powerful gusting winds. It’s when you see a grey blanket of cloud that gets lower before rain starts that you can expect bad weather to last for hours: that’s a new weather front moving in. Also, if you can see the base of the cloud and it’s jagged and blurred, you are about to get wet. A smooth, flatter base means you will probably stay dry. If you need to shelter, look for a conifer tree. Spruces are the best umbrellas of all – notice how dry the ground is under them. If you can find a sun pocket under a spruce, you’ll be surprised how toasty it is. Tristan Gooley is the author of The Secret World of Weather and an expert on navigation using natural signs. His books include The Natural Navigator and How to Read Water Winter fungi By John Wright Among the many trials and joys of a winter walk through woods, or beside a hedgerow, are the puzzles that present themselves along the way. Why do dead beech branches always turn black? What is that golden yellow slime crawling on the forest floor, or all those twiggy masses high up in trees? Those twiggy lumps could be any one of several phenomena: a rook’s nest, mistletoe, a squirrel drey, a burr or a canker. If they are on birch, they will almost certainly be witch’s broom, with a single tree sporting a dozen or more. Their long, thin branches emanate from a central mass several feet across. While clearly made of woody material, this mystery is grown by the tree under instructions supplied by a parasitic fungus, Taphrina betulina, for which it is forced to build a palatial home. Casting our eyes downwards, we might see one of winter’s great beauties, the scarlet elfcup. This fungus nestles in small groups among the fallen leaves, startling in its brilliance against the sombre winter colours. Surprisingly, it is edible, but it’s much too pretty to pick. The rarest of winter mysteries is “hair ice”. At temperatures close to zero, thousands of long, hair-like ice crystals can be exuded from the pores of a fallen, dead branch which has been infected by an otherwise unremarkable fungus, Exidiopsis effusa. The overall effect is of a branch with a luxuriant, grey hairdo. A long-established woodland like the New Forest is a good location to search for these mysteries, but any hedgerow, park or cemetery will do. My advice is to look up a professional teacher in your area via foragers-association.org. The Field Studies Council is also a highly respected organisation that teaches all aspects of natural history. I went on one of its courses 40 years ago and still remember it with enormous pleasure. John Wright is a mycologist, forager and home brewer, and author of River Cottage handbooks on Mushrooms, the Edible Seashore and Hedgerows. His latest work is A Spotter’s Guide to Countryside Mysteries Stars By Patrick Norris Nighttime winter walks on the Northumberland coast can produce good stargazing experiences. In the dark, walking on a beach is easier – there are fewer obstacles. Just walking out of a pub such as the Jolly Fisherman in Craster and heading towards Dunstanburgh Castle can be amazing on a clear night. The aurora borealis, northern lights, can be excellent on the coast, especially from Lindisfarne, but it is a fickle phenomenon, not to be relied on. If you’re heading into the hills, maybe to a dark sky park or reserve, it’s good to check out locations in daylight. It’s vital to minimise light disturbance when you do arrive, so use red lights only. It takes around 20 minutes for your eyes to properly adjust, and any sudden white light will set you back. I take a reclining camping seat, but mats work well: they’re cheap and lightweight. Clear winter nights tend to be cold, so warm clothes, a hat, gloves and a warm blanket are essential, plus hot chocolate, coffee or soup if possible. I prefer 10x50 binoculars over a telescope – too fiddly to set up – but they can be heavy, so take lightweight pairs if you prefer. Once the excitement has settled down, especially if you have children, get ready for an extravagance of stars, shooting stars, satellites and planets. There are some useful apps, but watch out for phone-light spoiling your night sight; Night Sky and SkyView are both free. Another possibility is to visit an established observatory. In Northumberland we have Kielder, Battlesteads Hotel or the Twice Brewed Inn on Hadrian’s Wall. My favourite is the Breamish Valley in the Cheviot Hills. Other great locations are Walltown and Cawfields on Hadrian’s Wall: both are just off the B6318 and have plenty of parking, fixed stargazing information panels and toilets with good access. For meteor showers, check out the Meteor Calendar. The International Space Station is also a reliable, and predictable, sight. Patrick Norris was a Duke of Edinburgh awards volunteer before guiding walks with his own company, Footsteps. He works with Ingram Valley farm in the Northumberland national park, England’s first international dark sky park Fossils By Martin Curtis Fossil hunting is the perfect activity for the whole family, and you don’t need to be a palaeontologist or geologist. With simple techniques, you can easily find fossils with no need for tools – it’s all about training your eyes. Winter is the best time of year. We get more storms, rougher seas and rain, vital for breaking up material on the beaches that has fallen from the cliffs. On the Jurassic Coast [stretching from Dorset to east Devon] we get material from the entire Mesozoic era – Triassic, Jurassic and Cretaceous. It’s the only place in the world where you can find that. When searching for fossils, look for unusual shapes, colours and textures, or anything that stands out from what you would typically find on the beach. It’s easier when rocks are wet, so walk near the water’s edge, if it’s safe to do so. For the same reason, fossil-hunting in the rain is often very productive. The safest time to be on the beach is roughly two hours before low tide and no more than two hours after. Stay away from the cliff base at all times while on the beach, and you must not climb on to the mudslides, as they are dangerous. The foreshore is the safest place to be. I’ve found all sorts of things there: ammonites, trilobites, teeth and even coprolites – fossilised shark poo. Martin Curtis is a mountain leader and guide at Jurassic Coast Guides, specialising in fossil-hunting walks along beaches near Charmouth and Lyme Regis. Britain’s best fossil sites are mostly coastal, and Martin’s insights apply equally to fossil locations as far apart as John O’Groats and Cornwall’s Maer Cliff. Get started on a guided walk Mosses and lichens By Dr Rebecca Yahr On bare trees, mosses and lichens are all the easier to spot – and these miniature wonders don’t fly away. For mosses, check at the base of a garden tree, or a shady lawn. In woodland you might find a whole landscape in miniature, made up of mosses. A 10x magnifying glass can transform your experience of something like a spiky forest of common haircap, Polytrichum commune. But my favourites are the lichens. There is something magical about these tiny ecosystems, actually fungi that farm algae or bacteria inside themselves to make food. Lichens are everywhere, but the richest diversity will be found in unspoilt clear-air regions with little human impact. Ballachuan Hazelwood, in Scotland, is the jewel in the crown for lichen lovers, but the Lakes, Dartmoor and Trossachs are also excellent. For information, I’d start with the British Lichen Society website; there are good blogs, too. Lichens form strappy tufts – the powder-dotted cartilage lichen Ramalina farinacea does this – or leafy rosettes on woodland trees, like oakmoss Evernia prunastri (which is neither limited to oaks, nor is it a moss). Oakmoss has a distinctly primitive-looking branching pattern, evenly in twos at every division and with white undersides. If you have old trees in clean air, you are almost certain to have these on the older twigs and younger branches. And, if you are in the west of Britain, where we have temperate rainforest, look out for the abundant “apple green” Flavoparmelia caperata, forming saucer-sized rosettes on trunks of trees, and the lettuce-sized lungwort Lobaria pulmonaria, named for its resemblance to human lungs. In moorland you can search for the intricately branched cushions of reindeer lichen, Cladonia portentosa, and the glowing yellow-green map lichen, Rhizocarpon geographicum, common on acidic rocks and roof slates. Dr Rebecca Yahr discovered a passion for the fascinating micro-worlds of lichens while working at the Archbold biological station in Florida. She is now resident lichenologist at the Royal Botanic Garden Edinburgh Birdwatching and painting By Darren Woodhead Winter is by far my favourite season for birdwatching, walking and painting – and I do all my work outside. The limited daylight hours give a natural deadline and the low, watery sun highlights the most subtle of shades among skeletal natural forms. There can be challenges, however: will the paint freeze, or will the wind rip the page off again? I advise going out alone, preferably before dawn. Try to walk silently. I carry a rucksack with a small selection of high-pigment tube watercolours in a folding metal palette, a variety of torn watercolour paper sheets clipped to a lightweight board, binoculars and a telescope. Tune in to the birdsong and the energy of the environment while looking out for something that catches your attention: for me, it can be unusual behaviour from a bird, a striking burst of light, or the natural composition of some vegetation … I never know. When the moment arrives, get started with the drawing or painting. I kneel on a weathered sleeping mat and begin making marks, using a couple of beloved simple oriental brushes. Hedgerows are very rewarding: all those gnarled hawthorns or coppiced beech hedgerows adorned with punky growths of rosehips, reaching out and waving in the bitter wind. Working direct in brush with watercolour requires an almost zen-like state for it to appear effortless. Watercolour, transparent by nature, hides nothing. When it works, the elation is majestic. Go for regular walks and you will discover areas of solitude, where if you’re lucky, a favourite subject can emerge. At the moment, mine is tree sparrows. Pools of mixed burned umber watercolour are perfect for their soft brown plumage, warming up the wash with a touch of burnt sienna and yellow on their heads, then cooler grey tones for the chest and flanks. Sap green captures the moss on winter branches, alongside some crimson. Carrying a wet painting for the rest of the walk can be a challenge in itself. Darren Woodhead is one of Britain’s leading nature artists and a lifelong birdwatching enthusiast. He has been artist-in-residence on BBC’s Spring-, Autumn- and Winterwatch. He lives and works in the Lothian hillsUK football’s most powerful bodies are facing calls to follow the lead of the US in tackling gender-based violence, including by letting clubs suspend players suspected of abusive behaviour without pay. In a letter seen by the Guardian, the CEOs of the Football Association and the Premier League have been urged to decide “which side they are on when it comes to violence against women and girls”. The letter has been sent by the feminist group Level Up, the End Violence Against Women Coalition and the Three Hijabis, who last year launched an anti-racism campaign after black England players were subjected to a torrent of abuse after the Euro 2020 final. It outlines demands including following the lead of Major League Baseball (MLB) and the NFL, where players suspected of domestic abuse, sexual violence or child abuse can be suspended without pay. It also calls for mandatory training for staff at every level on gender-based violence, a charter outlining minimum standards, clear sexual misconduct policies including disciplinary procedures, and prevention programmes in academies. “This week has seen football make the headlines for all the wrong reasons. It is clear that our beautiful game has an ugly underside when it comes to violence against women,” the letter states. “It’s time for the FA and Premier League to confront a culture of gender-based violence.” The Scottish club Raith Rovers made a U-turn on Thursday after days of mounting anger over its signing of David Goodwillie, who was ruled to be a rapist in a civil case in 2017. It comes against a backdrop of allegations against Premier League players including Mason Greenwood and Benjamin Mendy. Greenwood, a Manchester United striker, was released on bail on Wednesday after his arrest on suspicion of rape, assault and threats to kill. Separately, the Manchester City defender Mendy is accused of nine offences, including rape and attempted rape, relating to six alleged victims. “This is not about individual clubs or players, it’s about the whole game, and the Premier League and FA [Football Association] need to lead from the top,” said Janey Starling, a co-director of Level Up, which this week launched a petition calling for action. “This is a huge opportunity. If the Premier League can implement a gender-based violence policy and if professional football in the UK will take a stand on this, it will have a huge impact across the rest of society. I genuinely believe they could have more influence than the government,” she said. Andrea Simon, the director of the End Violence Against Women Coalition, said American football and baseball had shown that sports governing bodies could be more proactive. “We’ve seen the impact of campaigns to keep racism out of football in shaping fans’ attitudes and behaviours. Now it’s time for the sport to look at its problem with violence against women,” she said. In 2018 the former Chicago Cubs shortstop Addison Russell was suspended for 40 games without pay for violating the MLB’s domestic violence, sexual assault and child abuse policy, despite not facing criminal charges after his ex-wife detailed physical, mental and emotional abuse. Since the policy was implemented in 2015, 14 players have been suspended for violating it, with suspensions ranging from 15 to 162 games. Five were placed on paid administrative leave. Shaista Aziz, a football fan and anti-racism campaigner, who along with Amna Abdullatif and Huda Jawad formed the Three Hijabis, said football was part of the “DNA of the UK” and had to seize the opportunity. “For football to wash its hands and look the other way in relation to misogyny and all forms of oppression and violence is just not acceptable,” she said. In a statement, the FA said it condemned violence and prejudice including misogyny, and it encouraged victims or witnesses of abuse to report to the police. It said it had an equality policy, every club had a code of conduct, and its regulatory framework allowed it to take action against anyone breaching its policies or regulations. “If incidents of this nature take place in a football environment, the FA will take the allegations extremely seriously and will take action within its jurisdiction. Any such case would be investigated once any criminal or statutory investigation is concluded,” it said. A Premier League spokesperson said it was developing a gender equality strategy to “address serious issues” including misogyny and violence against women, and it was talking to the Home Office about supporting work to tackle violence against women. Workshops in academies explored healthy relationships, consent, sexual harassment and bullying, it added. “The Premier League strongly condemns any form of abuse or violence against women and girls and takes these issues extremely seriously,” the spokesperson said.Lucy is the team’s captain, so she looks after the ball. Her family’s house is about 10 minutes’ walk from the pitch: it is one of the more established dwellings in Minawao, a permanent structure largely screened behind a high mud wall. She greets her mother, who is sitting outside with an aunt, in Hausa before disappearing inside. Once she has retrieved what she came for, the day’s training can begin. “We play football with our friends to ease our minds,” she says. “That’s why they give girls this ball to play with: to forget about what happened to us.” This could barely seem further from Yaounde, where the Africa Cup of Nations final will take place on Sunday. We are 500 miles away in Cameroon’s extreme north region, tropical greenery having given way to the parched fringes of the Sahel. For almost a decade it has been one of the most troubled areas on earth, haunted by unspeakable atrocities. Minawao is a refugee camp that opened in 2013 to provide safety for thousands of Nigerians who have fled, and continue to flee, from the Islamist terror group Boko Haram. The border is only 20 miles away but life is relatively calm here. For those who made it this far, the process of rebuilding can begin. Access to Minawao is heavily restricted but, with assistance from the UN Refugee Agency (UNHCR), the Guardian spent a day in the camp with its girls’ football team. Twenty players, aged between 15 and 19, train five times a week on a dry, flat area of ground in front of the settlement’s youth centre. The team was formed to ensure girls could play despite a male-dominated environment and its sessions are overseen by Modu, a stern but affectionate 35-year-old who coached a school side in his village before the terrorists forced him to join Minawao’s first influx of arrivals. He leads warm-ups and then, when everybody has loosened, begins a series of passing drills. “If a girl wants to play, she only has to come to me and she’ll be training with us the next day,” he says. Football has become part of life’s fabric for these players. It is a source of pride and certainty when, here of all places, there is little of the latter. Occasionally Modu can take the team to play friendlies outside the camp; recently they travelled 15 miles to Mokolo to face opponents from other nearby communities. “We win most of the time,” Lucy says matter-of-factly. “We won a cup and shared the prizes,” adds her vice-captain, Fayiza. “I will never forget that day in my life.” Each of Minawao’s 69,000 inhabitants has lived their own version of a horrifying shared history. Lucy was only nine when her village in Borno state, Kunde, was raided by Boko Haram. “They arrived and started killing people,” she says. “We hid in a cave at night and it was impossible to sleep. They were holding guns and we were so afraid of them. I lost my uncle and many other people died. We had to run.” Fayiza, too, experienced things nobody should have to endure. “We saw people in our village running and some were falling down, the attackers were shooting them,” she says. “We ran away and, after they had finished fighting, we went back. After about a month they returned, killing men but not women. The women were saying: ‘How can we live a life without men, who go to their jobs and provide for the family?’ We left again and they followed, and it went on for about a year like this. Then the people from UNHCR met us, took our names and drove us to Minawao.” The camp’s population continues to swell. Boko Haram remain active in Nigeria and there have been attacks in the far north of Cameroon in the past year. Refugees are repatriated when it is deemed safe to do so but some people choose to return, finding Minawao’s security and familiarity preferable to the desolated areas they left behind. Resources are under heavy strain in an area where rivers have run dry and vegetation is feeling the effects of pressure on the terrain. “We have a problem with livelihood,” says Luka Isaac, who is the refugees’ president and leads their discussions with organisations who are active in the camp. “Only about 25% of people here are economically active. The majority of them were farmers but we need more land from the government. Food supplies arrive every month but if people can work, and stand on their two feet, it will give them resilience.” People with existing areas of expertise such as the cheery Andrews, who runs a seven-strong bakery operation that produces the camp’s bread in a giant clay oven, are encouraged to resume their career where possible. In another corner of the camp, women are trained to make and sell ecological charcoal. Most of the girls’ team are still in school, but Lucy is 18 and starting to make a living by sewing headwear. She hopes to become a doctor – “so that if you are ill you come to me and I’ll treat you” – while Fayiza wants to be a news journalist. Isaac emphasises that role models of any kind are vital for Minawao’s young women and believes football has a part to play. “Watching footballers around the world, people want to be like them,” he says. “It makes them want to play. It’s the same if you watch actors in films. These recreational activities keep us awake, give us good aspirations, because you think of the future and not what happened in the past. Everyone has their own star.” The sentiment is important even if, in practice, a straw poll of the team’s favourite player brings one answer. Sitting around a table in the small, spare library building a stone’s throw from the pitch, the team shout Ahmed Musa’s name in unison. The former Leicester player has deity-like status in Nigeria and, thrillingly, they were able to watch him play last month. Tickets were arranged for them to watch the Super Eagles face Sudan in Garoua, a four-hour drive away, during the Cup of Nations group stage. As their friends in Minawao watched via a satellite link, they posed for a photograph on the pitch. “I never thought I would be able to see these players in my whole life,” Fayiza says. For the players, as well as the accompanying Modu and Isaac, it was a first-ever stadium visit. When we meet Nigeria have long since been eliminated from the tournament, but the team are behind Cameroon, who are about to make their ultimately unsuccessful bid for a place in the final. “We cannot forget Nigeria because it’s our country, but we grew up here,” Lucy says. Back on the training pitch, they try to re-enact their heroes’ moves. It is tough: Modu’s team wear shirts intended for a boys’ team and most play in slip-on sandals. “Equipment is a problem for us,” Modu says. “We often get injuries because the girls don’t have proper shoes, and sometimes they’ll even draw blood. They often tell me we need more jerseys, more shoes.” Should those ever arrive, the hope is that future footballers in Minawao will benefit. “These girls are pioneers,” says Moise Amedje, one of UNHCR’s representatives in the region. “They are paving the way for the next generation.” They may not become professional players and they should not have to manage the pain barrier to play at all, but football has given Lucy and her friends a reason to look forward.Only the hardy wade into the Channel in winter, and this year I’m one of them. Nearing the end of my stone-cold morning swim at Mermaid Beach in Folkestone, Kent, I notice something out of the ordinary. A commotion has broken out around a small inflatable dinghy a few beaches away as it skirts a vicious pile of rock groynes there to protect the shingle beach. Shortly afterwards, a fellow swimmer hollers in my direction, wondering whether I’ve seen the arrivals. They tossed their lifejackets in the water when they landed, he says, with what sounds like disdain. I swim back to shore and walk up the beach, following a coastguard car. The dinghy is still bobbing up and down on the rocks, surrounded by military-looking jetskis; by the time I get there, it’s empty. Six men sit, soaking, on two semicircular stone banquettes adjoining the beach, surrounded by police and medics. According to the chatter on police radios, other men might have fled into a nearby coastal park, perhaps because they had contact information for people to help them. All six have been handed rugs and bottles of water; they look stunned, and a little sheepish. I ask a police officer if I can talk to the men and he shrugs his shoulders. “They haven’t been checked for Covid,” he says. I’ve been living in Folkestone on and off now for nearly six years, and love the place and its beaches. Even before Covid-19 got many thinking about moving out of London in search of space and a better quality of life, Folkestone had become a magnet for a different kind of migrant: relatively well-heeled professionals or arty types from London. To some we’re sniffily known as DFLs, or Down-from-Londoners; there’s even an expensive beer called DFL, turned out by a local bakery, along with its sourdough bread, to help relieve us of our money. Just 20 metres away from where the new arrivals sit getting their breath back, construction workers are hammering away at a swanky beachfront development called Shoreline (tagline: “Where the land meets the sea”). Hardly any local people will be able to afford to live there. Walking through a gaggle of police and nurses, I sit down beside one of the refugees: a handsome young man wearing a flimsy jacket who tells me his name is Mahmoud. He says he’s from the city of Deraa in southern Syria – a country that, by coincidence, I’ve spent much of the past decade reporting from. I’d imagined he might be elated to have arrived at his destination, but instead he looks stunned, as if he’s still processing what has just happened. The journey took seven hours in the freezing cold; at one point, he tells me, he was thrown into the water. He paid €3,000 (£2,514) for the privilege, but had no idea who the smugglers were – it was an amorphous company or syndicate. “It was a bad idea,” he says. The current wave of arrivals began around 2015 when, thanks to the long aftermath of the Arab spring, millions of people fled chaos and poverty in the Middle East and north Africa to seek sanctuary and a better life. Most fetched up in countries such as Turkey, Greece and Italy; in time, some got as far as the UK, often concealing themselves on lorries or in the Channel tunnel to get here. It’s only in the last two years that this perilous new smuggling route – crossing the Channel on small boats or dinghies from Calais or Dunkirk in France to towns on the Kent and Sussex coast – became a serious prospect, when ferry security was toughened up and the pandemic shut down conventional travel routes. In 2018, 539 people attempted to cross the Channel in this way; by 2021, the annual number had swelled to more than 28,300. In the past 12 months the boats have kept coming, and in even greater numbers. The day Mahmoud and the others arrived, 8 October 2021, turns out to be one of the biggest days ever for asylum seekers arriving on little boats: 624 people made the crossing, the fourth highest daily tally then recorded. Most, like Mahmoud, don’t make it on their own. If they’re lucky, they are intercepted by Border Force or RNLI lifeboats and taken to UK shores to begin their applications for asylum. The boats are a near-constant presence: you can watch them from the shore, see them attract inflammatory comments on social media or, in my case, swim right past them. As Mahmoud and I speak, a medic arrives to check that he and his friends have drunk enough water. The older man sitting beside him is called Mohammed, but he knows no English. Neither does the third man, also Syrian. Three north Africans sit apart on the other banquette. Explaining as best I can that I am a journalist, I ask Mahmoud why he left Syria, and he tells me he’s fleeing the government of Bashar al-Assad. Had he been in the rebel Free Syrian Army? “No, no,” he says, waving the question away as if I don’t understand the gravity of the situation. “Bashar hates anyone who wants democracy.” Like many young Syrians, he might have been fleeing the prospect of imminent military service. Given he only left earlier in 2021, he might also have been escaping punishing new US sanctions, which are helping push the country to the brink of famine. Without getting to know him better, it’s hard to say. I write down my name and telephone number in his still-wet notebook. “Welcome to the UK,” I say weakly, and shake the hands of all three men. *** It is no wonder Mahmoud found his journey terrifying. The Channel is one of the busiest and most dangerous shipping lanes in the world. Whatever the enthusiasm of evangelical sea-swimmers, no one could survive in water like this for very long. A month later, at the beginning of November, someone dies attempting to reach the UK from France, after their small boat capsizes near Dunkirk. Little more than a day later, another person is found dead on a beach near Calais, after their boat rapidly filled up with water on the way across. A few days later, on my way back into the water at Mermaid Beach, I walk past another boat arriving and chat briefly to its shivering occupants. They include two Albanians and a young man from Iranian Kurdistan; none can speak any English. As time goes on and Mahmoud doesn’t get in touch, I begin to wonder what became of him and the other new arrivals. As far as I can tell, an adult male like him would have been taken by bus to nearby Dover to be processed. After that, and possibly a stay in a cheap hotel, there’s a good chance he’d have been returned to a makeshift hostel in an army camp on the outskirts of Folkestone while his application for asylum is considered. The place is called Napier Barracks and it’s on the furthest western edge of Folkestone, in a hilly, sparsely populated army camp known as Shorncliffe. On a chilly afternoon in November, I set out from Folkestone to find it, but I get lost several times. Shorncliffe has a long and distinguished military history, and many of those who live around here work for the army or the Ministry of Defence. The Gurkhas have a base here, and there’s a large Nepali community in the wider area. Street names include Military Road and Gurkha Way; outside some of the barracks, large signs announce “MOD area, keep clear”. Napier Barracks is a forbidding series of Victorian military blocks with views of the Kent Downs. The place once housed army cadets; it was pressed into service as a hostel in September 2020. At any one time, between 200 and 400 recently arrived asylum seekers, all men, are housed here; provided they give a forwarding address, they are free to come and go. I walk past the main gate to find a dozen north African men, mostly Eritrean, ferrying out metal goalposts for a football match in a field across the road. After them come a few Kurds, headed for an afternoon stroll. *** In the following weeks, I take a walk here most days. The first person I strike up a conversation with is Sadeq, an Iranian Kurd in his 20s who arrived in the UK, by small boat, on 25 June, with 43 others. We meet on a park bench overlooking Napier, Sadeq patiently using an app on his mobile phone to translate from his local Kurdish dialect into elementary English. In Iran, he says, despite being “uneducated, illiterate”, he worked for a local democratic party, smuggling Kurdish-language materials across the border from Iraq. Every time he speaks about the Iranian authorities and what they might do to him, he jokily pretends to hold an imaginary noose with his head inside it. One day in April, the Iranian police arrived at his door armed with his photo. He was out, but his mother warned him to leave. “Go, go, go,” was all she said on the phone; it was enough. Sadeq left Iran on 20 April, without any belongings. He didn’t bring his passport because, like many Iranian Kurds, he didn’t have one. He wasn’t even able to go home and say goodbye to his mother; it would have been too dangerous. His first journey by sea was from Turkey to Greece, with 37 others. “It was a small boat with an engine,” he says. “The journey lasted five days after the engine broke. There was a different group of smugglers in every country. My uncle paid for it all. He also paid for the journey to the UK.” Why the UK? “I don’t know,” he shrugs. “My uncle told me it was a safe place.” The journey from the “Jungle” in Calais took eight hours; Sadeq had paid €1,700 (£1,423) for it. In the night, six of the smugglers ushered people on to the boat with knives; even so, the sea was so choppy that five of them immediately got out. During the journey they were ordered to keep their phones switched off, presumably to avoid detection by French or British police. What he remembers most were “big waves – we were so scared of them. And these really big fish.” The boat was intercepted by British police and taken to Dover, where Sadeq spent five days being interviewed before being packed off to a hotel in south London for two and a half months. Then he was brought to Folkestone and Napier. Each block in the camp houses 28 asylum seekers, split into two sections of 14, with seven people on each side; MDF partitions have been placed between the beds, with a curtain for “privacy”. Like the others I speak to, Sadeq much prefers Napier to the isolation of a London hostel. “The food is very good, much better than London, and the security people are very good,” he says. All the same, there is no dentist and Sadeq’s teeth are hurting. He mimes scratching himself to communicate that there are also bugs. He has been promised that the authorities will find him a room in a flat somewhere in around two months: “London, Birmingham, Glasgow, anywhere.” In the meantime, there is little to do. He can’t contact his friends and family back home, he says, because he and they are afraid of surveillance by the Iranian authorities. Napier has a games room and the internet; Sadeq spends most of his time watching YouTube to improve his English. He’s been here 59 days, he says, clearly counting them down. Like the others I speak to, he has had little interaction with local people, but no bad experiences either. One retired man he met while walking even took him to Ashford for a day trip and bought him a new pair of shoes. On another afternoon, after watching a football match in the field across the road from Napier, I wander over to speak to one of the best players – Leon, a wisecracking Kurd from the city of Sulaymaniyah in Iraq, who took the trip from Dunkirk by small boat eight months ago. The journey cost him £2,000, he says. There were so many smugglers and it was impossible to know who to trust, which was why he didn’t give any money up front; instead he left it with an intermediary with instructions to pay only when he called from the UK to say he’d made it. Everyone he talked to had done the same thing. “In my country, even the worst smugglers are better than my president,” he quips, making a common claim about corruption among the Barzani clan who run Kurdish Iraq. “But these people were not good. They lie to you. The journey will take one hour, they say – you will be in England, and everyone will be fine.” The reality was different. “Everyone was crying and praying. All of us thought we were going to die. Water comes inside the boat, inside your clothes. I love my life; you think about everything.” Among 35 passengers there were about half a dozen children on the boat and an equal number of men and women. The journey lasted four hours; they were rescued by the British police. Both they and the French police were efficient and respectful, Leon says (“If anyone says they were not good, they’re lying”). By comparison, he claims, Belgian police imprisoned him and stole his money and mobile phone. Much of his journey over land from Turkey was spent in total darkness: “You’re always in a truck or in a house. You can’t go out.” Leon refuses to tell me why he’d left Iraq, other than that he had problems with family and religion. And, despite the terrors of the journey, he has no regrets about coming to the UK. In time, he wants to go to university here, to study information technology. He’d also like to play for Manchester City, he says: “But at 24, I’m too old.” *** Almost everyone I speak to, including Sadeq and Leon, hopefully extols Britain as a land of opportunity. They also talk about its benevolent approach to refugees as reasons to come here; some know a little English, or something of British culture. Jemal, a self-effacing young man, arrived in Napier on 12 November, having departed his native Asmara in Eritrea with two friends back in March. Even the first leg of the trip, to Sudan, was gruelling, and after that came an epic journey of five or six days on a huge truck through the Sahara. There were about 120 people, he says. “It was hot. We had water but no food, and no appetite.” The reason was that they were tired and “scared of bad people – criminals”. By May he was in Libya, where “there were people with guns”; from there, he paid €4,000 (£3,352) to travel with about 150 others in a boat to Italy. “It was beautiful and scary,” he says. “The boat was shifting to the left and right; people were seasick.” The journey lasted 36 hours and the passengers were eventually rescued by the Italian authorities, who took them to the island of Lampedusa. Now in Europe, Jemal began to breathe more easily. One friend went to Switzerland, “because he had family there”, and another set off for the Netherlands. Jemal went to the Netherlands, too, where he stayed with some cousins for three weeks. After that, he went to Belgium, then Calais for two weeks, contemplating the final leg of his journey to Britain. By this time Jemal had been on the road almost continuously for five months, and he was entirely alone. He paid €2,500 (£2,095) for a journey by dinghy with 60 others, but the vessel turned out not to be in a fit state. He laughs darkly. “We paid our money and then had to make it ready ourselves – working with the smugglers, pumping it up with air, fixing the motor and battery.” As usual, the smugglers didn’t make the trip, some of the passengers appointing themselves navigators. “One man was using a compass on his mobile phone. Four or five others were helping; maybe because of their work before, they knew something about this.” The journey was scarier than the one from Libya to Italy; there were too many people for such a small boat and Jemal had no idea who the smugglers really were and how far they could be trusted. Then there was the fact that he couldn’t swim. Most of all, he began to worry that a fight might break out among his fellow passengers. “Some people are good, some are bad, and this was a very small boat.” I ask why he’d left Asmara and he talks about coronavirus and the lack of facilities there: “There was no safety, and the hospitals aren’t good.” In Asmara his family ran a small supermarket; he has four sisters, and one brother who left before him and is now in Sweden. Only after talking for some time, and almost in passing, do I begin to understand one of the main reasons Jemal has come here to apply for asylum: he’s afraid of being called up for military service amid a brutal local civil war (“The Eritrean government, if they want a soldier, they might come to me”). It becomes a theme. Over the next weeks I swap WhatsApp messages with Sadeq, who eventually tells me he’s gay. It was, he confesses, a prime reason he decided to leave. A few days later he says his application for residency in the UK has been declined. Being gay in Iran is punishable by imprisonment and even execution: why hadn’t he mentioned it on his application at Napier? “I couldn’t talk about it because the translator was Kurdish,” he texts. “I don’t want Kurds to know.” *** The story of how an informal support network for people like Sadeq and Jemal grew up in Folkestone is largely one about women of different ages helping young men. Sally Hough is one of them. Hough, another DFL, used to work in London galleries before making the move to Folkestone with her partner a decade ago. We arrange to meet in a Folkestone coffee bar and she sweeps in and orders a bacon burger before apologising if I don’t eat meat. “I feel like I should be vegan now,” she jokes, referring to the main demographic working with asylum seekers in the town. Like many others, Hough’s first experience of helping refugees was in 2019, when she mentored a boy for Kent Refugee Action Network (Kran), a local NGO dedicated to supporting young and unaccompanied asylum seekers. A friend was supporting a Syrian family who had been rehoused in unsuitable accommodation: “Dreadful and mouldy, mattresses for small children with springs sticking out of them.” The pair set up a crowdfunder, which raised £800. When she went shopping locally for mattresses, one local bed shop insisted on selling them to her at the wholesale price. With more money than they needed, Hough decided to do something to help those at Napier, too – collecting toiletries, shoes and bottled water, and delivering them to the barracks by car. Softly spoken but steely, Hough says her efforts have not been well received by everyone. On her first drop-off in October 2020, she and a friend encountered camera-wielding members of an amateurish far-right group who mocked and abused them, accusing them of bringing in drugs. They weren’t local, Hough says, and the police and the camp manager intervened. Though the harassment soon dried up, she decided the safest way to distribute the mounting pile of donations might be to use a room in the camp. Then came the fire, in January 2021, when some of the residents allegedly set light to a block to protest about the spread of Covid-19 in the camp. Hough was in a local park picking up her children when she saw the smoke rising; then the men from the camp began to send her videos. “It was an awful feeling. I thought people were going to die.” For a time Hough worked with local organisations, such as Napier Friends, which helps, among other things, to organise English classes in the camp. But she is withering about the way Napier has been run by the Home Office which was criticised in a report by Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of Prisons into conditions at the site. Now, working with other local charities (including Samphire Project and Art Refuge), Hough manages a volunteer-run drop-in centre 10 minutes’ walk from the camp, to which many Napier residents come for advice about the asylum process, to learn skills or just to have cake and coffee. Napier used to have an appalling reputation, Hough says; people who thought they were being transferred there sometimes ran away, or jumped on a bus to London. Improvements have been made, thanks to the efforts and activism of the residents and people like her, together with a judicial review that meant the Home Office was forced to make changes. The food is certainly better and the barracks are less isolating than a hostel, but the dormitory-style accommodation is essentially the same: the residents can socialise, but they can’t sleep. “Someone goes to the toilet and the lights go on and off. Someone misses their family and calls them, and that wakes someone else up and makes them miss their family, too. Before long lots of people are awake.” Sadeq had told me he was always tired and yawning. The only reason asylum seekers get sent back to Folkestone and Napier, Hough thinks, is that “the Home Office want to prove a point – that they’re being tough”. Hough isn’t the only local working independently to help refugees. Shortly after I move into my flat in the town, I notice a stream of young men turning up on the doorstep of my middle-aged neighbour, Teresa. (Teresa – not her real name – really is a vegan.) “She’s like a mother to us,” one man tells me. Teresa moved to Folkestone in April 2019, after the end of a long marriage, and immediately set about doing what she could to help young refugees. With her children grown up, she sees it as the role of people like her “to help younger generations”; she has enabled a few asylum seekers to secure tenancies by offering to be their guarantor, and assisted others with their visa applications and interviews at a local jobcentre. Our lunch over, Hough offers me a lift to the camp; I have arranged to meet Jemal again. Along the way, she greets several young men we pass on a residential street. They come to the drop-in centre, she says. Some have told her that occasionally a car will slow down and someone will shout, “Go back to where you came from” or similar. Every single person in Napier, I’m told, is likely to have heard that once. *** How much sympathy do the people of Folkestone really have for the asylum seekers who arrive on the beaches? Between the mouthy far-right activists and those who have the time and inclination to help, most seem to be in the middle, and broadly understanding of the asylum seekers’ plight. If some tut-tut at the anarchy of dinghies washing up on their beaches, that’s forgivable. The asylum seekers themselves would agree; they would much prefer a safer, more orderly way to get in. When journalists come to Folkestone to report on the regeneration of the town, some end up at the museum, musing thoughtfully over a picture called Landing of the Belgium Refugees. It recalls the arrival of Belgians fleeing the first world war, among them 16,000 who came on a single day in October 1914, and the welcome they received from the local authorities. But much has changed in Folkestone since 1914. After a brief period of prosperity in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, it fell into a long period of neglect. The last straw was the mothballing of its ferry port in 2000, killed off by the arrival of the Channel tunnel. Walk through the housing estates behind Folkestone’s new “creative quarter” and you’ll find pockets of squalor and deprivation reminiscent of the 1950s. Most here accept that culture-led regeneration and the recent arrival of well-heeled Londoners are among the best things to have happened to the town for decades. But such progress hasn’t trickled down to the local population, and average rents in Folkestone went up by as much as 26.7% in the last year, the second highest rise in the country. In many ways Folkestonians have more to fear from migrants like me than those arriving, desperate, on inflatable dinghies from overseas. As the weather deteriorates and the smugglers persist in trying their luck, the final week of November brings fresh catastrophe; at least 27 asylum seekers, mostly Kurds like Sadeq and Leon, are found dead when their inflatable capsizes near Calais. At midday the following Sunday, a few hundred people gather on Sunny Sands, Folkestone’s most popular beach, for a vigil to remember the dead. By the time I arrive, the slogan “Safe routes now” has been etched in giant letters in the sand. The event has been organised by Bridget Chapman, spokesperson for Kran and an energetic advocate for local asylum seekers. About 25 Napier residents are there, too, given lifts by Sally Hough and Napier Friends. At the drop-in centre, she tells me, there has been an explosion of interest among people wanting to help. Soon after, the trail of dinghies and small boats dries up for a while; fierce weather and the roaring sea have made the journey all but impossible. But just before Christmas, despite escalating rhetoric from the British government, they start up again. When the wind drops and the seas calm, determined swimmers think about venturing back into the water, but it makes Hough anxious. “It’s not long before we hear the helicopters,” she tells me, when I call for an update. “We hope everyone has arrived safely, and that there was at least one person who was welcoming on the beach.” • This article was amended on 9 February 2022 to include the names of two of the charities that Sally Hough now works with. All refugees’ names have been changed.In 1985, at the height of popularity for the faddish baby dolls, the Cabbage Patch Kids, the cartoonist Art Spiegelman debuted a subversive line of trading cards, the Garbage Pail Kids. Featuring viscerally queasy drawings of, say, a mushroom cloud detonating from the roof of a cheery toddler’s skull, or a Raggedy Ann facsimile barfing up dinner into a pot, the Garbage Pail Kids were a sensation among edgy preteens all over the world. They were also swiftly banned in a slew of schools. To this day, Mexico has a law restricting the import and export of Garbage Pail Kids material. “You know how Joe Manchin is a thorn in our side?” Spiegelman asked in a phone interview this week. “His uncle, A Jamie Manchin, was the state treasurer of West Virginia in the 80s. He said that Garbage Pail Kids should be banned because they’re subverting children. It runs in his family. “It reminds me that things keep changing, but we’re still dealing with permutations of the same struggles.” The latest permutation came last week, when the McMinn county board of education in Tennessee voted to remove Spiegelman’s 1991 Holocaust memoir, Maus, from its middle-school curriculum. Though the board cited the graphic novel’s use of non-sexual nudity and light profanity in defending its decision, the ban is part of a wave of scholastic censorship in the US, largely led by an agitated conservative movement and targeting books that deal with racism or LGBTQ issues. But the author of the Pulitzer prize–winning graphic novel, which tells the story of his parents’ experience as Polish Jews during the Holocaust, traces his own free speech radicalism to a very different inflection point in America’s censorship wars. As a teenager, Spiegelman found himself siding with the right of Nazis to march in Skokie, Illinois, a town with a significant population of Holocaust survivors. “The ACLU lost a lot of members because they defended their right to march,” he said. “And I just thought that seemed right. Let them march, and if there’s any more trouble, stop them. I thought that was a conversation that had to take place. “It shaped me.” Born in Sweden after his parents were liberated from Auschwitz, Spiegelman grew up in Queens, New York, and began cartooning before he reached high school. He was a fixture of the 70s Bay Area underground comix scene, rubbing shoulders with world-renowned provocateurs like Robert Crumb and Gilbert Shelton. The work that birthed from that era was truly brazen – depicting drugs, violence and sex, with a thirsty anticipation for backlash. Spiegelman says that he and his peers drew much of their rage from the rampant censorship campaign that targeted the comics industry in the 1950s – a time when, due to federal pressure, publishing houses instituted the Comics Code, which repressed even the teensiest adversarial tone in the work of mainstream cartoonists. “There were literally parents and clergymen gathering comic books from kids and burning them in bonfires,” he said. “We as cartoonists of that generation loved the salacious, raucous, uninhibited expression of id. … We wanted to topple every article of the Comics Code if we could.” He began to publish the deeply personal Maus as a serialized comic in 1980 in Raw, an annual comics anthology he edited with his wife, Françoise Mouly. But Spiegelman maintained a fascination with both high and low culture, leading him to pursue projects like the Garbage Pail Kids. Spiegelman hasn’t exclusively rankled political conservatives. In 1993, in the aftermath of the Crown Heights riots, he drew a cover for the New Yorker that featured a Hasidic man and a Black woman bonded by a passionate kiss. The imagery ruffled feathers, even within traditionally liberal enclaves. Spiegelman recalls one baffling criticism from a member of the New Yorker editorial staff, who believed that his cover depicted a Hasidic man hiring an escort. (That clearly was not the case.) A decade later, in 2002, Spiegelman struggled to find a domestic home for his 9/11-themed anthology of comics called In the Shadow of No Towers. Eventually he was forced to take it overseas to the German newspaper Die Zeit, due to what Spiegelman believes was the frothing jingoism that gripped the country after the attack. “It was saying the unsayable. There’s one big panel in the second or third installment of In The Shadow of No Towers where I’m trying to take a nap at my drawing table. Osama bin Laden is on my left with a scimitar, while George W Bush is on my right with a gun to my head,” he says. “I think one of the people at the New Yorker said that I was crazy, that I was talking about those two things as equal threats. When that got back to me I said, ‘No, you’re right. America is a much larger threat.’” Now Spiegelman is gearing up for the same war he’s been fighting since he first started drawing cartoons more than 50 years ago. The characters and context have changed, but his core ethics have not. In fact, the more I talked to Spiegelman, the more I got the sense that the Maus censorship has shaken him more than any of his previous brushes against authority. When you consider the many years children have turned to the book to better understand the Holocaust, it’s not hard to understand why. Still, the current controversy has also neatly illustrated one of the foundational principles of the publishing industry: nothing drives up interest in a book faster than a misguided prohibition. Maus is topping bestsellers lists across the country, as readers everywhere clamor to see what the fuss is about. “You know how they publish book galleys before books are published? On the back of them it says, ‘Published April 3’ and a list of things that’s being done to publicize the book? I see a future where it says, ‘Published April 3, banned May 12,’” Spiegelman said. “That would be the end date of anything they need to do to publicize the book.” I hope that dawning reality adds some clarity to the culture war, which is why it’s reassuring to watch Maus blast off to the top of the sales charts. The conceit that the left consists exclusively of nosy schoolmarms, while the right is united in first amendment patriotism, has surely been rendered counterfeit by now. “This week has been like, ‘Well, who’s the snowflake now?’” said Spiegelman. Let’s keep those words in mind. • This article was amended on 6 February 2022 to correct a misspelling of Spiegelman in the subheading.One thing the last two years and counting of the pandemic has given us (which no one gives it credit for) is: a renewed love of parlour games. Everyone is down on the coronavirus, but we do have to give it that particular due. “Oh, but we couldn’t go to the supermarket … ” Yeah, but you got Zoom quizzes. “Oh, but we couldn’t see our loved ones for months on end … ” Hmm, OK, but Quiplash and Among Us filled a void. “Oh, but I lost my job and couldn’t get a haircut … ” Fine. But you had six months to sit on the floor doing jigsaws and getting too into adult board games? What is the problem, exactly? Honestly, I think some people just like moaning. Anyway, this is a TV column, and it should behave accordingly. The second series of Mel Giedroyc: Unforgivable drops on Dave this week (10pm, Tuesday), and it feels, somehow, related. The format is thus: Mel Giedroyc sits on a throne and coaxes a revolving cast of British comedians into performing tasks and games. She has an underling who sits on a lower chair than her and they do various pre-planned skits that never quite hit, but that is sort of the charm. Katherine Ryan is in an episode, Jamali Maddix in another. Hold on. Hmm. No, it’s not Taskmaster, you’re right. But it is, isn’t it? It feels a bit dismissive to say Unforgivable is “Taskmaster, but Dave still has the license for it”, but to ignore the role Taskmaster plays in the genesis of all this seems like ignoring a very large, Greg Davies-shaped elephant in the room. Taskmaster (I am not explaining what Taskmaster is. You are reading the Guardian. You know what Taskmaster is) was the breakout hit from Dave’s get-away-from-Top-Gear-repeats-by-elevating-British-comedy tactic. It defected to Channel 4, but there are a lot of interesting shows with interesting comedians leftover: the James Acaster and Josh Widdicombe-fronted Hypothetical, the deeply enjoyable British as Folk, the rebrand of Late Night Mash. Unforgivable is along the same lines – British comedians you haven’t heard of getting their first big run at TV, a few comedy stalwarts in the mix, some pre-planned storytelling that rapidly goes off-piste – that makes all of them so good. We’ve had a fallow few years with panel shows. The Cats are always doing Countdown, of course, and Would I Lie To You? and Mock the Week are still mainstays on the BBC, but it hasn’t felt like the giddy panel-heavy days of the late 90s and early 00s for a while. Why? You would have thought the easiest path to TV gold would be “put five to six funny people in a room together and let them be unscriptedly rude”, but sometimes it just doesn’t work. Is it the cultural temperature at the time? Too many celebrities in the mix and not enough comedians? Is it the exact right format? – but it feels like Dave is closest to cracking the alchemy right now. Unforgivable can clank a little; every episode starts agonisingly slowly. Giedroyc brightly asking everyone, “Tell us an embarrassing story!” can veer into office away-day ice-breaker awkwardness, and I could do with fewer rhyming puns – but it understands the best way to make funny people be funny on TV is, simply, by letting them. Giedroyc helps – her post-Bake Off pivot to “wholesomely cheeky schoolmarm” has been a delight to watch – as does Lou Sanders who, in the role of underling, consistently comes out with the sort of lines you can’t believe survived an edit (the new series starts with a throwaway joke featuring a toilet roll prop that made me have to pause the screener to compose myself). Their nice/naughty dynamic helps pull structure out of what is, for the first third of each episode at least, people sat in chairs storytelling. But the episodes get more manic as they progress: essentially, someone always gets comfortable enough to tell the country the last place and time they shat themselves, and once that Rubicon has been crossed (normally around the 24-minute mark), there are a lot more laughs. It’s not quite the can’t-miss format of the show that came before it, but it’s a valiant attempt. Listen up, the rest of British TV! Put more funny people on shows where they can be funny! Dave has figured it out! Catch up!That’s going to be it from us for the day. Thanks for following and to my colleague Cait Cassidy who took you through the bulk of the day earlier. Here are the main events that have kept us busy: Some 83 people were reported to have died with Covid in the last day. Queensland recorded its deadliest day, with 21 people losing their life. At least 303 people are in ICU across Australia with the disease. An estimated 2,000 people rallied in Canberra to protest vaccines, vaccine mandates and ask for “freedom”. The Coalition MP George Christensen and United Australia party leader, Craig Kelly, attended. The deputy prime minister, Barnaby Joyce, offered his resignation to the prime minister after a text emerged from last year where he called Scott Morrison a hypocrite and a liar. Morrison rejected the offer. The Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, said Joyce’s position was untenable as the ABC said Joyce had withdrawn from an interview on their Sunday politics show Insiders. Justin Langer resigned as the coach of the Australia men’s cricket team after rejecting a six-month contract extension. The former captain and Langer’s friend Ricky Ponting said it was a sad day for Australian cricket. A bushfire is threatening properties in the south-east of Western Australia near Denmark, with 60 firefighters on the scene and weather conditions forecast to worsen. Stay safe and enjoy your weekend. An estimated 2,000 people rallied in Canberra today, variously protesting against vaccine mandates, lockdowns, vaccines generally and asking for “freedom”. Read our wrap of the day and see some pictures from the rally, which included the United Australia party leader, Craig Kelly, and the Queensland Coalition MP George Christensen. Cricket Australia’s chief executive, Nick Hockley, has just spoken at a press conference about the resignation of Justin Langer as coach of the men’s team. He says Langer was offered a six-month contract yesterday to take the team through the T20 World Cup later this year, but that it was a short-term extension while there was a post-Ashes review. Langer resigned “effective immediately” after the offer was made. But Hockley says he personally, and Cricket Australia, are “eternally grateful” to Langer: He is not only a legend of the game but an outstanding individual. His passion, his dedication and commitment is second to none. As we said we would, following the Ashes, did a thorough evaluation of the team’s needs going forward. We recognised that the team has evolved and the requirements and needs of the head coach have also evolved. The decision to start a process of transition is what we believe is in the best interests of the men’s team for unity and future success. Hockley is talking a lot about how the team is in a “period of transition” and how the requirements for a head coach have “evolved” and there is a desire to change the way the team is managed. And he rejects criticisms that came earlier today from the likes of former captain Ricky Ponting and opener Matthew Hayden. We obviously respect the views of the greats of the game, but really feel that the process that we have undertaken, we have done it thoroughly and in the best interests of Australian cricket. South Australia’s health officials have reported two women, both in their 80s, have died after testing positive for Covid-19. There were 1,289 new cases recorded in the state where 16 people are in intensive care. Some might remember the controversy over supertrawler the Abel Tasman that was banned from Australia in 2013? Well OK – maybe not – but this environment reporter remembers it. Anyway, the Dutch-owned trawler, now known as the FV Margiris, has shed more than 100,000 dead fish into the Atlantic Ocean off France. Here’s our story about that. Here’s our story about that private text Barnaby Joyce sent last year while he was a backbencher, describing Scott Morrison as a “hypocrite and a liar”, and the ongoing fallout: Here’s a bit more about the announcement from Queensland that a former grazing property near Hughenden has been purchased and turned into a 350 sq km national park. The environment minister, Meaghan Scanlon, says for commercial reasons she can’t say how much the property cost, but has revealed that US-based charity The Wyss Foundation put in $2.6m. The property, known as The Lakes, will also protect the headwaters of South Gregory River that feeds into the Great Barrier Reef catchment, Scanlon said: These regions have plains, woodlands, escarpments, creeks and unique high-altitude lakes that support a wide range of important flora and fauna. Dr James Fitzsimons, of The Nature Conservancy Australia that helped negotiate the new park, said The Lakes had “significant conservation values”. Is it worth rhetorically pointing out the Queensland Coalition MP George Christensen’s attendance at today’s rally in Canberra – sporting a grin and a T-shirt with the words “Think for Yourself” – comes on the same day his state records its deadliest day of the pandemic with 21 deaths? I think it is. Cheers to Caitlin Cassidy. There’s been a fair bit going on today so here’s a very quick recap. A total of 81 people have died with Covid in the last day. Queensland recorded its deadliest day, with 21 people losing their life. South Australia is still to report its numbers. At least 287 people are currently in ICU across Australia with the disease. Deputy prime minister Barnaby Joyce offered his resignation to the prime minister after a text emerged from last year where he called Scott Morrison a hypocrite and a liar. Labor leader Anthony Albanese says Joyce’s position is untenable. Justin Langer has resigned as the coach of the Australia men’s cricket team. Assistant coach Andrew McDonald has been appointed interim coach. A bushfire is threatening properties in the south-east of Western Australia near Denmark, with 60 firefighters on the scene and weather conditions forecast to worsen. I’m Graham Readfearn and I’ll be here until we close off our live news coverage in a few hours. With that, I will pass the theoretical baton on to Graham Readfearn who will keep you company for the rest of the day. Enjoy your respective weekends. More on Langer’s resignation: Here is the full statement from Cricket Australia: Cricket Australia has accepted men’s team head coach Justin Langer’s resignation, which was received today. Justin was offered a short-term extension to his current contract, which sadly he has opted not to accept. CA would like to thank Justin for his outstanding leadership since he became Australian men’s team coach in 2018 and for guiding the team to the T20 World Cup title last year and the 4-0 Ashes victory. Justin is not only a legend of the game but an outstanding individual. The contract extension offered to Justin was the result of a thorough review process that evaluated many factors including future requirements of the team and the upcoming extensive schedule of fixtures. The extension was approved by the CA Board and was put to Justin last night. It included the opportunity to defend the T20 World Cup title in Australia at the end of this year. Justin informed CA this morning he was not accepting the offer and would resign with immediate effect. Cheree Toka campaigned for years for the Aboriginal flag to be a permanent fixture of the Sydney Harbour Bridge, as NSW premier Dominic Perrottet announced today. Back in the ACT, and protestors have been singing The Last Post, with George Christensen up and about among them. The Northern Territory has recorded 968 new Covid-19 cases today and no deaths. An additional 173 cases have been added to Friday’s tally - bringing the total number of cases announced today to 1,141. Hospitalisations, too, have risen. There are 151 people being treated in hospital with the virus, including four people requiring intensive care. It comes with the mask mandate in the territory to lift from 6pm. A statement from the NT government says territorians have shown “high levels” of personal responsibility and compliance with mask-wearing. It is still recommended people over 12 wear a mask outdoors when physical distancing isn’t possible. The indoor mask mandate remains in place. Andrew McDonald will be appointed interim head coach of the Australian men’s cricket team following the resignation of Justin Langer. A young man has fallen to his death from a cliff on Victoria’s Bellarine Peninsula, AAP reports. The 22-year-old plummeted into the water near Ocean Boulevard at Jan Juc just after 2am this morning. His body was found by SES and search and rescue crews about 7.30am. Police will prepare a report for the coroner. Hmm ... Oh, my! WA premier Mark McGowan has just delivered a press conference giving updates on food supplies, bushfires and Covid. McGowan urged residents not to panic-buy, while he stood in a freight yard in Perth where a train was arriving with supplies to ease a shortage caused by road closures due to flooding. He said there were unconfirmed reports of property damage from an out-of-control bushfire near Denmark in the state’s south-east, where 60 firefighters were on the ground. McGowan reported the state had seen 26 new Covid cases, adding residents could now apply for a $320 payment if they had to isolate while waiting for a PCR test result. Back to the news of the resignation of Australian men’s cricket coach Justin Langer. Former Australian cricket captain and batting legend Ricky Ponting isn’t impressed. Ponting has been speaking to the ABC this morning, where the batting legend and now pundit described Cricket Australia’s handling of the situation as “embarassing”. Ponting, who described Langer as “like a brother”, said the decision appeared to have been taken at a “very strange time” in the wake of a 4-0 Ashes win over England. “I think it’s a really sad day as far as Australian cricket is concerned.” “It’s been a really poor six months with the way Cricket Australia have handled some of the better people in Australian cricket.” “Those being Justin Langer and Tim Paine. I think it’s been almost embarrassing the way they handled those two cases.” Ponting said he thought it had been a small number of players and backroom staff that had expressed dissatisfaction with Langer’s coaching style. When asked if he thought new captain Pat Cummins should have backed Langer earlier this week, he said Cummins had been put in a difficult position. With that, I will pass you deftly, and briefly, into the hands of Graham Readfearn. ACT Police estimates the anti-vaccination crowd gathered in the territory is in excess of 2,000. A reminder, the ACT’s double-vaccination rate is 98.6% among over 12-year-olds. You do the maths! (I can’t). Back in Melbourne: Two inmates lost their lives in Junee private prison in NSW in a three day period last month, provoking calls for an immediate investigation into the facility. On 26 January, a 47-year-old man died in his cell after testing positive to Covid-19. Today, the private operator GEO confirmed that a 48-year-old woman died at the prison on 29 January. The Greens MP David Shoebridge said it was a “human rights disaster” and urged the inspector of custodial services to begin an immediate investigation. He said the prison needed to be brought back to public management. There are real questions about the ongoing safety of Junee and Parklea prisons and the impact of private operators seeking to maximize profits regardless of the human cost. My office has been inundated with requests from families for information about what’s happening with their loved ones at Junee because they’re hearing nothing from the prison operator. Families and inmates have been denied essential information about what’s happening, which is creating a climate of fear and distress. Meanwhile, inmates are having court dates canceled because the prison is in lockdown. The failure of either the minister or the private operator to even announce these two deaths is just another part of this policy of silence about the unfolding crisis in prisons and it must end. Back in the ACT where protestors have gathered in opposition to vaccination mandates, though there seems little ideological coherence to what, exactly, they are purporting: Queensland’s chief health officer, Dr John Gerrard, says the “good news” is the public hospital system is not being overwhelmed and the peak of the Covid wave in the state has passed. The good news is in our public hospital system, the numbers of patients in hospital continues to decline gradually down to 727 from 732. This is a gradual decline in admissions in hospital. This again demonstrates that we have passed the peak of transmission in the community across most of Queensland. We are increasingly confident the transmission is decreasing. We know there will be a lag as people, in terms of hospitalisations ... and deaths. There will be a lag in that, but the peak of transmission has passed and the virus is absolutely everywhere in Queensland. It is in every corner of Queensland. We know that large numbers of people who have carried the virus have no symptoms. There is no way you can avoid being exposed to this virus in the coming weeks. It is inevitable. Although the peak has passed. That is certainly good news that the peak has passed. Taking you to Queensland now, where authorities have been providing a Covid update. The 21 deaths recorded today is a record for the state. The chief health officer, Dr John Gerrard, says only two of today’s deaths received a booster shot, however seven were aged care residents: This includes two people in their 60s, four in their 70s, 11 in the 80s and four in their 90s. Four of these people were not vaccinated. Two had received a single dose of vaccine. Thirteen had received two doses and only two had received a booster – only two out of 21 people who had died in this reporting period. Seven of these people were known to be aged care residents. It distresses me greatly every day to be reporting on older Queenslanders dying without having received a booster. We know that the booster, that third dose of vaccine, is absolutely critical in protecting us, particularly older people, from more severe disease. Hospitalisation, intensive-care admission and death. I cannot state this often enough. Here are the latest coronavirus numbers from around Australia today, as the country records at least 81 deaths from Covid 19: ACT Deaths: 1 Cases: 372 In hospital: 63 (with one person in ICU) NSW Deaths: 18 Cases: 8,389 In hospital: 2,337 (with 152 people in ICU) NT Deaths: 0 Cases: 968 In hospital: 151 (with 4 people in ICU) Queensland Deaths: 21 Cases: 8,508 In hospital: 727 (with 46 people in ICU) South Australia Deaths: 2 Cases: 1,289 In hospital: 218 (with 16 in ICU) Tasmania Deaths: 0 Cases: 483 In hospital: 10 (with two people in ICU) Victoria Deaths: 41 Cases: 7,810 In hospital: 687 (with 80 people in ICU) Western Australia Deaths: 0 Cases: 26 Queensland’s Covid-19 update has been posted. Sadly, there have been 21 deaths recorded in the past 24 hours. There have been 8,508 new Covid cases detected. It brings today’s daily national toll to at least 81. Speaking of the ACT, its Covid update has just gone live. There have been 372 new cases reported overnight and, sadly, one life has been lost. There are 63 people being treated in hospital with Covid-19 including one person requiring ventilation. More on the protests in the ACT: They’re back. A large crowd has gathered in the ACT for a Hands off Our Kids national rally to end vaccination mandates. Before bidding adieu, Albanese welcomes the NSW premier Dominic Perrottet’s announcement the Aboriginal flag will be flown atop the Sydney Harbour Bridge 365 days a year. I welcome the decision. ... this is a welcome move, it should fly, proudly, for 365 days a year and I look forward to being a part of a government that advances in reconciliation ... with a voice to parliament. Albanese turns to the deeply weird photo opportunity that took place yesterday, when Morrison was pictured washing a woman’s hair in a salon. Scott Morrison should stop jumping in motorcars in Bathurst pretending he is a car driver ... he should stop trying to pretend he is a hairdresser. He should stop with all the photo ops and just do his day job. Do his day job looking after older Australians in aged care who are currently undergoing a crisis and increasingly aged care providers are calling for the defence forces to be brought in to make beds, to do the essentials. This is a government that, if Scott Morrison was fair dinkum, he wouldn’t go to a hairdresser. He would go to the governor general and call an election because quite clearly they are not governing, they are not functioning, they are just paralysed by disunity. Labor already had a cheeky little dig at this one: Albanese says the idea Joyce’s remark was flippant is “simply untenable” also, and pulling out of the Insider’s interview due to go ahead tomorrow demonstrates Joyce is “incapable” of doing his job. It follows the other revelations of what the people who were closest to Scott Morrison said about his character. The revelations about Gladys Berejiklian at the time of the bushfire crisis saying that Scott Morrison was a fraud in terms of his character and saying, importantly, that he cared more about politics than people. That was the height of the bushfire crisis ... The context is a prime minister who was saying that a reported sexual assault occurred just metres from his office and he wasn’t aware of those allegations. That no one told him, in spite of the fact that this alleged incident occurred in the defence minister’s office just metres from his own. People in his office knew, people in the department knew, people in Parliament House knew, no one thought of telling the prime minister. It’s also the case that there has been no reporting of all the inquiries that were set up to find out what Scott Morrison’s office new about the circumstances around Brittany Higgins. The federal opposition leader, Anthony Albanese, is speaking live from Sydney now. He says it is “untenable” for the deputy prime minister, Barnaby Joyce, to remain in his position after what he said about the PM in the leaked text message. This isn’t a government. It’s a shambles full of dysfunction and disunity. It’s a shambles which isn’t looking after the interests of Australians because they are obsessed by their internal hatreds and dysfunctions. The comments by Barnaby Joyce a year ago are ... just extraordinary. It is untenable for Barnaby Joyce to continue to be deputy prime minister to Morrison when this is what he had to say: “He is a hypocrite and a liar from my observations and that is over a long time. I have never trusted him and I dislike how he earnestly rearranges the truth to a lie”. That is something that sums up what the deputy prime minister thinks of Scott Morrison and I note that Barnaby Joyce said “that was a year ago, I have got to know him better”. Hang on a second here. That was after Barnaby Joyce had served in the cabinet for over half a decade. There it is. Justin Langer has resigned following a meeting with Cricket Australia yesterday evening, his management, the Dynamic Sports and Entertainment Group, has confirmed. The resignation is effective immediately. You can read more on the background to his decision here. Langer’s contract was due to expire in June. Ahead of the confidential board meeting that took place yesterday, Australia’s captain, Pat Cummins, was unwilling to publicly endorse his coach’s future. Speculation had been ongoing despite the strong Australian victory in the Ashes this summer. We have more detail on the 18 lives lost in NSW overnight. One person was in their 40s, three were in their 60s, four were in their 70s, six were in their 80s and four were aged in their 90s. Condolences to their loved ones. Just two of today’s deaths had received a booster vaccination. The chief cricket writer at the Australian, Peter Lalor, is reporting that Justin Langer, the coach of the Australian men’s cricket team, has resigned. What a Saturday this is shaping up to be! Wow. This is a big call. I am struggling to think of a time this has happened before on the program. At 12pm today, human rights activist and former professional sports player Craig Foster will lock himself in a cage outside the Park Hotel in Melbourne in solidarity with detained refugees. His gesture will be the official launch of the Freedom Cage campaign, a grassroots movement calling on celebrities and members of the public to protest against the indefinite detention of refugees and asylum-seekers across the country and offshore. The Park Hotel currently holds 25 refugees and asylum-seekers, most of whom have been detained for nearly nine years. The Aboriginal flag will have a permanent home atop the Sydney Harbour Bridge “as soon as possible”, NSW premier Dominic Perrottet says and AAP reports. Perrottet told reporters today the government had been “working through this” for some time. He said that first advice he’d received on the reconciliation gesture was that it would take two years to make good, something he felt was excessive considering the bridge itself was built in nine years. “I’ll climb up there and and put it up myself if I need to,” Perrottet declared. He said the initiative was part of a new holistic government approach to acknowledging Indigenous Australians in NSW that would include the remediation of Sydney’s Goat Island and its return to Aboriginal ownership: Part of the change we are looking at today is empowering all ministers to have buy-in to that responsibility. There are many issues that go right across the board, across different departments. If we all work together and have a key focus, I want all our ministers to be minister for Aboriginal affairs in their own right. We can’t truly be proud of our country unless we are working together to achieve true reconciliation. That’s a combination of both symbolic reconciliation and practical reconciliation. The premier said it was important to engender a deeper understanding of Indigenous culture, something he said had been lacking and as such, was “a travesty”. Not to make light at all but this was quite funny: Good news for South Australia and the NT - the Stuart Highway will reopen to trucks and emergency service vehicles from 7am tomorrow, restoring the main road link between the state and territory. The SA government says four wheel drives and other high-clearance vehicles will be able to use the road from Tuesday of next week, initially for one vehicle at a time during daylight hours. It came after heavy rains that fell around SA’s north in the past fortnight saw more than a metre of water build up on the highway. Victoria’s deputy secretary of the Covid-19 response Kate Matson will provide a Covid update from the Royal Exhibition Building at 11am this morning. Tasmania has recorded 483 new Covid-19 cases overnight. There are ten people being treated in hospital, included two people requiring intensive care. There have been no new deaths. Updated bushfire advice for the Shire of Collie in Western Australia says smoke is impacting eastern parts of Collie and residents and travellers are advised to close doors and windows and take care when driving through the area. A bushfire “advice” warning remains in place for people bounded by Paull Street to the west, Palmer Road to the north, Airstrip Road and Barnes Road to the east, and Coalfields Road to the south in the eastern part of Collie and for people in parts of Collie Burn. There remains a bushfire emergency warning in place for the Shire of Denmark, and a watch and act warning in the Shire of Murray. These screenshots appear to show Josh Frydenberg on Weixin (WeChat) wishing everyone a Happy Chinese New Year following backlash over the PM’s “hijacked” account. The link takes you to a statement on Weixin which, when translated reads: Our Chinese community in Australia has played and will continue to play an important role in our country’s success. I am so grateful for you to keep looking forward, staying strong, and helping our country come together. That’s why we head into 2022 with confidence as one Chinese New Year. I hope you all can catch up and celebrate with friends and family during this special time, after a very difficult and chaotic two years. May your celebration be a joyous sign that our best days are yet to come, and may you all enjoy a happy and prosperous Chinese New Year! Speaking of Queensland, deputy premier Steven Miles and CHO Dr John Gerrard will hold a press conference at 10.45am local time. Returning to today’s Covid numbers, and it is worth mentioning hospitalisations in NSW have dropped by 157 today, while ICU numbers have also dropped by eight (though there have been 18 lives lost). In Victoria, hospitalisation numbers are relatively stable. But the seven-day case number average is down 16% in the state, and down 34% on last week in NSW. They could also hop over to Snapchat – which not only has a timer but a Snap Map and personal emoticons: So to summarise, Joyce has apologised unreservedly to Scott Morrison and conceded he should never have written the text calling the PM a hypocrite and a liar. Though he didn’t expect the texts to end up in the public domain, he said the fault was his. He went on to say the PM was the first person he called when he found out about the leak, and offered his resignation, which the PM rejected. Joyce said he trusts the PM now, who has honoured “every agreement” he’s had with him, but conceded this would be damaging for Morrison. It is also worth mentioning he suggested he didn’t actually want the person who forwarded the text to Brittany Higgins, to forward the text to Higgins. This comes as the recorded instruction in the text was “tell BH”. Joyce is asked if things will be awkward in parliament next week with the PM, and whether the text will damage the upcoming election campaign. Obviously you’d say that the optics of it is for others to decide. But no, the first call I made on becoming aware of this text becoming public was to the prime minister. I think that the election campaign will be based on a clear decision. It’s going to be the Nationals and the Liberals in a working relationship, or the Greens and Labor in a working relationship. And the Australian people will make that decision on whether they want the Greens and Labor running the country, or they want the Liberals and the Nationals running the country. And off he goes. Joyce says the PM has honoured “every agreement” he’s had with him, which is why he trusts him, despite calling him a liar as a backbencher. Asked if the text will be damaging to the prime minister, particularly on a week he has also been described as “horrible, horrible”, Joyce says well, of course: Obviously, you wouldn’t be apologising for it if you didn’t think that there was something wrong with it. But what you have to do is make amends for it. So you don’t apologise for things that you don’t think cause harm. Should people trust the PM? “Yes,” Joyce says, “they should”. You should always base something on fact. And I base that on the fact that in the most difficult of times, the pandemic, the geopolitical situation that Australia is in in our region of the world, in negotiations with the Coalition, he’s showed competency, and also he’s honoured every agreement. Every agreement that I’ve had with him. There’s not one word of it that he hasn’t stuck to. A reporter asks what the comments – that he was a “hypocrite” and a “liar” – were about specifically. Joyce says “whatever it is was, was wrong” because it was never from a conversation he had with the PM. I was never in a job that I had a conversation with the prime minister at that stage. So what you’re basing it on is based on what you read in the paper. And what you read in the paper, you know better than I do. Does he trust Scott Morrison now? “Yes,” Joyce says, “I do”. A reporter asks Joyce why he felt the PM was a hypocrite and a liar. Why did the text get sent to Brittany Higgins? Joyce says the message was based on assumptions, not fact, and he thinks he told the person who sent the message not to forward it on to Higgins. I didn’t send it to Brittany Higgins. I sent it to another person who forwarded it on. In fact, I think that I said to ... never to forward it on. Your views from the backbench are based on assumption and commentary, not on a one on one relationship. And basing something on commentary is a flawed process. Dealing with someone one on one in the hardest job in the nation is something entirely different. To actually be in a room with a person when you’re dealing with such things as Aukus, the pandemic, how we make our nation a stronger place, gives a vastly greater insight than your life totally at the back of the chamber. And so, it was based on assumptions – not fact. Joyce says the fact the PM did not accept his resignation is a “statement of a person of great character”. That is not one of a person of any form of vindictiveness or a sense of retribution. Really, the issue in regards, no doubt you’ll ask, ‘What is your views?’ and, ‘why did you say it?’ ... and therefore they are basing something on assumptions and commentary, not the proper process. The proper process of analysis is done by a court. And that process is now afoot, and so I shall not be offering any commentary on a legal process. Joyce goes on to say the Australian people have “no real interest” in some of the intrigues of Canberra, like the deputy prime minister calling the prime minister a liar, presumably. What they’re interested in is their future. What they’re terribly concerned about and interested in is such things as what China and Russia are agreeing to at the moment. Joyce: I want to apologise to the prime minister. Last year in March, I was approached by a number of people to help them. I did. And ... that assisted in a legal process that is now afoot. However, I should never have written the text that I did. I certainly never expected the text to be forwarded on. And I don’t blame anybody but myself, but I never expected it to end up in the public realm. But it would not have ended up in the public realm had I not written it, so the fault is mine. My view from the backbench about the prime minister is based on assumption and commentary, not from a one on one working relationship. And from a one on one working relationship, I found a man who has honoured every agreement that he’s made with me. And who I have noted has honoured every agreement that he’s made with others from both sides of the political fence. When it came to light a couple of days ago, I rang the prime minister immediately. I apologised. He accepted my apology. I offered my resignation and he did not accept my resignation. Barnaby Joyce is speaking now, issuing an apology to the prime minister. He says he should “never have written” the text that he did and never expected it to be forwarded on and end up in the public realm. But it would not end up in the public realm if I hadn’t written it, so the fault is mine. NSW premier Dominic Perrottet is speaking now from Sydney airport. He was just rudely interrupted by a flight announcement (“this was always going to happen”, he muttered), but he’s talking about business investment into Rex which is expanding the airline’s services across Sydney and regional NSW. We’ve always had strong financial foundations in this state. The strongest economy in the country. And importantly, as part of that, it’s working with the private sector to drive that investment so that will create more jobs for the people of our state and this commitment today from Rex is a sign of confidence in the New South Wales economy. It’s a sign of confidence that will drive opportunity and prosperity for the people of our state for decades to come. This investment today will also include an expansion for call centre, Rex’s call centre in Orange. Also a flight simulator, as well as other expansions right here at Sydney airport. Sydney is Australia’s tourism capital. And importantly, this investment will ensure greater tourism opportunities for regional New South Wales. With 59 lives lost in NSW and Victoria alone, it is worth reading, if you haven’t already, Tory Shepherd’s piece on Sue Rees, who survived cancer but died in hospital as Australia’s Omicron wave took off. As Australia’s death toll grows, we know very little about who has died. Daily press conferences reveal the rising number, often accompanied by the disclaimer that those who died had “underlying conditions”. Sue would have hated being a statistic, her daughter says: She always hated taking off her clothes, her pearls, her brightly coloured tops … if you dress the same as everyone else, they stop talking to you as an individual with a personality and start treating you like a two-dimensional cardboard cutout. She got caught up in a system where she was just treated like a number and no one could see who she was. When you’re in those hospital gowns you just become one of thousands. Faceless, soulless, you’re just a nobody. Victoria’s case numbers are also in. There have been 7,810 Covid-19 cases reported in the past 24 hours from rapid and PCR tests. Sadly, there have been 41 lives lost overnight. NSW case numbers are in, and there have been 8,389 new Covid-19 cases detected over night from PCR and rapid antigen tests. Sadly, 18 more lives have been lost overnight. We are expecting a press conference from deputy leader Barnaby Joyce at 9am. It is expected he will respond to the leaked texts calling the prime minister a ‘liar’. Labor senator Kristina Keneally has echoed opposition leader Anthony Albanese’s calls for aged care minister Richard Colbeck to resign. 566 people have died in aged care from Covid since 1 January. This government’s approach ... is summed up in one word: neglect. That’s not my word, that is the word chosen by the royal commission into aged care and that is what they titled their interim report. How is it that we are in the third year of this pandemic, and what did the government announce today? A taskforce to look at data in aged care. I’m sorry Kieran, I don’t see how having a bunch of bureaucrats sitting around poring over data in a windowless office is going to solve the problem of somebody’s grandmother who’s in aged care who’s wounds aren’t getting dressed. Richard Colbeck has presided over a diabolical circumstance in aged care. He should resign. A bushfire threatening rural properties south of Perth has flared back up to emergency level as firefighters also battle a blaze on Western Australia’s south coast, AAP reports. Authorities on Friday upgraded the blaze in Nambeelup, about 70km south of Perth in the Peel region. “You are in danger and need to act immediately to survive. There is a threat to lives and homes,” WA’s Department of Fire and Emergency Services said. “If the way is clear, leave now for a safer place.” The fire, which has burnt through 100 hectares since Wednesday, is moving fast in a northeasterly direction and is out of control. Aerial support has been sent to assist firefighters on the ground. Residents near the town of Denmark on WA’s south coast were earlier urged to flee an out-of-control bushfire that poses a threat to lives. An emergency warning remains in place for parts of Shadforth, west of Denmark, with affected residents advised to leave immediately if the path is clear or prepare to shelter in their home. DFES: Houses on Point Hillier Vista, McLeod Road and the east end of Limbourne Road are under threat from fire. Residents in the emergency warning area, leave in a southerly direction towards South Coast Highway, and then travel on the Highway east towards Denmark. William Bay National Park is closed and people are asked to leave the area. An evacuation centre has opened at Denmark Recreation Centre. The blaze is moving slowly but is described as uncontrolled and unpredictable. An emergency bushfire in Rockingham, south of Perth, was downgraded on Thursday to an “advice” level, with residents advised to monitor conditions. Train services on the Mandurah line between Rockingham and Cockburn Central were cancelled on Friday morning but have since resumed. Australian Primary Principals Association president Malcolm Elliott is speaking now on ABC Weekend Breakfast. He says teachers are facing an expanding workload and facing burnout two years into the pandemic, which may dissuade people from entering the workforce. It can’t help much, that’s for sure, because the job is – while richly rewarding – it is really very demanding in terms of its levels of energy and now we’ve got more of a focus on it so it is illuminating the nature of teaching even more closely. We’ve known the work has been intensifying in schools for a long time - decades, really – but now the Covid situation has brought it into sharper relief, so that the flexibility and adaptability that teachers and school leaders and departments of education and so on have had to show has been massive, recognised by lots of families, but it has been exhausting. Teachers are trained to work with children in classrooms and have now developed a lot of experience in other modes of teaching, particularly online, but it is very, very draining. Turning now to our nation’s traffic: Victorians might want to avoid the Western Ring Road if you’re out and about this morning. There’s been a major truck fire near Furlong Road, causing large delays. Liberal MP Bridget Archer crossed the floor last year to support an independent MP’s integrity commission bill. The principal of a Brisbane Christian school that withdrew student enrolment contracts including gender and sexuality clauses has stepped aside. The Citipointe in Carindale faced a possible review of its state funding and anti-discrimination action over the contracts sent to parents last week. The documents said “the college will only enrol the student on the basis of the gender that corresponds to their biological sex” and said homosexuality is “sinful” like bestiality, incest and pedophilia. Citipointe Christian College principal Brian Mulheran said in a statement on Friday night that he had decided to “stand aside and take extended leave in order to reflect on what has transpired and provide the College community time to heal”: Citipointe needs to be ready to welcome students on Monday with a positive outlook to start the new school year. He had on Thursday revoked the enrolment contracts, saying parents would not have to sign them. He apologised about the documents, and to gay and transgender students. Mulheran said on Thursday: We deeply regret that some students feel that they would be discriminated against because of their sexuality or gender identity, and I apologise to them and their families. As stated previously, the college does not and will not discriminate against any student because of their sexuality or gender identity. It is central to our faith that being gay or transgender in no way diminishes a person’s humanity or dignity in God’s eyes. Prime minister Scott Morrison and Queensland education minister Grace Grace had opposed the contracts. Meanwhile, a 6.4 magnitude earthquake has just hit the Indian Ocean. Good morning, We’ve reached the weekend, which means – I hope – no more weird photo opportunities in hair dressers for prime ministers. It’s Caitlin Cassidy, here to guide you through this morning’s news. The deputy prime minister, Barnaby Joyce, has apologised to Scott Morrison after the leaking of a text message in which he labelled the prime minister “a hypocrite and a liar”, sent before Joyce returned to the leadership of the National party Joyce said: “In the last 24 hours I have become aware that a screenshot of a text message has been circulating among third-parties that contains comments I made in March 2021 when I was a backbencher. “While the text message was supposed to be private, what I said in that message was wrong; and I have unreservedly apologised to the prime minister for my comments.” Morrison said that he “accepted his apology in good faith”. Firefighters in Western Australia are dealing with two emergency-level bushfires, forcing some residents in the state’s south to flee their homes. Authorities on Friday upgraded the blaze in Nambeelup, about 70km south of Perth in the Peel region. “You are in danger and need to act immediately to survive. There is a threat to lives and homes,” WA’s Department of Fire and Emergency Services said. Residents near the town of Denmark on WA’s south coast were earlier urged to flee an out-of-control bushfire that poses a threat to lives. An emergency warning remains in place for parts of Shadforth, west of Denmark, with affected residents advised to leave immediately if the path is clear or prepare to shelter in their home. Also on the agenda, once again, is Covid-19. Victoria recorded 36 Covid deaths yesterday, while New South Wales reported 31 Covid deaths. It came as the prime minister reiterated his backing of WA premier Mark McGowan’s decision to keep the borders shut to domestic travellers over concerns the Omicron strain would overwhelm the health system of the relatively Covid-free state. Morrison denied his support had anything to do with the popularity of the border closure in the west. And we’ll be keeping an eye on the nation’s capital today, where a protest is reportedly planned after anti-vaxxers yesterday camped outside the ACT National Library armed with megaphones and placards. There will no doubt be much to get through today, so let’s dive in.The government’s new levelling-up strategy should help Britain’s left-behind towns and cities emulate Renaissance Florence in cooking up the “secret sauce” of economic success, according to its co-author Andy Haldane. The hefty report, published on Wednesday, was mocked by some for its frequent historical references – including to 15th-century Florence under the Medici – but Haldane, a former Bank of England chief economist, is deadly serious. Only by looking back at where and when economic development has really worked, he says, can we decide how to reverse what he calls 70 years of government failure in tackling regional inequality. “The power of this is not that every part of the UK is going to look like Florence – I think that would be a stretch,” he said. But he added that the “raw ingredients” were the right ones. “It was the coming together of scientists and artists and business people, and financiers of course, as the Medicis themselves were. It was that crucible, of skills and of professions and of sectors, public, private, third, that generates a kind of spontaneous combustion.” As the permanent secretary to the Cabinet Office and former chair of the industrial strategy council, Haldane was a key driving force behind the 350-page document. It set out for the first time what Boris Johnson’s election pledge to “level up” the UK means in terms of policies and targets. Twelve wide-ranging new “missions” on narrowing regional gaps in everything from healthy life expectancy to crime rates will be put into legislation, giving the government a duty to pursue them. And a new wave of devolution will see every area in England given the option of a London-style metro mayor. Haldane said the agenda had been made all the more pressing by the cost-of-living crisis, which is hitting hardest in many of the areas the report is focused on helping. “Let’s not mince our words: the numbers are big and they are real,” he said. But he added that it “reinforces the importance” of taking action. While experts have praised its ambition, some have questioned whether the white paper’s many targets are too scattergun: the director of the Institute for Fiscal Studies, Paul Johnson, warned: “There is something for everyone, and hence little sense of prioritisation: ambition and resource will be spread very thin.” But Haldane insisted that economic regeneration only works when a range of different factors are tackled. “We know the secret sauce of success in places has these multiple ingredients. You can’t just not do transport, or not do high streets or not do jobs or not do broadband,” he said. “You’ll fail if you have one missing ingredient, in the same way as if you miss out the eggs or the sugar or the flour from the cake, it’ll fall flat.” Another major question mark over the report was whether the Treasury had set aside enough resources to match its ambition – and whether Rishi Sunak was really committed to the agenda. Haldane acknowledged that the current three-year spending review, which he admitted was “sealed”, would have to be just the start. “It’s a 2030 mission. So the government – whichever government – will have several bites at this cherry. Several spending reviews to get through.” He also argued that spending on many areas of public services, from health to transport to crime, could serve the purpose of helping to level up the UK, as long as they were distributed towards the areas of greatest need. “We’re talking about general wellbeing and pride in place; that doesn’t translate into a single budgetary pot.” All departments will now have to report the spatial allocation of their spending across the country, in the hope that this will help to drive change. “Shocker: some departments couldn’t even tell you where it’s going geographically.” Haldane also pointed to improvements that can be made without funding from taxpayers, through regulation, for example. The white paper included an announcement that the government’s Decent Homes Standard, setting minimum levels properties must reach, would now be applied to private rentals. “I was in Blackpool a few years ago now. And I remember touring around some of the private rental sector houses – they were absolutely horrific,” he says. Official figures show that 21% of private rental properties fail to meet the required standard. “It’s completely intolerable,” Haldane said. He added that “private landlords will have to pay” for the necessary improvements: “I would say that’s the right outcome”. With the launch coming in the middle of another chaotic week for Johnson’s teetering government, senior officials like Haldane could be excused for wondering if their big ideas would last more than a few weeks. But he insists the levelling-up agenda is here to stay – “the opposite of a bad budget” that unravels within days. “Looking back at UK history and international history, unless you commit to the long-term course, you’ve got absolutely no chance,” he said.In the decade following her bestselling 2003 debut, Brick Lane, which was shortlisted for the Booker prize then turned into a film, Monica Ali produced three more novels. First came Alentejo Blue, loosely linked vignettes set in a Portuguese village that bore almost no relation in style, conviction or tone to Brick Lane. In the Kitchen followed, a meandering tale of a London chef in crisis, and then Untold Story, an odd novel in which Princess Diana fakes her death and moves to small-town America. Critical responses to all three were mixed (the New York Times called Untold Story “preposterously gimmicky”). There was a 10-year gap. And now Ali is back with Love Marriage, a novel about the rocky engagement of Yasmin Ghorami, a 26-year-old trainee doctor whose parents are originally from Kolkata, and fellow medic Joe Sangster, the upper middle-class son of an outspoken feminist author. As the book opens, Yasmin is nervously anticipating an introductory family dinner at her future mother-in-law’s huge Primrose Hill home. Although Harriet always uses caterers, Yasmin’s mother, Anisah, an eccentrically dressed homemaker with “a talent for being herself”, has spent 10 hours cooking (“shukto, alu dom, dal pakori, kachori …”). Yasmin knows her parents will insist on driving from south London unfashionably early, clutching carrier bags stuffed with Tupperware. The elegant Harriet, who spends her life writing essays on liberal guilt while throwing lavish parties for the literati, will graciously “hide her amusement”. Harriet is, in fact, thrilled at the prospect of her new culturally diverse family ties. It’s debatable whether the Ghoramis feel quite as enthusiastic. Harriet is famous for a photograph taken in the 1990s in which she posed naked, glaring defiantly at the camera. Yasmin’s younger brother Arif, an unemployed sociology graduate, is delighted to have found this image online. He has also spotted their mother reading one of Harriet’s books over the kitchen bin, before hurling it in. The stage, then, is set for comedic culture clashes, generational tensions, embarrassment, misunderstanding, conflict and, we trust, resolution. Publishers fought to buy Love Marriage and the BBC is turning it into a drama. It isn’t hard to see why. It is an exploration of multicultural British modernity, of love, sex, class, politics, faith and family. But how well does it work in literary terms? Yasmin, who plans to specialise in geriatric medicine, is mild and kind, an appeaser who has spent her life trying to meet the expectations of her father Shaokat, a south London GP who rose from orphaned poverty. “Baba” loves to spend his evenings puzzling over obscure medical cases with his daughter, who increasingly wonders if she ever really wanted to be a doctor at all. At the agonising introductory dinner both mothers, for very different reasons, hijack the wedding preparations; but then an unlikely companionship springs up between them. Fuelled by Harriet and her artsy friends, Anisah begins a feminist reawakening, abruptly – and this is a bit of a credibility stretch – moving into Harriet’s house. Yasmin’s growing bewilderment at her mother’s behaviour is tempered by a personal crisis: her perfect fiance Joe admits to a one-night stand. Yasmin responds with her own sexual rebellion, and soon nobody is behaving as they should: there is a lesbian affair, a shock pregnancy, two fist fights, a blood-stained bedroom, several racist incidents, and some deep family reckonings, including a particularly distressing revelation about how Yasmin’s parents really met. There are riches here. All the components of modern identity are laid out: race, class, gender, faith, sexuality. Ali explores generational and cultural tensions, as well as contemporary political issues such as Islamophobia, NHS underfunding and Brexit. There is a big cast and the chapters jump between several perspectives (we even, puzzlingly, get Joe’s psychotherapist), but perhaps because we enter so many heads, often fleetingly, complexities begin to flatten. Joe, for instance, never quite emerges from the psychological diagnosis that defines him. It is therefore hard to invest too deeply in the engagement, or in Yasmin’s feelings about it. Peripheral characters sometimes seem to exist to make a point. A performance artist called Flame, one of Harriet’s friends, is no more than a plot device to fuel Anisah’s journey, and Yasmin’s best friend Rania, a would-be “Muslimah Kim Kardashian” who despairs about faith-based dating sites, tends to pop up as a sounding board, or to demonstrate a big cultural point. A scene in which Rania suddenly decides to drink alcohol initially feels odd. Later, when video footage of her drunkenness sparks a social media furore about feminism and faith, it is hard to ignore the authorial puppeteer tweaking at the strings. One notable exception is Baba. Tormented by hang-ups, he is a fully realised and often moving character. He loves his children deeply but is so desperate for them to succeed, to prove to the world that he is worthy, solid and safe, that he risks alienating them entirely. He is also furious with his wife. The story goes that the two met in a library, a “love match”. Anisah’s well-to-do family grudgingly accepted him because he was bright – they even paid his medical school fees (he paid them back, he boasts, with interest). This journey from poverty explains why he is so harsh on his son. Arif feels hopeless, angry, unwanted and unconfident, but Baba sees only a lack of motivation. The tension between the two festers until, one day, it explodes. This is the kind of complex emotional authenticity that made Brick Lane such a hit. This novel is largely engaging, entertaining and relevant and there will be lots of love for it, possibly prizes. Ali is a good storyteller, sometimes enlightening, but there is the feeling of a smaller, tighter, more devastating novel lurking here. As it is, the emotional punches can get a little lost amid the padding and point-making. • Love Marriage is published by Virago (£18.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Campaigners in Cardiff are calling for the police and other authorities to do more to protect LGBTQ+ people after it emerged the sadistic homophobic murder of a consultant psychiatrist was only one of a spate of hate crimes recorded at the time. A vigil is to be held near Bute Park in the city on Sunday after a 17-year-old girl and two men were found guilty of murdering Dr Gary Jenkins by beating him and stamping on his head for 15 minutes in the early hours of a morning in July last year. There has been an outpouring of grief and concern from the LGBTQ+ community in Wales, with members saying they have experienced an increase in aggression over the past two years, and some pointing out that Jenkins’ murder was an example of a string of hate crimes that coincided with release from lockdown. During the attack and robbery in July, Jenkins, a bisexual man, was subject to homophobic abuse. Afterwards, Dionne Timms-Williams, who was 16 at the time, said: “I needed that.” It emerged after the three were found guilty of murder that one of the killers, Lee Strickland, 36, had targeted men in the park before. Iestyn Wyn, the campaigns, policy and research manager at Stonewall Cymru, said the case had provoked “intense horror”. “There’s a sense of fear within the LGBTQ+ community that there is an increase in prejudice and hate and negative attitudes,” he said. Wyn emphasised the problem was a global rather than a Cardiff issue. “Some people feel able at the moment to say what they want to whoever they want. For decades we’ve lived in a society where if you hold beliefs that are dangerous or harmful, you wouldn’t express that. It’s become clear that people feel they are able to express their hatred of people who are different. “We need a frank and open conversation about what can be done by those who have responsibility for our safety. There needs to be a UK-wide conversation.” Homophobic and transphobic hate crime recorded by police in the UK rose sharply after lockdown restrictions were eased. The highest number of violent sexual orientation hate crimes in a calendar month recorded by South Wales police between the start of 2019 and August 2021 was July 2021 (153), according to analysis from the PA news agency. A few weeks before Jenkins was attacked, student Yang Wu, 27, was left with facial injuries after a homophobic attack on a road close to the park. In September a man carried out a homophobic attack on two other men in the Splott area of the city and posters advertising an LGBTQ+ festival were pulled down. Matthew Williams, professor of criminology at Cardiff University, said there was emerging evidence that as the world emerged from lockdowns there were “flashpoints” of violence. Yan White, creator of the Queer Emporium in Cardiff, which brings together a string of LGBTQ+ businesses, said: “The police need to have a look at how they strategise in terms of protecting vulnerable people.” He said other forces had programmes to keep people who meet in places like Bute Park safe. “There’s no equivalent here.” Cardiff councillor Ashley Lister, who campaigns on LGBTQ+ issues, said: “We don’t want kneejerk reactions. We have to work with the community and the authorities about engaging to improve the inclusivity for the city, not to create barriers. It’s sickening in 2022 we’re organising a vigil for a man who was brutally murdered over his sexuality. It’s scary.” Adam Price, the leader of Plaid Cymru, said the murder had sent shock waves through the LGBTQ+ community but said it was “an all too familiar feeling”, adding: “Until the voices and experiences of LGBTQ+ people are heard and affirmed across society, there will continue to be hate crime. The work that needs to be done has to start in schools, it’s got to be in workplaces and it needs to be across all of society.” The Cardiff-based lesbian activist Lisa Power said the city had used to be known as one of the safest for LGBTQ+ people. “But it’s going backwards. We need better education in schools, we need to support people to challenge hate speech. Allowing people to talk trash to people about their gender, sexuality or ethnic origin can end in terrible crimes like this.” A Welsh government spokesperson said: “What we saw in July 2021 was a homophobic attack in the heart of our capital. It is a cruel reminder that while we have made great strides in the campaign for equality, we still have a very long way to go.” South Wales police said it was working to make Bute Park safe. A spokesperson said: “South Wales police has worked with the local authority and Bute Park management to survey Bute Park, assess what additional measures may be instigated in the park and as a result there have been agreed improvements in CCTV and lighting, park assess and patrols from the police and partners to prevent and detect crime.” It said it had launched a range of initiatives ranging from plain clothes officers patrolling the centre at night to protect vulnerable people and student safety campaigns. The spokesman added: “Hate crime has always been a priority for South Wales police. Every day officers work with the community and local representative groups to ensure that the rights of people from all backgrounds, races and cultures, regardless of their circumstances are upheld.”The knock on the door came just before midnight on New Year’s Eve. Chloé Gardiner and her boyfriend were at home, but not alone. After a hard year, they had invited two friends over to see in 2021 with them, breaking strict rules in force in her area as the UK entered its second wave of the pandemic. “There were three carloads of police in the end,” says Gardiner, a 23-year-old care assistant from the small town of Portstewart in Northern Ireland. “And there were only four of us.” It was hardly a wild party, she says – they were just hanging out, listening to music and posting the odd picture to social media – and she doesn’t know who reported them; they weren’t being loud, and they have no close neighbours. They were fined £200 each for breaching Covid regulations, deducted automatically in her case from her wages. Gardiner, who works two jobs, says money went from both pay packets, and she is still trying to recoup £100 she thinks was wrongly deducted in the confusion. Working in care, Gardiner had seen the consequences of Covid-19. Why did she take the risk? “At the beginning I adhered to all the rules, but the more things went on – it’s bad for your mental health, it’s tough trying to stay away from people you see in your everyday life anyway. And for something as simple as a hug … it was just nice to have people over for New Year.” Gardiner had never been in trouble with the police before, and initially felt bad about it. But when the health secretary, Matt Hancock, resigned the following summer after being caught kissing an aide, guilt turned to something more like indignation, followed by fury when stories of boozy lockdown parties in Downing Street began to surface. “It’s awful, what’s now coming out. It’s not just one or two. When their parties were going on, I was having to video-call families whose loved ones were on their deathbeds,” she says. “How can we live by the government’s rules if they can’t live with them themselves?” That question has reverberated through Westminster in recent weeks, as tales of a “bring-your-own-booze” party in the Downing Street garden and Friday night “wine-time” sessions dripped out. Individual liberties have been curtailed to a previously unimaginable degree during the pandemic – and sometimes huge sacrifices have been made. Mourners avoided hugging each other at funerals; mothers gave birth alone; and for months on end millions of Britons left their homes only for essential errands such as exercising and buying food. Most complied, with a YouGov poll in 2020 finding 68% of Britons claimed to have done everything asked of them. But one in four didn’t – numbers likely to have risen as the pandemic wore on. Now the realisation that those who set the rules may have repeatedly broken them is casting the last two years in a different light, prompting difficult questions about freedom, trust in government, and the power of the state. By last December, police in England and Wales had issued 118,963 fines for breaking Covid regulations – anything from meeting one friend when socialising was banned, through to staging illegal raves, with fines ranging from £100 for minor infractions to £10,000 for the most egregious, and sometimes more in cases of late payment. In Northern Ireland, police issued more than 8,000 fines over the year to March 2021, and Scottish police handed out more than 12,843 in the year to August 2021. Over half of all Covid fines were issued during the lockdown between January and March 2021, when schools, pubs, offices and restaurants shut once again, and the initial novelty of clapping for the NHS gave way for some to frustration, deepening financial hardship and plummeting mental health. As so few cases reached trial, it’s not always clear what drove the rule-breakers (fixed penalty notices, or FPNs, are processed like speeding fines, usually without a defendant going to court). A handful of sad cases have made headlines, from the Somerset care worker fined for eating a sandwich in her car, post-shift, at a beauty spot (deemed a non-essential journey) to a lonely 66-year-old pensioner from London who met friends at his allotment as he picked greens for supper. Not every case, however, elicits such sympathy. In London, 31 police officers responsible for enforcing Covid laws were fined for breaking them to get haircuts. Three students in Norwich were each fined £10,000 for throwing a house party for 100 people. And on the day the Queen buried her husband of 70 years, sitting alone in her funeral pew, a 27-year-old Londoner named Vianna McKenzie-Bramble marked her birthday with a marquee, a bouncy castle and around 60 guests gathering outside her flat. What she couldn’t have known was that hours earlier Downing Street staff had also hosted two illicit leaving bashes, reportedly merging into one drunken gathering. Although Boris Johnson wasn’t present, No 10 would later apologise to the Queen. Police called out to break up McKenzie-Bramble’s party in Victoria Park, London, found the grass littered with empty bottles and nitrous oxide canisters. Over at Downing Street, there was reportedly dancing in the basement and someone broke a swing used by Johnson’s toddler son. While she was fined £12,000, the Downing Street party remained a secret for eight months, despite the presence of a 24-hour police guard outside No 10. For many who suffered traumatic lockdowns and stuck to the rules, the thought of Downing Street aides swigging gin in the garden may be enraging. Yet some Britons caught partying during lockdown seem almost as infuriated by the idea of those in power getting away with what they were punished for doing. If the pandemic once divided Britons into rule-takers and rule-breakers, the partygate scandal may have briefly reunited them in anger. *** There is a stretch of boggy marshland, on the fringes of the London suburb of Edmonton, that could have been made for illegal parties. Bordering an area where fly-tippers dump old sofas, it’s close enough to a busy road to mask the sound from the DJ decks, but over three miles from nearby houses. When police were called to this wasteland on 30 May last year, they found around 500 people who had been raving all night and into the morning, in defiance of Covid rules limiting outdoor gatherings to 30 people. Party organiser Jayden Elworthy, a DJ, actor and aspiring model from London, claimed to be “saving lives on the dancefloor” and said of Covid that “we are past that now”, according to the officers’ testimony to court. In his absence, Westminster magistrates fined him the maximum allowable under coronavirus law – £10,000, rising to £12,000 for failing to pay a fixed penalty notice promptly. Over the phone from Barcelona, where he is currently working, Elworthy is initially defiant. When he organised the rave, he says, Ascot racecourse was preparing to welcome thousands of racegoers, and football crowds would soon be gathering to watch the Euros. “No one cared. Everyone was mixing,” he says. “I’m not going to have people govern me when firstly they don’t even abide by their own governance, and secondly that governance is flawed.” Elworthy, who has had Covid twice, agrees there was a “limited necessity” for restrictions to stop it spreading, but is suspicious of the science. He spends some time expounding on a complex conspiracy theory popular online, involving US public health officials supposedly paying a Chinese lab to make the virus, alongside various plots he believes were covered up by the mainstream media. His private rule of thumb, he says, was that partying was acceptable if the R rate of the virus was under one. But the bravado crumbles when it comes to the fine. He can’t pay, he says, and seems paralysed thinking about it. “I don’t know what to do. I haven’t even appealed it. I just prioritise everything else in my life instead.” The clubbing and events sector in which Elworthy earns a living was the first to be shut down and the last to be reopened in successive lockdowns. He runs a tech company on the side, but still had to claim universal credit at times, and has friends who lost everything; others, he says, were key workers risking infection every time they went to work, who felt they had little left to lose by mingling socially, too. “For some it was easy – you could stay at home and avoid it. But some were forced out into the wilderness of Covid, so then what’s the point of staying in when your mental health is at risk? There were a couple of DJs who killed themselves because overnight they had nothing – no career, no life.” The parties, he insists, were about “saving people from loneliness, depression, drug abuse. I had friends calling me, crying, saying, ‘I don’t know what to do, I feel like a fish in a fishbowl; I go to work, I come back, I’ve already had Covid and I’m sat in my room going crazy.’ It’s breaking the law to even say, ‘Come over.’” After his court case was reported in the press, Elworthy got some abuse online. But he thinks the mood changed when the tales from No 10 tumbled out. “No one blames me now,” he says. “Everyone’s like, ‘So why were we staying at home, then?’” *** Jack started his biology degree in autumn 2020, just as the second Covid wave was gathering force. He had no face-to-face teaching for his first year at University College London and was largely confined to halls, sharing a flat with five strangers he didn’t get on with. After the country locked down again on 5 January 2021, he says, police patrolled the halls alongside university guards, making students stick to their rooms. At 19, Jack wasn’t afraid of catching the virus, but he did fear the financial consequences of breaking lockdown. “A friend had a party and he got fined £1,800; his mum ended up taking a loan out to pay for it. It doesn’t seem right, the pressure that was put on us – sit in your room and be really depressed, or leave the room and financially cripple yourself. You don’t want to harm anyone by giving them Covid, but you don’t want to end up wasting your life away in a room, either.” So one February night, Jack sneaked upstairs to see friends. There were seven of them in a room, he says, keeping quiet so as not to attract attention. But they were caught by security guards and each fined £100. “What we were doing was obviously wrong, but I could justify it to myself in the sense that we weren’t seeing anyone who was vulnerable – it was all in the same building, and I was with people I’d been seeing every day just before lockdown,” he says. “Even though breaking the rules is obviously not a good thing, it’s interesting that the students who didn’t break the rules noticeably struggled to fit in. A lot of them are currently living alone or have mental health issues.” Will, now in his second year at university in Cardiff, also succumbed to temptation after a frustrating year of cancelled A-levels and staying in. “I had spent my whole life at school and then three months before my final exams it was like, ‘Nope, see you later.’ We never had a prom or a leavers’ ball. Then we got here and it was: ‘Stay put, don’t go to lectures,’” he recalls. Learning moved online, and all five of his student housemates dropped out of university; rattling round the house on his own, he threw one illicit lockdown party without getting caught, emboldening him to try again last March. This time, with around 100 guests and music blaring out, the party was broken up by campus security. His friends vanished quickly, leaving, as Will puts it, “just me, in my now really dirty house”. Given the size of the party and the fact that it was his house, Will was warned he could be fined up to £6,000. What possessed him? “Being students, you feel a little bit – not invulnerable, but we were surrounded by each other. We weren’t going into lectures, we weren’t going to give it to our elderly professors,” he says. After a meeting convened between police and his university to settle several outstanding student cases, Will escaped with a £30 fine and a warning. He says of the Downing Street party allegations: “It’s so bizarre, I don’t even really know how to process it. I only got fined £30, and my mum was nice enough to pay it, but there will have been people who got a £6,000 fine who are students, who are in debt, yet the people at the top of the country are doing this.” Harry, a 22-year-old final-year student in Newcastle who was also fined after being caught socialising at another student house, feels differently. Some of his friends racked up fines of up to £800, yet they felt it was worth the risk when nightclubs were closed: “The first time you got caught it was £100, and we were probably saving that on entrance fees and drinks.” Harry voted Conservative at the last election, and takes an equally relaxed view of Johnson’s conduct. “You’ve got a few young spads and it’s their social life – I kind of think of these people as the weird kids at school [about whom] you thought, ‘I hope they never go into politics’ and they probably don’t have much of a life outside work. Boris Johnson wasn’t elected to be a cookie-cutter Hugh Grant-type prime minister, was he?” Larissa Kennedy, president of the National Union of Students, argues that only a “very small minority” of students broke the rules, and often only because they were struggling emotionally. “I’ve spoken to people who had months of not seeing anyone, who were only going out once a day for their exercise and not talking to a living soul. Some of them had moved countries to come to the UK and study, only to be locked into a room.” But Jack, Will and Harry are typical lockdown-breakers in one sense, which is that they’re all young men. A study led by researchers at the University of Sheffield, part of a larger exercise examining everything from young people’s compliance with advice to wash their hands to their mental health during the pandemic, found that over half of men aged 19 to 24 admitted breaking Covid guidelines during the first lockdown in spring 2020. One in five men aged 19 to 21 reported being arrested, fined, warned or escorted home by police, compared with only one in 10 women that age. One explanation is that men were more likely to guess that their own friends wouldn’t comply with lockdown, encouraging them to rebel without fear of being judged for it. Dr Jilly Gibson-Miller, lecturer in psychology at Sheffield, explains over Zoom that young people’s willingness to take risks depends on how they perceive others who do it. “If they identify with that person, they’re more willing to take that risk. It boils down to social comparison,” she says. “They might see a person who followed the rules as more sensible or more grown up, but that’s not necessarily a cool thing.” Where older age groups saw rule-breakers as selfish or immature, the study found young men tended to see them as “cool” or “independent”. They also tended to underplay the dangers of Covid, says the study’s co-author, Dr Liat Levita. “I think they didn’t see the point of complying. When we asked questions such as, ‘How much risk are you to others?’, the males tended to underestimate it.” The study did, however, find links between compliance and mental health, with those feeling anxious more likely to obey the rules and those feeling depressed more likely to break them and seek out company. “Anxiety has a survival value,” says Levita, who argues that while many young people described feeling anxious during the pandemic, that may have been a healthy reaction, so long as that anxiety was not crippling. “But depression is interesting, in terms of how low mood affects your behaviour. You’re less likely to engage with anything, you have very low motivations – with that kind of diagnosis, we did find people struggled more in adhering to the guidelines.” Nonetheless, Levita and Gibson-Miller argue that young people shouldn’t be seen as having behaved recklessly and that, if anything, it’s surprising so many complied with unprecedented curbs on their freedom. “They didn’t wash their hands so well. Sometimes, they broke the rules. But they did almost everything we asked of them, without going out into the streets and creating anarchy and throwing bottles around and rioting,” Levita says. And while those aged between 18 and 29 received over half of fines issued up to March 2021, plenty of other recipients were arguably old enough to know better. *** Harriet is a 54-year-old teacher from Hampshire, who followed the rules religiously through the first lockdown. But by December 2020, she was growing restless. A keen wild swimmer, she drove to the shingle beach at Hill Head near Portsmouth with two female friends for a bracing dip between Christmas and New Year, even though the restrictions in force allowed for meeting only one person outside her household to exercise. Heading into the chilly water, they bumped into two more swimmers they knew. The women were towelling off afterwards when a policeman, who she suspects was tipped off by another beachgoer, approached. “I was so embarrassed I just pulled my towel over my head,” she admits. “He said, ‘Are you part of the same household?’ and there was this silence that lasted a bit too long – do you tell the truth or lie? But being the good citizens we are, we told the truth.” The women apologised profusely and were relieved when, instead of fining them, the officer merely warned them not to do it again. As a teacher, Harriet arguably risked jeopardising her professional reputation by breaking the law. What possessed her? “We were doing something that, in our view, we had risk-assessed, that was in a bit of a grey area – you were allowed to meet one other person outside; we were just a bit on the edge of that,” she says. “We had the windows open and we were fully masked in the car.” It felt odd, she adds, that she was allowed to work all day with hundreds of potentially infectious children, yet she was barred from meeting friends. The rollout of the longed-for Covid vaccine that winter may have encouraged a surprising number of older Britons to drop their guard. The Office for National Statistics found that almost half of over-80s met someone from outside their household or bubble indoors after their first jab, and given the timing of vaccinations, many must have breached the January to March lockdown to do so. After months in hiding, seeing their grandchildren only over FaceTime, perhaps loneliness got the better of some. From the beginning, police have had some discretion to exercise compassion in such circumstances, via a strategy allowing them to explain and warn lockdown-breakers rather than leap to penalty notices. But even compassion can have its downsides, if exercised disproportionately in favour of some groups over others. Research published last year by the human rights pressure group Liberty found people of colour were 54% more likely to be fined for breaching Covid laws than white people, reflecting concerns that “existing patterns about the policing of certain communities would be replicated and exacerbated” by an enforcement-led approach to lockdown, as its policy and campaigns officer Jun Pang puts it. Alternative measures such as improving sick pay and halting evictions could, she argues, have been used to help low earners comply. Whether or not they were more likely to break the rules, the poor were arguably disproportionately likely to get caught. Hiding a party is easier in a remote country house – or a bomb-proofed building sealed off from the public road, like No 10 – than an inner-city flat with paper-thin walls. Flat-dwellers with no outside space, meeting in parks for illicit beers, were more visible to police patrols than homeowners smuggling guests into suburban gardens. Alba Kapoor, senior policy officer at the Runnymede Trust, meanwhile points out that ethnic minority Britons were disproportionately more likely to be living in overcrowded and pressured conditions when lockdown hit. “For us, the key takeaway is that the extension of police powers in this way will always have a disproportionate impact on BAME groups and on black men in particular,” she says. And, she points out, all this unfolded just as an emerging Black Lives Matter movement was providing a new focus for old frustrations with the criminal justice system. In January 2021, Bianca Ali was getting ready for a protest marking the death in police custody of a black man, Mohamud Hassan, when two police vans pulled up outside her Cardiff flat. “I live alone and I’m 5ft 2in – I’m not a threat,” says Ali, 30, a co-founder of Black Lives Matter Cardiff Community. “They were banging on my front door saying that they knew I was in there – I didn’t open the door, I didn’t know what could happen to me. It was a really intimidating situation.” Ali was warned to expect a fine for organising a protest gathering in lockdown, although she insists she wasn’t the organiser. It didn’t stop her joining the socially distanced protest outside Cardiff Bay police station, which lasted four days. “I was there for something bigger than me. If they want to give me a fine, it’s not going to stop me protesting about the death of a black person,” she says now. Ali was handed a £500 fine, but refused to pay, triggering a stressful eight-month legal battle that ended last autumn with police dropping the prosecution. Nonetheless, she was shaken by the process. “I suffer from anxiety, and my anxiety went through the roof,” she says. “Even now, if I walk from my house to my mum’s house, I have to pass the police station, and my stomach turns over. It’s a horrible feeling, especially on evenings like this when it’s dark. Who’s going to believe me, a young black woman from a rough area of Cardiff, against the police?” Ali was represented by Patrick Ormerod, a solicitor with the London firm Bindmans, who argued that she was exercising her human rights in protesting, and thus had a reasonable excuse for breaching lockdown. Having also handled cases of students threatened with £10,000 fines for throwing parties in which the legislation turned out to have been misapplied, Ormerod argues a straightforward mechanism for appealing Covid fines is urgently needed. “I hope the Covid public inquiry will look at what could have been done differently with the criminal justice response to the pandemic. Jacob Rees-Mogg [the leader of the Commons] has suggested we should look at whether the restrictions were proportionate, but I think the inquiry should also look at how so many people were criminalised when they probably weren’t guilty of the offences,” he says, pointing out that for those who can’t afford lawyers, the prospect of challenging fines in court is daunting. That was true for Ali Lawrence, a musician and music teacher from York who for decades has supplemented his living by busking. During the first summer of the pandemic, when the rules relaxed and restaurants were buzzing with “eat out to help out”, he managed to get out and play. But by March 2021, having earned almost nothing in three months and exhausted a government support grant, he was poring over the regulations trying to establish whether busking was allowed. “During the 18 months of restrictions, nearly every musician was out of work. It was a tough time,” he says. “There wasn’t really any clear explanation in the rules – the only thing it said was that if you couldn’t work from home, you could travel to your place of work. And cases like mine are a business.” When he settled down at his piano in a busy York square, he took a copy of the regulations and a photocopy of his tax return to show music was his job, but was nonetheless told to stop by a police officer because he was “drawing an audience”. (He admits it may not have helped that when the officers approached his busking partner, Karl Mullen, the latter started playing the Laurel and Hardy theme tune on the piano.) Footage uploaded to YouTube from a bystander’s mobile phone shows a masked Lawrence at his piano and curious shoppers skirting round him, while a passerby observes that “there’s more people in Morrisons than there are here”. North Yorkshire police handed him a £200 fine. Lawrence didn’t want to pay up for what he thought didn’t constitute an illegal gathering, but feared getting a criminal record if he went to court and lost. “So I caved in. But I felt awful, because I thought, ‘Well, I haven’t done anything wrong – I’m just trying to work.’” (North Yorkshire police subsequently said in a statement that his fine was for “contravening an officer’s instructions” to stop.) While Lawrence views Johnson’s so-called “work events” in Downing Street as “just what you expect” of politicians, his experiences have changed the way he feels about the police. He remains anxious about getting into trouble, and recently when he was asked to move on while busking in a nearby market town, he gave in for fear of another fine. He is closely following the progress through parliament of the police, crime, sentencing and courts bill, which contains controversial new restrictions on protest. “I’m worried that we’re losing all our freedoms. It’s in the back of my mind that we had almost a bit of a police state last year.” Over the last two years the police have been visible in everyday lives as never before: patrolling parks, interrogating dog walkers at beauty spots, breaking up backyard barbecues. And for some who haven’t previously experienced the sharp end of the law, that may have been a wakeup call. The NUS’s Larissa Kennedy thinks the pandemic may have shaped young people’s feelings about the police, citing a resurgence of “cops off campus” campaigns fuelled by resentment at the heavy security presence during lockdown – including instances of black students being stopped and challenged when trying to get into their own halls. Liberty’s Jun Pang, meanwhile, wonders whether living under this level of surveillance may prompt some Britons who hadn’t previously been in trouble with the police to empathise more with minority communities. “It’s really interesting, hearing people talk about their first interactions with the police. People might describe it as quite arbitrary or say they don’t understand what’s going on. Well, something we have been trying to say from the beginning is that lots of communities experience arbitrary policing because of things like racism and discrimination; lots of people have interactions with the police that don’t seem to make any sense. I think this is a really interesting moment.” If all goes to plan, and the government lifts all pandemic restrictions in March, the era of Covid fines will be over. But long after memories of being banned from sitting on a park bench have faded, some will still be quietly paying off those fines. And for those like Jack, who broke the law when they were young and lonely, the corrosive feeling that it’s one rule for the governed and another for the government lingers. “They were doing it because they think they’re above the law, and they are above the law, really,” he says of parties at No 10. “The police weren’t patrolling Downing Street, they weren’t checking if those people were in groups of six. They didn’t do that for the MPs – they did it for students. But if anything, maybe it should have been the other way round.”Last year was a breakthrough time for UFOs, as a landmark government report prompted the possibility of extraterrestrial visitors to finally be taken seriously by everyone from senators, to a former president, to the Pentagon. But 2022 could be even more profound, experts say, as the clamor for UFO disclosure and discovery continues to grow, and as new scientific projects bring us closer than ever to – potentially – discovering non-Earth life. In June, the Pentagon released a highly anticipated report on unexplained aerial phenomena (UAP), the now preferred nomenclature by some in the extraterrestrial community, which found more than 140 instances of UAPs that could not be explained. The report came after leaked military footage documented seemingly otherworldly happenings in the sky, and after testimony from navy pilots helped to somewhat destigmatize a subject that has long been defined by conspiracy theories and dubious sightings. All in all, the newly sincere approach to UFOs has longtime sky-watchers excited. “I’m confident that 2022 is going to be a seismic year for UFOs,” said Nick Pope, who spent the early 1990s investigating UFOs for the British ministry of defence. In Congress, where a bipartisan group of senators has been pushing for years for the government to release more information on UFOs, and from the US defense department and intelligence community, Pope said he senses “a genuine desire to grip the issue”. “I think we’ll see congressional hearings on UFOs,” Pope said. “I also think we’ll see the release of more US military photos and videos of UFOs, and associated documents. Some of this may come via whistleblowers, but much of it may be released by the government itself, either proactively, or in response to requests under the Freedom of Information Act. “Finally, I think we’ll see more high-calibre witnesses coming forward, including commercial airline pilots, military aircrew, radar operators, and intelligence officers with direct knowledge of this subject.” It was a group of pilots who brought the issue to the fore in 2021. In a breakthrough interview with 60 Minutes, members of the US Navy lined up to recall their experiences of encountering UFOs on America’s coasts. It happened so frequently that the encounters became commonplace, Ryan Graves, a retired navy pilot, told the CBS show. “Every day,” Graves said. “Every day for at least a couple years.” For years, pilots had refused to share tales of their UFO experiences, worried of being labeled kooks or being passed over for promotion. The account of the navy pilots was given credibility, however, by leaked military footage which showed an oval flying object near a US navy ship off San Diego, and separate videos which showed triangular-shaped objects buzzing around in the sky. The US government’s UFO report, released in June 2021, fueled more interest. The Pentagon studied 144 incidents reported by military pilots between 2004 and 2021 in preparing the report. Officials were able to explain one of the incidents – it was a balloon – but the rest remain a mystery. Since then the Pentagon, pushed by US senators Kirsten Gillibrand and Marco Rubio, has launched a new office for reporting and analyzing UFO reports, although some in the UFO community suspect the government to be less than forthcoming with its findings. Still, as the clamor for information has grown, so has interest from the scientific community, and in 2022 a slew of new projects will launch, specifically aimed at detecting alien life. Avi Loeb, the Frank B Baird Jr professor of science at Harvard University, is behind one of those. He is the head of the Galileo Project, which aims to establish a network of sophisticated telescopes which will scan the skies for extraterrestrial objects. The privately funded project, which involves more than 100 scientists, is building its first telescope system on the roof of the Harvard college observatory, and it will begin operating this summer. Loeb plans to make the projects’ findings publicly available. The telescope will use infra-red cameras to take 24/7 video of the sky, and is equipped with a radio sensor, an audio sensor and a magnetometer to detect non-visual objects. A computer will use artificial intelligence to analyze the data, ignoring objects like birds, drones, planes, and meteors, and paying extra attention to any objects “that are not human-made”, Loeb said. “We’re taking a road not taken so there may be low hanging fruit, that nobody else picked because it was not taken,” Loeb said. For all that UFO research may be becoming destigmatized, Loeb said the field is still looked down upon by some astrophysicists and other academics, which can turn off young scientists. “I really want the next generation to be free to discuss it, and for it to become part of the mainstream,” Loeb said. “My hope is that by getting a high resolution image of something unusual, or finding evidence for it, which is quite possible in the coming year or two, we will change it.” The Galileo Project also hopes to use data collected by Planet Labs, which uses a fleet of miniature satellites to image the entire Earth once a day. By both looking up and down, the likelihood of discovery is increased. Collaboration is important, Loeb said, as the search for UFOs to date has been quixotic at best. But those who claim the lack of evidence of extraterrestrials means that alien life does not exist are misguided, Loeb said. “It’s just like a fisherman on the beach, looking at the ocean, saying: ‘Where are all the fish? I don’t see anything?’” he said. “And obviously if you don’t use a fishing net you will not find anything.” Long-time space enthusiasts are also hopeful about the impact of the James Webb space telescope, the largest and most powerful of its kind, which Nasa launched in December 2021. When it begins operating this summer, the Webb telescope will enable astronomers to scan the skies, peering back to when the universe was first beginning to form, as well as help study exo-planets: worlds that circle other suns. These concerted efforts could make 2022 “a banner year”, Leonard David, author of Moon Rush: the New Space Race, and a journalist who has been reporting on the space industry for more than five decades, said. “It’s a great time to be alive. The bottom line is something’s coming. You can’t have that many people doing that much research and come up dry,” David said. “At some point we’re going to have a confluence of scientific data that supports the likelihood that we’re a pretty mundane place here on earth, and there’s a lot of alien civilizations that are out there. “We’ve got to start thinking we’re not alone. It’s: how crowded is it up there?” A frequent backdrop to any discussion of alien life is how it would affect humans here on earth. Some speculate that religions could be shaken to their core, or that there could be a mass existential crisis. David said that extraterrestrials, however, could be aware of us and be deliberately ignoring our planet, which would represent an equally devastating blow to the human sense of self-importance. “I don’t know exactly where the Earth fits in and why we would be on the receiving end of any attention,” he said. “We could be the dolts of the universe.”Thursday marked 1,000 days since Ronald Greene died on a roadside in northern Louisiana. And the 1,000th day, too, that Greene’s mother, Mona Hardin, has awaited answers from state and federal authorities. “It’s hard to sleep,” Hardin told the Guardian in an interview. “But it’s something I have to push myself through. It has destroyed my family, because of what we saw and what we know.” It was 10 May 2019 when Greene was arrested by Louisiana state police for an unspecified traffic violation. The story made public by police back then was that the 49-year-old Black man had led troopers on a high-speed pursuit, crashed his car, and then engaged in “a struggle” before dying. But gradually a clearer narrative emerged, laced with brutality and attempted cover-up. Greene, who was unarmed, had been stunned multiple times with tasers, punched in the face, placed in a chokehold and shackled, and had lain prone for almost 10 minutes before his death at the hands of six white troopers. Body-camera footage of the incident was suppressed for two years until the Associated Press published excerpts last year, showing Greene, his face bloodied, pleading with officers to desist. “I’m sorry!” Greene said. “I’m your brother! I’m scared!” A US justice department civil rights and wrongful death investigation remains pending after an internal review declined to bring charges, allegedly following pressure from senior members of the state police force. But this week, new revelations have sent shockwaves around Louisiana, forcing the state’s Democratic governor, John Bel Edwards, to publicly deny he had delayed or interfered with investigations into Greene’s death. The Associated Press reported Edwards received a text message from Louisiana state police superintendent Kevin Reeves just hours after Greene’s death, informing Edwards of a “violent, lengthy struggle” leading to the Black motorist’s death, at a time when public information on the incident was scant. Superintendent Reeves resigned in October 2020 amid mounting scrutiny of the department in the wake of Greene’s death. The message was sent as Edwards was fighting a re-election campaign in a deep red state, which saw the governor make little comment on Greene’s death until years later. The reporting also suggests that Edwards’s handling of the incident is now part of the federal civil rights investigation. During a heated press conference this week, the governor struck a defiant line after his office insisted the text alert had been standard operating procedure. “There are implications that I knew more, or that one or more of my staff members tried to cover up what happened. I will say that that is simply and categorically false,” he said, acknowledging for the first time in public that the killing was a racist act. “It is sad. It is regrettable that I am here under these circumstances talking about these things. But unfortunately, it is unavoidable.” The governor is facing increasingly bipartisan criticism, both from state Republicans who control Louisiana’s legislature, and members of the Democratic Black caucus who held a heated closed door meeting with Edwards earlier this week. Hardin, who lives in Florida, and lost her job shortly after her son’s death due to stress, remained unconvinced by the governor’s denial and has called for his resignation. “It’s a cowardly way for him to approach the murder of a man by his state troopers,” she said. “He said the text message was standard procedure, but there was no follow-up on his end after the murder of a man? They carelessly and lightly really insisted this was ‘standard procedure’. But no one ever made any effort to be honest with me.” Edwards won an incredibly tight 2019 re-election campaign on the shoulders of Black voters. According to election analysis, he won 99% support among the Black community, who turned out in high numbers to push him over the line. “It’s going to be very difficult for Black people to trust him again,” said Eugene Collins, president of the NAACP Baton Rouge chapter. “He’s going to have to really work hard to rebuild that trust. And at this point I don’t know if he can.” Collins reiterated the NAACP’s demand that Edwards meet with the Greene family to explain the message and his prior knowledge of the case. As of Wednesday, the Greene family had received no communication from the governor. Edwards, a centrist, is the only statewide Democrat elected to office in Louisiana, and has recently made pronounced comments about the legacy of racism in the state. Last month the governor signed a pardon for Homer Plessy, the civil rights pioneer whose act of civil disobedience in 1892 led to the infamous Plessy v Ferguson supreme court decision. “The stroke of my pen on this pardon, while momentous, it doesn’t erase generations of pain and discrimination,” Edwards said at the time. “It doesn’t eradicate all the wrongs wrought by the Plessy court, or fix all of our present challenges.” But the governor has also signed into law a controversial “blue lives matter” bill in 2016. The act expanded the state’s existing list of groups protected against hate crimes on grounds of race, religion, sexual orientation and other minority groups to include law enforcement officers and other first responders. It faced significant criticism from civil liberties groups and Black Lives Matter activists at the time. For some observers, Edwards’s “standard procedure” defense is perhaps in line with his character both as a no-frills straight-talker, but also as the son and brother of law enforcement officers. “Edwards is very careful. He’s a lawyer with a family background in law enforcement. He’s not given to wild pronouncements or getting ahead of a story,” said Dr Pearson Cross, associate professor of political science at the University of Louisiana at Lafayette. “I also think he would be inclined to accept the story, as it was originally told, until he had proof that it was different.” For Mona Hardin, the wait for answers continues. “We still have to hope and pray that everyone digs down real deep, to bring this to its proper course and for everyone who had their hand in this to be held accountable,” she said. “You just can’t keep overlooking the murder of a man. You can’t keep letting these killer cops get away with it,” she added. “It’s organized crime.” This article was amended on 5 February 2022. Eugene Collins is president of the NAACP Baton Rouge chapter, not Eugene Phillips.Minimalist fashion is huge, so it was only a matter of time before a crop of Scandi-stylised brands appeared, to capitalise on to its devotees. The new beauty minimalism is about a sheer wash of complexion-enhancing skin tint, a flush of good health to the cheeks, lightly fluffed brows (no hard, sharp algorithm-baiting arches here) and a semi-matte neutral lip colour that could feasibly be one’s own. Tasteful, chic and effortless in application, these cool-girl brands, such as Jones Road, 19/99, Westman Atelier and Rituel de Fille, are to beauty what labels like Totême, Raey, The Row and Acne Studios are to fashion. Model Rosie Huntington-Whiteley is famous for her minimalist aesthetic, so it stands to reason that her beauty line, Rose Inc, takes its lead from her wardrobe. But there’s a lot more to love than the pared-back packaging and limited colour palette. The Softlight Luminous Hydrating Concealer (£23) – surprisingly opaque, creamy and blendable – is expansive in shade range and very good overall (and owes a lot to Nars Radiant Creamy Concealer, in my view). Blush Divine Radiant Lip &amp; Cheek, £23, is a smudgy, effortless multitasking tint that sticks around all day and comes in a refillable palette. Authored is social media star Tanya Burr’s new brand of minimalist beauty essentials, and frankly, the determined haters would be wise to stand down. This, perhaps against expectations, is a solid lineup of intelligently formulated and useful products that do as promised. The brand describes itself as “carbon neutral” (it’s a hotly debated issue as to whether this term can apply to any consumer goods), and it certainly has a good stab at increased sustainability, with recyclable lids and aluminium tubes (including, very unusually, a fully aluminium mascara chamber and divisible wand). It’s not perfect – the Tinted Moisturiser, £28, gorgeous though it is on already-clear skin, is too runny to live in a tube without making a little mess. The lip balm is nice but brings little that’s new to the party (except looking great – and why not?), but the brow gel – perfectly glue-like for lasting, non-flaky lift of each hair – is glorious, and the mascara is among the best to launch in a very long time. Unlike most natural-skewed mascaras, it’s proper, sooty-black, gives noticeable volume and is outstanding in its smudge-free staying power. I’m waiting for a restock so that I can buy a spare.So you’re levelling up. As your government has spent the last 10 years levelling down, you’ll forgive me if I don’t cheer. To justify why the government has hit people so hard and for so long, I heard one of your predecessors Michael Gove on the Radio 4 Today programme this week repeating the theme song always played for this purpose: it was necessary to make cuts (translation: to make poor people poorer) because there was “no money left” when the government came to power. You’ll know, though, that billions somehow appeared from nowhere in the first phases of the pandemic. Perhaps you also spotted this week that there are great concerns now that some of that money was wasted. Could that be true? I mention this because the journalists looking at the levelling up plans for education are struggling to find what hard cash is going to be handed over to schools. There might be some “creative accounting” going on: announcing “new” funding that is actually old funding. Leaving that aside, there are two core problems with your so-called levelling up. The first arises when it is cast – as you have – as if inequality were solely a north-south problem. I’ve lived in London all my life. There are some parts of London where a high percentage of people are on the bottom level of incomes. Treating such people as privileged is absurd and insulting. But what kind of levelling up is possible when your government backs the arrangements by which the privileged remain privileged: inheritance of property, tax havens and private education? These create and freeze the “levels” in society. They are built into the system. If there are individuals who can hop up from one level to another, it follows from this set-up that for every person who hops up, someone has to hop down. Who’s volunteering for that? You’re also part of a government that has behaved in the past as if the public sector – of which schools are such a big part – is a beastly drag on society. Yet the public sector is what helps us stay alive long enough to benefit from the crumbs that drop from the rich man’s table. Did “trickle down” ever happen, or was that as empty a slogan as “levelling up”? So these are the contexts for levelling up coming to education. You may already have heard some cynical snorts and guffaws coming from the chalkface. Since 1988, successive governments have treated education as an electoral asset: they’ve come up with endless slogans and projects to supposedly solve what is supposedly a crisis. Each time, they have peddled the narrative of decline, which claims that things are worse now than they were before. Each time, the initiative is heralded as the solution to the decline. Thus, the national curriculum, Sats, Ofsted, city technology colleges, the literacy hour, the numeracy hour, league tables, academies, free schools, the knowledge-rich curriculum, Ofqual, systematic synthetic phonics, eBacc, Education Action Zone, behaviour tsar, Progress 8 … what have I missed out? Some are great but get abolished, some are rubbish but survive. The consistent point about them is that they were all imposed from on high. It seems as if the intellectual ceiling of those in government restricts people from imagining that education could be run in a vastly more participatory and consensual way. And here you are again, sitting in your offices in London cooking up stuff that you say will solve everything for some people out there. On this occasion, the people out there are in the north. You’ve even marshalled some nonsense about wanting everyone to do better at Sats. You’ve had years to get everyone to do better at Sats. You’ve had Ofsted, league tables, academies, free schools, hubs, Ofqual, systematic synthetic phonics to ensure that everyone does better at Sats. What’s gone wrong with your initiatives? You are peddling jiggery-pokery here. I think if you pop down the corridor from your office, nip into another office, you’ll be able to look carefully at how the Sats marking is done. You’ll find that it’s rigged anyway. The setters and markers of the tests decide how many succeed and how many fail before the students even sit down to write their papers. They can level up or down anytime they like. I hope I haven’t shocked you by telling you that. Yours, Michael RosenIn January last year, while working on the Turkish-Syrian border, photojournalist Mehmet Aslan photographed a Syrian man, Munzir al-Nazzal, who had lost a leg in a bomb attack. Munzir was playing with Mustafa, his 5-year-old son, who was born without limbs, and the shot portrayed the father, propped up on a crutch, raising his smiling child into the air. Aslan entitled his photograph Hardship of Life. It was an image that was shared across the world and last October it was named photo of the year at the Siena international photo awards, moving the festival’s organisers and the Catholic church to take action over the little family, who were at that point languishing in a refugee camp in Turkey. After lengthy negotiations between the Diocese of Siena, Caritas, a Catholic aid association, the organisers of the Siena photo awards and authorities in Turkey, Munzir and Mustafa arrived in Italy on 21 January. “I will never thank the Italian people and the church enough for what they have done for us,” says Munzir, 33. “In these 11 years, no other country had moved to help us. And we will never forget it!” Munzir lost his right leg in 2014 when a bomb was dropped as he walked through a bazaar in Idlib, Syria. In 2017, his wife, Zeynep, was pregnant with Mustafa when, on 4 April, she was badly affected by a deadly sarin gas attack on the rebel-held town of Khan Sheikhun, in north-west Syria, which killed 89 people. According to a UN report that year, Syrian government forces were behind the strike. The medication Zeynep was given affected the baby and Mustafa was born without arms or legs due to Tetra-amelia syndrome, a congenital disorder. “For 11 years, the president of Syria has waged war against his own people,” says Zeynep. “Because of the war, there are thousands of people there who have lost their legs and arms like my husband. And in my city, there were four pregnant women, victims of the sarin gas attack in Khan Sheikhun, whose children were born with the same malformation as Mustafa.” Mustafa needs special electronic prostheses, which were not available in Turkey. Italian paediatricians, specialists and surgeons have visited the family since they arrived and are working to design artificial limbs. All the doctors are working for nothing to try to give Mustafa the life and childhood the war took away from him. Even the contrade of Siena, the 17 city districts that famously compete in the biannual 90-second horse race around the Piazza del Campo, have offered their economic support to the family. The Italian authorities worked with the UN refugee agency, the Turkish authorities and Caritas, which is offering food and a home to the Syrian family in a small village near Siena. In the end, the Catholic church negotiated the passage of Mustafa and his family through Turkey, thanks to a humanitarian corridor, which allows for legal passage across countries, perhaps one of the most effective models for avoiding asylum seeker deaths and suffering, but unfortunately rarely used by European countries. “I hope that Mustafa’s story and his new life in Italy can serve as a harbinger to raise awareness around Europe that the humanitarian corridor is the only dignified way to allow these people to reach Europe,” says Siena’s Cardinal Augusto Paolo Lojudice, who, alongside the Siena photo award’s founder, Luca Venturi, followed the negotiations to bring the family to Italy. “The humanitarian corridors require a dialogue between two countries, and unfortunately, this does not always happen. Where there is no stable government, as in Libya, it becomes difficult to propose a humanitarian corridor.” In the past six years, Catholic associations and charities have brought to Italy more than 4,300 refugees from around the world. Munzir says he barely noticed when Aslan took the original picture on 6 January last year: “I was doing what I do every day, playing with Mustafa.” Munzir says his son loves being raised in the air because it gives him the feeling of flying, a sense of physical freedom for a child born without limbs. Munzir plays with him every day here in Italy, surrounded by the beautiful Tuscan hills, which have taken the place of the decaying, grey buildings of the Turkish-Syrian border. “The story of Mustafa and Munzir, who would not be here without that picture and the attention of the press, also serves to remind everyone, especially in these times, that war is nothing but the total destruction of every life,” says Lojudice. “To remind that war is the terrifying action that man wages against another man, and therefore against himself. But this story also shows that there is something higher in this world. As a man of [the] cloth, I call it God – you can call it humanity.” Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:If Peloton wants to know why the lockdown boom in home exercise was unsustainable, then Ian Rodriguez has a good answer: working out is more fun with other people. Rodriguez, a 52-year-old teacher from Preston, Lancashire, cancelled his gym membership when the pandemic hit but couldn’t wait to get back. As many others did, he spent money on gym equipment, including a rowing machine and some weights. But then he started missing the gym classes. “I kept fit at home throughout the lockdown, but as restrictions eased, the lack of social interaction started to get to me. I was getting to the stage where I missed going to classes at the gym. Exercising on your own, even with someone shouting at you on a screen during an online course, just isn’t the same,” he says. Rodriguez is now back at the gym “four or five times a week”. Millions of others around the world have responded to the call of the gym instructor, leaving Peloton, the home fitness company, facing further questions about what this means for demand for its exercise bikes, treadmills and online classes when it reports its latest quarterly results on Tuesday. The last few years have been a wild ride for the company. Peloton was one of the symbolic commercial successes of the global pandemic lockdown, along with the likes of Zoom, Netflix and Amazon. It floated in 2019 at $29 per share and its valuation approached $50bn in January 2021 as shares went over $160 at the height of lockdown restrictions. But Peloton’s fortunes have turned, and the valuation has sped downhill dramatically. Today, the company is worth as much as it was around flotation, at $8bn. Late on Friday, however, shares in Peloton surged more than 30% in after-hours trading after a report in the Wall Street Journal that Amazon is considering making a bid for the company. A takeover bid from one of the world’s biggest businesses would be in keeping with a high-profile brand that is used to making headlines. In May last year, Peloton recalled its two treadmills following the death of a child and dozens of other injuries, and in late 2019 it was lambasted for a “sexist and dystopian” Christmas advert, which featured a woman recording a video diary of her Peloton use after her partner gave her a bike. In December, its shares tumbled following the onscreen death of the Sex and the City character Mr Big while riding a Peloton in the series reboot, And Just Like That. A rushed-out parody ad campaign by Peloton featuring the Mr Big actor, Chris Noth, was subsequently dropped when Noth was accused of sexual assault. Noth denies the accusations. Now, the chief executive, John Foley, is facing pressure from at least one shareholder to resign. Blackwells Capital, an activist investor with a 5% stake in Peloton, says it has “grave concerns” about performance and is calling on its board to fire Foley and explore a sale. Anjali Lai, a senior analyst at the research company Forrester, says Peloton is wrangling over a question that has affected all companies selling goods and services to consumers: how permanent are the changes brought about by the pandemic? “Are the dramatic changes in consumer behaviour that we’ve observed over the last two years a pulling forward of consumer demand, or are they indicative of a long-term, persistent change in what consumers buy, and how? In Peloton’s case, supply and demand has been volatile, which indicates that the at-home fitness experience is an acceleration of consumer demand, not necessarily a persistent change.” Peloton makes and sells exercise bikes (starting at £1,550) and treadmills (starting at £2,545), as well as a monthly subscription fee to its online classes at £12.99 a month. It also makes clothing and accessories, although this is a much smaller part of the business, and recently launched a camera product. As a rough proxy of how many people use its equipment, the company has 2.5m connected fitness subscriptions, in which users pay £39 a month to access classes through their Peloton bike or treadmill. Peloton does not give a geographic breakdown of sales, but it currently ships equipment to the US – its biggest market – plus Canada, the UK and Germany. In its last set of quarterly results in November, it said sales this year will be up to $1bn lower than expected, at $4.4bn-$4.8bn, while the number of monthly workouts by each connected fitness subscriber had fallen to 16, versus 20 for the same period in 2020. It recorded a loss of $376m in the three months to September last year, against net income – a US measure of profit – of $69.3m the year before, as it cut the price of its bikes, ramped up ad spending and suffered problems with its supply chain. The company’s chief financial officer, Jill Woodworth, said: “It is clear that we underestimated the reopening impact on our company and the overall industry.” The New York-based company said last month that it is considering job and production cuts. A CNBC report, citing internal documents, suggested it was planning a temporary halt to bike and treadmill manufacturing. Responding to the claims in a message to his 3,200 staff, Foley started off strong, saying the report was “out of context” and the company was taking legal action against the leaker, before acknowledging that cost cuts were indeed on the way. “In the past, we’ve said layoffs would be the absolute last lever we would ever hope to pull. However, we now need to evaluate our organisation structure and size of our team, with the utmost care and compassion,” he said. In a message that drew heavily on the American corporate lexicon, Foley added that the company would be “resetting”. “We feel good about right-sizing our production, and, as we evolve to more seasonal demand curves, we are resetting our production levels for sustainable growth.” Dan Ives, the managing director of the US investment firm Wedbush Securities, says Peloton is a “revolutionary” product but management failed to foresee a shift in demand. “The clock has struck midnight for Peloton coming out of the WFH environment and there could be some darker days ahead as the company adjusts to a lower growth profile,” he says. Meanwhile, gym owners on both sides of the Atlantic are welcoming back the likes of Ian Rodriguez, albeit against a backdrop of a dire two years for gyms. Pre-pandemic, the UK had 7,239 gyms and 10.4m memberships, according to the Leisure Database Company, a market intelligence firm. It expects both numbers to have fallen last year. In the US, Peloton’s biggest market, about a quarter of health clubs have closed, according to the IHRSA, a fitness industry association, with the number of memberships also expected to drop from the 2019 total of 64m. Nonetheless, one UK gym industry veteran is optimistic about recovery. John Treharne, the founder and director of the Gym Group, which operates 190 low-cost venues around the UK, says that the entire UK market is now “pretty close” to pre-Covid levels and could be back to normal by Easter. And that, he adds, is partly due to people missing the “social aspect” of gathering for a collective workout. “The sort of individuals who might have contemplated using an online or Peloton-type product have clearly returned to the more traditional offering,” he says. Peloton, meanwhile, needs to change gear and adjust to a world where gyms are back in business.“I’m a brand new guy over here,” said “Little” Steven Van Zandt in the first episode of Lilyhammer, back in January 2012. He wasn’t that new: Van Zandt was basically reprising the New Jersey mobster persona he’d successfully deployed for nearly a decade in The Sopranos. After ratting out his associates, his new character, Frank “the Fixer” Tagliano, had to begin a new life – in Lillehammer, Norway. The sleepy, snowy town didn’t know what was about to hit it. The same could be said for us: Lilyhammer was Netflix’s first original series. Ten years on, our entertainment landscape is almost unrecognisable. Netflix has changed what we watch and the way we watch it. It has successfully reorganised traditional broadcast television and theatrical cinema models and put itself at the centre, growing from 24 million subscribers in 2012 to 214 million this year. It is available in more than 190 countries (Netflix UK launched the same month as Lilyhammer). It has created more than 1,500 original series, including planet-straddlingly massive shows such as Stranger Things and Bridgerton. In 2021 alone it released over 150 original movies – three per week. Its competitors have been playing catchup ever since. So how did it take over entertainment in just 10 years? Lilyhammer was not exactly a smash hit, even if an estimated 20% of Norway’s population watched it. But the show marked the streamer’s first tentative step into making its own content, in partnership with the Norwegian broadcaster NRK1. By this stage Netflix had seen the writing on the wall. It had successfully transitioned from a mail-order DVD service to delivering content directly to consumers over the internet. This had always been the plan: the clue was in the name. But its biggest hits were existing shows such as Family Guy, Grey’s Anatomy, Law &amp; Order, the US Office and Parks and Recreation. It was only a matter of time before the big media players noticed Netflix’s booming subscriber numbers and reclaimed their programmes for their own streaming platforms. So Netflix borrowed a trunkload of cash ($16bn over the past 10 years) and plotted its transition from distribution to production. Netflix has not only transformed our entertainment landscape but our social one, too – and not just in terms of “Netflix and chill”. In 2010, two years before Lilyhammer, the company acquired the now-feted Breaking Bad, which had just finished its third season on AMC. The crime series already had a cult following by that stage, but Netflix supercharged its popularity by putting the first three seasons up on its platform ahead of the fourth. Not only could new viewers quickly get up to speed, they could consume Breaking Bad the same way Walter White’s customers consumed his top-grade meth. To the under-35s, the idea of dutifully congregating round the living room television at the same time each week to catch your favourite show sounds laughably old-fashioned. We now expect the next episode to be available when we want it – which is often straight after the previous one has ended – and where we want it, be that the living room flat-screen, our laptop in bed or the phone on the commute to work. In 2013, the term “binge-watch” was a runner-up to “selfie” for the Oxford Dictionary’s word of the year. By that time Netflix itself had published the results of a survey that found that 61% of streaming viewers binge-watched regularly and 73% had positive feelings towards it. Never mind that binge-watching has been blamed for everything from political apathy to insomnia, attention deficiency to declining birthrates; as Ted Sarandos, Netflix’s chief content officer put it, “binge-watching is the new normal”. The year after Lilyhammer, Netflix released the show that really put it on the map as a producer: House of Cards, whose mix of big-name talent (David Fincher, Kevin Spacey, Robin Wright), buzzy political themes and cinema-standard production values were impossible to ignore. Netflix bid over the odds for the rights to the series – some $100m – and even took the unprecedented step of greenlighting a second season up front. It has continued to bring in the big names in the years since: Martin Scorsese, the Coen brothers, Noah Baumbach and Alfonso Cuarón (whose Roma won Netflix its first Oscars in 2019). It looks likely to figure again in this year’s race, with contenders such as Jane Campion’s The Power of the Dog and Maggie Gyllenhaal’s The Lost Daughter. The channel has courted big names from outside cinema, too, signing high-profile production deals with the likes of the Obamas and the Duke and Duchess of Sussex. In truth, though, these are the exceptions rather than the rule. The typical Netflix programme is not created by Oscar winners or royals. Indeed, by design, there is no “typical” Netflix programme. Where mainstream broadcasting has traditionally taken a “one size fits all” approach to programming – with that one size being determined by a small upper echelon of executives – mainly straight, white, American and male – Netflix has taken the exact opposite approach, casting the net far and wide in search of fresh talent and tailoring content to underserved audiences. This has been key to Netflix’s success, says Deborah Jaramillo, a professor of film and television at Boston University: “[Traditional TV] was putting the idea out there that there was one sort of universal experience that we could all attach to and identify with, when the reality was that we are many different people with many different backgrounds, needs and struggles. Those things were not being spoken to by the whole model of broadcast television.” Jaramillo hates the term “binge-watching”, she adds, with its connotations of guilt and sin. “I think it casts a negative light on active, exuberant television-viewing. Watching movie marathons or reading a book aren’t understood in the same way, even though you’re still engaged for long periods of time.” Netflix has attracted Black film-makers and showrunners such as Ava DuVernay (who has delivered documentary 13th and series When They See Us and Colin in Black and White), Spike Lee (She’s Gotta Have It) and Shonda Rhimes (Bridgerton). It has championed LGBTQ+-friendly programming such as Orange Is the New Black, Sex Education and RuPaul’s Drag Race. “One thing that Netflix does extremely well on the English-speaking side is content that others wouldn’t have done because there just wasn’t seemingly an audience for it,” says Julia Alexander, of Parrot Analytics. A great example for her is teen series and romcoms, shows such as Never Have I Ever, The Kissing Booth and To All the Boys I’ve Loved Before. “If you were a young girl or a woman between 14 and 34, there was no one really making television for you. And Netflix over the last 10 years really leaned into it and thought: ‘There’s an audience here. They’re hyper online and they will like it, it will become their identity.’” It has done the same in many other areas: Japanese anime, adult-oriented animation, true-crime documentary, standup comedy, fantasy and sci-fi. It has also established footholds in territories including Spain, France, India and South Korea. As a result, non-English-language series that would otherwise never have travelled outside their country of origin have begun to find global audiences, such as Spain’s Money Heist, France’s Lupin and, most recently, South Korea’s phenomenally popular Squid Game. Netflix matches this pluralistic approach with an unorthodox work culture, a senior Netflix UK producer explains: “Rather than a situation where you’ve got a massive hierarchy within a company, what you have is lots of people who have real agency and can make their own decisions, but they do it whilst keeping everybody else in the company super-informed.” Netflix also encourages extreme candour: employees are encouraged to give and receive honest feedback rather than sniping behind people’s backs. For British people especially, all of this takes a lot of getting used to, they say. The UK is Netflix’s third biggest production hub, after the US and Canada, and it has invested massively here. But it has also moved the dial of British TV in general. Unrestrained by traditional management structures, public scrutiny and limited broadcasting slots, Netflix has been free to go where public service broadcasters could not. At a parliamentary committee hearing in 2020, for example, the MP Kevin Brennan questioned whether the BBC could have made a series such as The Crown, given the outrage it would have generated from politicians and hostile media outlets. One independent producer suggested that as a result of Netflix’s edgier British fare, like The Crown and Sex Education, the BBC and Channel 4 had been emboldened to commission riskier material such as Normal People, It’s a Sin and I May Destroy You. Rather than a competitor, Netflix sees itself as part of the thriving ecosystem of British film and television production, it says. It cites the first season of The End of the F***ing World, which aired on Channel 4 in the UK, then on Netflix for the rest of the world. When the show returned for its second season, it had gained a global audience, which resulted in increased viewing numbers for Channel 4 – so a win-win. It doesn’t always work out like that, though. Last year, Michaela Coel revealed she had been in discussions to make I May Destroy You with Netflix, but it refused to grant her any portion of the rights to her show, not even 0.5%. It told her “it’s not how we do things here”, Coel said. She took the show to the BBC and HBO instead. Netflix has declined to comment on that specific case, but says it does different deals with different producers. A spokesperson also points out that “for many of our commissions Netflix finances 100% of the budget, and thus bears the full risk of whether the show is ultimately a commercial success or not, while producers and rights holders are guaranteed their payment.” Netflix has not always lived up to its diversity commitments, either. In October 2021 it released The Closer, the last of six standup specials by African American comedian Dave Chappelle. In the show, Chappelle made a number of comments that were widely condemned as transphobic, not least by Netflix’s own employees. Sarandos defended the show, emailing employees that Netflix’s leadership “do not believe that The Closer is intended to incite hatred or violence against anyone” and that “content on screen doesn’t directly translate to real-world harm”. Some Netflix workers staged a walkout in protest. The queer Australian comic Hannah Gadsby, who had filmed two standup specials for Netflix and was cited by Sarandos as a model of Netflix’s commitment to “marginalised communities”, responded on Instagram: “Fuck you and your amoral algorithm cult.” Sarandos swiftly backed down and apologised that he had “screwed up”, but the incident pointed to possible faultlines in Netflix’s model. Its desire to cater to all tastes had set two of its communities against each other. A common criticism of Netflix is the extent to which it has atomised our viewing habits. Like Scheherazade in One Thousand and One Nights, its model depends on presenting viewers with a never-ending succession of new content, tailored to their personal viewing habits so that they never cancel their subscription. This is where Netflix’s fabled algorithms really do come into play. Users’ behaviour data is cross-referenced with its 2,000 different “taste groups” to produce a unique homepage for each user, presenting categories and “because you watched” suggestions that might appeal. Combine this fine-grained approach with the “anytime, anywhere” availability of streaming content, and we’re heading for a landscape where we’re all in our own discrete entertainment realities, watching different things at different times. With all this fracturing, does there come a point when film and TV no longer function as “popular culture”? So far, Netflix has managed to square this circle, generating mainstream hits while diversifying our tastes. Look at The Queen’s Gambit, for example, whose success led to a boom in sales of chess sets. Or how Squid Game became the network’s most watched series ever. Can Netflix keep it up for another 10 years? Last month, for the first time, it announced worse-than-expected results that saw its share price drop an alarming 20%, wiping nearly $50bn off its value. Its rivals are finally catching up. Big media companies such as Disney, Universal and Warner have taken back their content and used it to build their own streaming platforms. Earlier this year, for example, some of Netflix’s popular titles, including Modern Family and How I Met Your Mother, migrated to Disney+, which could translate to a loss of 750,000 subscribers, according to analysts. Big tech players Apple and Amazon are also making inroads, fuelled by almost bottomless funds. Amazon Prime Video’s forthcoming Lord of the Rings series alone has a budget of nearly half a billion dollars. Even binge-watching is not what it used to be. Some of the most talked about rival shows of the past year, such as Disney’s The Mandalorian and WandaVision, and HBO’s Succession, have lodged in the public consciousness partly as a result of dropping their episodes once a week, old-school. For the time being, at least, Netflix is one step ahead, says Julia Alexander: “They’re still dominant by, like, aeons,” she says. Comparisons are often difficult to draw, but Netflix’s largest comparable rival, Disney+, has about 100 million fewer subscribers. “Yes, competition is affecting Netflix, but at the same time Netflix is hitting a saturation point in the US and Canada, they’re making up for that in regions its competitors still aren’t even in.” Netflix is still growing globally, especially in Asia and Latin America. And it now has production centres across the world: Spain, France, Germany, Brazil, South Korea and more. “They’re in these regions, they have access to the talent, they have the partnerships,” says Alexander. “And these are places where Disney and Warner and NBC and Viacom all are going to want to be in, but [those companies] are still building up their presence in the United States and Canada. So it feels like they’re playing two different games at this point: everyone is going to wind up wanting to be a global player, but one of the only real global players right now is Netflix.” We’ve come a long way from Lilyhammer. One key difference between Netflix and its rivals is that it is not part of any larger media or retail or hardware business. Netflix is just Netflix. It lives and dies by the popularity of its content. In theory, therefore, it has a deeper interest in giving us what we really want to watch. Although given the past 10 years, it seems to have a better idea of what that is than we do ourselves.Those who would see the Parthenon marbles return to Greece sense change in the air. As the politics of identity resurge, as the legacies of colonialism are scrutinised, Benin bronzes held in Aberdeen and Cambridge have been sent back to Nigeria, those in Glasgow are the subject of a formal request, and those in Germany are to return too. The Benin bronzes – looted by the British in a punitive raid on Benin City in 1897 – are a very different case from the sculptures that once adorned the great temple of Athens’ patron goddess on the city’s Acropolis, acquired (or so it is argued) legally by Lord Elgin in 1801. But still: Palermo’s Archaeological Museum has just sent its share of the Parthenon sculptures to the Acropolis Museum – on loan, but with talk of a permanent arrangement. The Palermo sculpture is a shoe-box-size fragment showing part of the goddess Artemis’s foot, rather than the 75m of frieze plus magnificent pediment held in the British Museum, but still, it’s a precedent of sorts. The Greek prime minister, Kyriakos Mitsotakis, made return of the Parthenon marbles a talking point on a recent visit to London. Even the Times has reversed its leader line to support repatriation. “Separating components of an artistic whole is like tearing Hamlet out of the First Folio of Shakespeare’s works,” says its editorial – though bringing the Bloomsbury sculptures to Athens would not complete anything at all, since half of the stonework is destroyed, and they will never be intact again. To many British people – among whom restitution, according to a recent YouGov poll, is popular – restoring the sculptures to Greece seems simple. The Greeks want them, they were made in and for Athens, they should go back. Indeed, their presence in Bloomsbury has always been bitterly controversial, right back from the parliamentary debate in 1816 in which it was pondered, among many other things, whether Lord Elgin had taken advantage of his position as ambassador to acquire the firman, or permit, from the Ottoman authorities to abstract “qualche pezzi di pietra” (“any bits of stone”) from Athens’ Acropolis (the document survives only in Italian translation). That’s before you start to consider whether Elgin went beyond the terms of the firman – and whether, even if you think he was acting lawfully, that’s the point, given how many terrible things through history have been done within the rule of law. The case for return has seemed all the more compelling since the 2009 opening of the Acropolis Museum, whose airy galleries, in sight of the temple itself, do such a wonderful job of telling the story of the Parthenon. By comparison, the British Museum’s Duveen Gallery can seem bleak and depressing. So why doesn’t philhellene Boris Johnson just give them back? After all, as a student he wrote passionately in favour of restitution. Well: what Johnson may or may not have thought once is, naturally, irrelevant (see also: Brexit and the BBC licence fee). Much more pertinently, he can’t: national museums in Britain are not an extension of government, they are at arm’s length and independent from it. In a rare outbreak of continence, Johnson has said that the Parthenon sculptures are a matter for the trustees of the British Museum. These trustees, who include Mary Beard, Grayson Perry and chair George Osborne, are the “owners” of the BM’s collection – in the sense that they hold it in trust for the public. The 1753 act of parliament that set up the museum defined “the public” as “all studious and curious Persons” – including “all learned Foreigners”. It’s not impossible, then, that the trustees might wake up one morning and decide that the Parthenon sculptures would render most benefit to the public if they were displayed in the Acropolis Museum. In fact, I think they would be unlikely, at least in the short term, to do so. One reason is that trustees of institutions such as the British Museum are, collectively, constitutionally unsuited to taking radical decisions, however independent-minded they may be individually. Another is ideological: the museum asserts the centrality to its collection of the sculptures and argues there is huge benefit in their being displayed near Assyrian and Egyptian art, an arrangement that highlights the interconnectivity between cultures, as would not be the case in Athens. A third reason is the law. The 1963 British Museum Act and its amendments state that the trustees cannot deaccession collection items except under very specific circumstances: if they are degraded or riddled with pests, if they are “duplicates”, or if they are deemed by the UK’s Spoliation Advisory Panel to have been looted or bought under duress during the Holocaust. And so the situation circles, perhaps conveniently. It’s not up to the government, it’s up to the trustees. And yet it’s not up to the trustees, because of the law. And it can’t lend to the Greeks, because the Greeks don’t recognise the British Museum’s ownership of the sculptures. Museums, on the whole, don’t lend things without certain conditions being met – most importantly, that they would be able to get them back. Hence the impasse, the convenient continuance of the status quo. The sculptures, though more ancient than either concept, are embroiled in the history of the nation state and of museums, and tangled in a knot of legal trusteeship and ownership. In the early years of this century, Neil MacGregor, the former director of the British Museum, made a strong case for the British Museum as a “universal” museum based on Enlightenment principles. It was a place of the world, for the world, he said. The collection could be mobile, lending its treasures to Britain and around the globe (in 2014, with some chutzpah, the museum even lent one of the Parthenon sculptures to St Petersburg). In Nairobi in 2006, attending the first exhibition in Africa to which the BM had lent objects, MacGregor told me – and I still recall his testiness, unusual given his normal charm – that “repatriation is yesterday’s question”. Not all Kenyans, it was clear to me, were so certain. A decade and a half on, MacGregor, I think, would concede that restitution is, in fact, today’s question. The universal museum is not a neutral concept. The British Museum is the product of a combination of curiosity, scholarship and rampaging imperial acquisitiveness. But if museums are sites that represent some of the most troubling legacies of empire, they can and should also be places where these issues can be worked out – or to use a more recent formulation of MacGregor’s, “sites of atonement and reconciliation”. They have a duty to act ethically. The sensible course is for the government to institute an expert panel to hammer out principles on which repatriation claims to national museums can be soberly assessed, as has now long been done for artefacts linked to the Holocaust. The Westminster government with its wilful nativism seems unlikely to be minded to do that. But repatriation is today’s question. And almost certainly tomorrow’s, too. Charlotte Higgins is the Guardian’s chief culture writerIn November 2019, the actor Emma Watson was excoriated in the media for describing herself as “self-partnered”. The criticism ignored that a new spirit of positivity about being single was in full flourish, with more women between the ages of 25 and 42 single in the UK and US than ever before. As Rachel Thompson pointed out in an article for Mashable, the label may be new but the movement is not – Marjorie Hillis wrote Live Alone and Like It: A Guide for the Extra Woman in 1936. But it was given a renewed focus with Rebecca Traister’s 2016 bestseller, All the Single Ladies: Unmarried Women and the Rise of an Independent Nation, in which the American writer described a veritable social revolution, and there has been a steady stream of books in that vein ever since. “The single positivity movement is here, and this book will turbo charge the revolution” reads the inside jacket of this new anthology edited by journalist Angelica Malin, which explores the nuances of singlehood through 30 short personal pieces. Malin has assembled an admirable and diverse roster of voices, including reality television personality Megan Barton-Hanson, comedian Shaparak Khorsandi and body-image campaigner Stephanie Yeboah. Several of the writers are already known for their writing on singlehood, including Francesca Specter, the author of last year’s Alonement: How to Be Alone and Absolutely Own It (also a podcast), Nicola Slawson, the creator of The Single Supplement newsletter and Annie Lord, who writes an excellent sex and dating column for British Vogue. “Should we fear being single – or does the world make us fear it, because a single woman is a force to be feared?” Malin asks in her introduction. It’s a good question and one answered more persuasively in some of the essays than others. The most powerful include Mia Levitin on her divorce (which she describes as “dismantling the dreamhouse”); the author Shon Faye on a year without hugs (“one criticism of government policy during the pandemic is that it entrenched traditional norms in which only couples get the comfort of touch and intimacy”); Khorsandi on how an ADHD diagnosis gave her the courage to abandon the “romantic chaos” of her dating years; and Specter on dating and technology. “You’d like to be a girl, standing in front of a boy, asking him to love her, but instead you’re a nervous wreck navigating sporadic WhatsApp messages, inconsistent affections and a last minute cancellation”. Why, she asks pertinently, have there been no new icons of singledom in the culture since Carrie Bradshaw and Bridget Jones, two decades ago? Carrie was dumped via Post-it note, but if it were now, she’d get the message via a double blue tick. The most fascinating essay is one by Ketaki Chowkhani, who designed and taught India’s first ever single studies course at postgraduate level. She writes about the tiny, spiritual community she grew up in, in south India, founded by Aurobindo Ghose and Mirra Alfassa in the 1940s, where marriage was actively discouraged. Individuals all have their own rooms, while everything else – eating, work, leisure, laundry – is done communally. “Scholars have pointed to the dearth of single role models for a growing child and here I was, able to draw on a rich legacy of single life.” How far we have come since 2004’s dating manual He’s Just Not That Into You. (Although someone should perhaps let the algorithm know: underneath Malin’s new book, Waterstones recommends How to Be a Good Wife, The Meaning of Marriage and Get the Guy.) “So now I write my own life,” Felicity Morse comments on losing her “rainbow coloured romantic future” when her ex went to prison for fraud. “And I make sure it’s roomy; that I can expand with it and it can expand with me.” • Unattached is published by Square Peg (£14.99). To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Marian Keyes is in bed. It’s two o’clock in the afternoon, but she has just got back from a funeral and was feeling chilly. “It was a beautiful send off,” she says in her southern Irish lilt, as reassurance that she’s OK to talk. She is wearing a lilac hoodie and flashes a pastel pink manicure (a Keyes heroine would know the shade) as she rearranges the pillows to get comfy. Within a few minutes it feels as if we are both having tea and biscuits under the duvet at her Dún Laoghaire home outside Dublin, as she gives me a virtual tour of her bedroom. So far, so Marian Keyes. Loved by readers for her chatty style and satisfying storylines, she was for many years dubbed the queen of chick lit, a phrase now as passé as Daniel Cleaver’s chat-up lines in Bridget Jones’s Diary. In fact, her novels have tackled hefty issues such as addiction (Rachel’s Holiday), bereavement (Anybody Out There), domestic violence (This Charming Man) and depression (The Mystery of Mercy Close), always with her trademark lightness of touch. Yet despite selling more than 35m copies over the years, she is too often dismissed as a popular writer of books with pink covers (both of which are fine by her, thanks for asking). This month her 15th novel, Again, Rachel, will be published. It’s a sequel to Rachel’s Holiday, the novel that helped to make her name back in 1997. The 25th-anniversary edition has gone straight into the bestseller charts: its fuchsia cover featuring flip-flops screaming hedonist 90s, in contrast to the new novel’s grown-up navy jacket with a cartoon of a yoga mat and puppy. (With the exception of Rachel’s Holiday, all the paperbacks now have pretty non-pink covers, thanks to a 20-year campaign by Keyes’s editor.) We meet Rachel again as a fortysomething back at the Cloisters clinic where she was treated for cocaine addiction in the first novel, and where she is now head counsellor; her only addiction is snazzy trainers. She has a dog, a boyfriend called Quin who knows all the smartest restaurants, and a loving family (Keyes fans will be happy to be reunited with the rambunctious Walsh tribe who feature in five of her novels). “This was my life now and it was a good one,” Rachel reflects. So the stage is set for the return of her ex, Luke Costello (he of the too-tight leather trousers), which will send a flutter through the hearts of readers of a certain age. “OK, I did it for myself as much as for anyone else,” Keyes admits. “It was lovely writing him again. He was very, very sexy in Rachel’s Holiday.” It isn’t giving anything away to say that Rachel’s life isn’t just internet shopping and gardening. “As a menopausal woman, I like banging the drum for the idea that we don’t all wither when we are 37,” Keyes says. “I write about women being sexual past the watershed of 40, when we are supposed to shut up shop.” Keyes had always resisted the idea of writing a sequel because it felt like “selling people short”, and thought she was finally done with the Walshes. But she found herself drawn back to Rachel. “I think it must have been that connection with her as an addict,” Keyes says. After a suicide attempt when the writer was 30, her parents checked her into a clinic in Ireland for alcoholism. “She’s an addict, I’m an addict.” Like Rachel, Keyes, who is now 58, has been sober ever since, but the new novel “recognises the vulnerability that an addict lives with every day. Every single day there is a possibility that your life could kind of slip off, slip out of being normal and fall through the cracks again,” she explains, before brightening. “I’m making it sound very grim and it’s not.” She loved writing the group therapy sessions in both novels. “Having gone through rehab myself, it was one of the happiest times of my life in a bizarre way. The bonds that you form with the people in your group, the other walking wounded … we were all trying to help each other. It was actually very beautiful. I wanted to bring that same camaraderie and humanity to the new book.” Keyes divides her life into before and after recovery. “Once I did go through rehab and admit the game was up, things were possible for me: healthy relationships, a career, honest, authentic friendships.” In what reads like the outline of a Keyes novel, four months before she gave up drinking she wrote a short story and sent it to a publisher on a whim; the year after she left rehab her first novel, Watermelon, was published, and she got married at 32. (Her husband Tony Baines – “He’s lovely!” – looks after everything that comes with being an internationally bestselling author.) One of the sadnesses of her “after” life is that they never had children, a grief that is movingly expressed in Again, Rachel. “As somebody who wanted children and who didn’t get them, you are stalked by the ghosts of the children you didn’t have. I don’t mean it to sound spooky; it’s the opposite of spooky, you think of all that joy and fun and pride and love.” She decided against IVF “because I was afraid that I wanted too much. I was about six or seven years into recovery, I suddenly had a career, I really loved Tony,” she explains. “That old Catholic thing. I felt I was being told ‘Stop! You’ve been given plenty, don’t ask for more.’” In her mid 40s, Keyes was overcome by a depression that lasted four years. Although she had been troubled by anxiety since she was a child – “I was always scared” – it was unlike anything she had experienced before. “I can’t eat, I can’t sleep, I can’t write, I can’t read, I can’t talk to people,” she posted on her blog in 2010. And yet she managed to complete The Mystery of Mercy Close, about Helen Walsh, the youngest of the sisters, whose suicide attempt mirrored Keyes’s own. Despite making severe depression terrifyingly real, the book never loses its comic edge and is now her favourite of her novels. Even after she had come through “the worst black bits”, for a while she would feel “a pang of envy” when she heard someone had died. “I’m really not proud of that,” she says. “It took a long time for that kind of re-embracing of life to happen, but it did happen.” Since emerging from those “war years” in 2015, she feels mostly “better than normal”. It has made her “far more capable of a kind of pure joy”, she says, “more able to love”. “Joy,” one of Rachel’s patients scoffs in the novel, “a middle-class thing if ever I heard one,” and Keyes has no truck with Pollyanna-ish platitudes, preferring her own twist on the old saying: “What doesn’t kill you makes you weaker.” She feels it’s important to acknowledge that “horrible things damage you. They don’t make you better, or wiser and stronger. Most of the time they hobble you a bit.” Keyes always writes a happy ending, “because you can’t depend on real life to do it for you”. After her father died of Alzheimer’s in 2018 she “mainlined” Mills &amp; Boon novels. And she doesn’t think upbeat conclusions are “entirely unrealistic”; it’s just a question of timing. “In every life we have ups and downs, times of awfulness and hopelessness and then things sort of come together for a while. I always like to finish at the good bits.” Again, Rachel is dedicated to her mother, with whom she has unexpectedly “fallen in love” after years of “what you could call a robust relationship”: her mother is a “devout Catholic”, Keyes “a devout non-Catholic”. The eldest of five, Keyes attributes her gift for telling a story, and making it funny, to growing up in a big noisy household, rather like the Walshes. “Being a good raconteur was a thing in my family,” she says. “I think there was a blueprint given to me very early on. You laugh at your misfortune. It’s an immensely Irish thing.” She describes herself as a comic writer, but her novels are not given the same attention as those by male comic novelists such as Nick Hornby or David Nicholls. “Anything a man does is automatically given more weight, that’s the long and the short of it,” she says wearily. She is a big admirer of Nicholls (and he of her: “She’s your best, funniest friend telling a story”), but as she points out, she is unlikely to be longlisted for the Booker prize, as his novel Us was in 2014. “Maybe if I was Martin Keyes my books would be regarded differently.” What frustrates her more than lack of critical acclaim is the “low-level misogyny” behind the snobbery. “There are so many women who are kind of ashamed of reading my books because they’ve been told to be,” she says. “On behalf of all female writers, women who write about life and relationships and family dynamics, I feel I have a duty to say: ‘We are just as good, you know. You needn’t be ashamed of reading us.’ We are not ‘guilty pleasures’ – we are simply pleasures.” Give her Nora Ephron (Heartburn was her go-to novel before writing Watermelon) over Philip Roth, whose descriptions of women she has always found off-putting. A few years ago she provoked a Twitter storm after claiming she only read female novelists. “For God’s sake, the amount of men who think it is OK to say they don’t read any women authors,” she says now. “I do actually read men now and again, if they are really good, if they really convince me that it is worth my while and that there’s something relevant to me,” she adds mischievously. Keyes is delighted at the success of fellow Irish novelist Sally Rooney. “The utter thrill that there were people queueing outside bookshops around the world for the third novel from a young, female, Marxist, feminist Irish writer. Who would have thought?” Above all, she is thrilled at the changes that made her ascendency possible: “A writer who came from this repressive fucking country where women were not allowed to have opinions, where sticking your head above the parapet brought this incredible weight of judgment down on top of you,” she says. “It makes me proud of Ireland.” She rattles off a list of names – Naoise Dolan, Louise O’Neill, Nicole Flattery, Jan Carson, Lucy Caldwell – who have gained acclaim in Rooney’s wake. “She has changed the landscape for young Irish women writers.” As in an Austen novel or Strictly Come Dancing (she’s a huge fan: this past season “was just beyond beautiful”), real-life contemporary events rarely enter her fictional worlds, but hints at her disillusionment with Irish politics have started creeping in: soaring house prices in Grown Ups, for example. “It’s an abomination.” Published at the beginning of 2020, Grown Ups is her most structurally ambitious novel. She was particularly pleased with “the restraint” with which she wrote the three male characters, “not just as the love rat or the love interest,” she says. “I think on a sentence-by-sentence level I’ve improved, because I hadn’t a clue when I started,” she continues. “But the essentials, telling stories about people’s lives, have remained pretty much the same.” She sees Grown Ups as a turning point, not least because it was reviewed seriously. “People have stuck with me and a kind of a gradual accretion of affection or mild respect has built up,” she says. “I think something happened with that book, people thought: “OK, grand! She did this, we are all right. We can like her.” Twenty-five years after she first appeared on the scene, Rachel Walsh is finally respectable. • In the UK, the Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is on 13 11 14. In US, the National Suicide Prevention Hotline is In the UK, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org. You can contact the mental health charity Mind by calling 0300 123 3393 or visiting mind.org.uk1-800-273-8255. Hotlines in other countries can be found here. • Again, Rachel is published by Michael Joseph (£20). To support the Guardian and the Observer but a copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.The January snow lay thick on the Moscow ground, as masked officers of the FSB – Russia’s fearsome security agency – prepared to smash down the doors at one of 25 addresses they would raid that day. Their target was REvil, a shadowy conclave of hackers that claimed to have stolen more than $100m (£74m) a year through “ransomware” attacks, before suddenly disappearing. As group members were led away in cuffs, FSB officers gathered crypto-wallets containing untold volumes of digital currency such as bitcoin. Others used money-counting machines to tot up dozens of stacks of hundred dollar bills. The cybercriminals behind REvil had mastered a form of extortion orchestrated by seizing control of company computer systems and demanding payment to unlock them. The ramifications of this increasingly common crime stretch from geopolitical tension between Russia and the west, to Britain’s looming shortage of Hula Hoops, Skips and Nik Naks. This week, KP Snacks wrote to shopowners to warn of supply issues until “the end of March at the earliest” as it “cannot safely process orders or dispatch goods”. KP – and fans of its savoury treats – had become the latest victims of a ransomware attack that, as of Friday afternoon, the company was still fighting. Multiple calls to the company went answered. When the boss of a company such as KP gets the dreaded ransom note, no matter what time of day, their next call might well be to US cybersecurity firm Mandiant. “The typical situation is that they don’t see it coming and then all of a sudden they experience a devastating impact,” says Dr Jamie Collier, Mandiant’s senior threat intelligence adviser. The importance of computer systems to company supply chains, he says, affords enormous power to any hackers who breach their defences. “It provides a huge amount of leverage and allows these groups to demand significantly higher extortion fees than they would have done in the past.” While Mandiant’s teams go to work trying to fix or mitigate the damage, the victims enter negotiations with the hackers, who often act as if they are striking a legitimate business deal. “Threat groups are very approachable,” says Dr Collier. “You’ll see them recruit English speakers who can deal with it [negotiations], almost like customer service where you can make contact and interact in a professional way.” Hackers, he says, will even hand-hold executives through the process of buying and transferring the cryptocurrency favoured for ransom payments. Depending on the sophistication of the attack, the damage done by a prolonged shutdown, and whether the likes of Mandiant can fix it, there is sometimes little choice but to pay. On top of operational disruption, firms risk regulatory fines if data is leaked, as well as huge damage to their reputations. Many now have cyber insurance that offers them the option of letting the insurer pick up the tab, albeit while fuelling criticism for potentially fuelling future attacks. In May 2021, the DarkSide ransomware gang – often rumoured to be linked to REvil – took down fuel supplier Colonial Pipeline. As petrol stations ran dry and American motorists panicked, the company had little option but to hand over $4.4m (£3.3m). In the case of Travelex, even coughing up didn’t help. The biggest factor in the collapse of Travelex in August 2020 may have been the effects of Covid-19 on tourism but lingering damage from a ransomware attack earlier that year helped tip it over the edge. Travelex reportedly paid a $2.3m ransom but the loss of trust from customers was lasting. Ransomware attacks are on the rise. There were 1,396 in 2020, according to Ransom-DB, which tracks such incidents. The number nearly doubled to 2,699 in 2021, with about 35-40% of cases ending in a ransom payment. The likelihood, Ransom-DB says, is that many more go unreported. In the UK, the body responsible for stemming the tide is the National Cyber Security Centre (NCSC). Its deputy director of incident management, Eleanor Fairford, says: “As long as cybercriminals make gains, as long as people pay them, it’s a business model that is very lucrative. There’s no reason why it should stop.” Some have proposed banning companies from paying ransoms, in theory removing the incentive for such attacks. This, warns Fairford, may just result in companies failing to report attacks or simply going out of business. The challenges for those trying to stem the tide are manifold. Gangs are anonymous, rebranding, and relocating as quickly as the authorities can find them. Increasingly, they work together to pool specialised knowledge. There are even “initial access” brokers connecting firms which are good at infiltrating systems to others who are better at deploying ransomware once inside. Perhaps the greatest obstacle is that the countries from which hackers operate, dominated by Russian and former Soviet states, have shown little appetite to stop them. “It might be of benefit to certain states to have these gangs annoying the west, plus the impact is not in the states from which it originates,” says Fairford. The FSB’s show of strength against REvil, she says, may be little more than theatre, or diplomatic expediency. “I don’t think anybody seriously views this as the beginning of the end of ransomware, at the hands of the Russian state. It’s some sort of token attempt to show movement.” The only solution, experts agree, is for firms to take every precaution to defend against some of the most well-known weaknesses that ransomware gangs exploit, often via individual staff members. These include targeting computers used remotely by staff, a growing trend as the pandemic led to more people working from home. Helge Janicke, research director of the Cyber Security Cooperative Research Centre in Australia, stresses the need for “awareness of your workforce, having effective technical controls and integrating ransomware attacks in your organisation’s incident response and disaster recovery plans”. “The key is being prepared.”After moving from Uruguay to São Paulo, Brazil, during the pandemic, photographer Pablo Albarenga revelled in exploring his new home by bike. It felt like a safe, freeing way to familiarise himself with its vastness; the Brazilian city is the fourth largest in the world, and often referred to as a concrete jungle. On a 60km ride one hot November Saturday, he passed through a colourful residential area with an elevated highway. At weekends, it is closed to cars. “The road transforms into a makeshift beach,” Albarenga says. “Locals meet friends, hang out and sunbathe. They take the city for what is and make it work for them … and they make it look good. “Times are universally hard,” he adds. “We all need moments of self-reflection, peace and stillness like this. The image – and the person – remind us that we don’t have to hike Everest or swim in the ocean to find a little serenity in the madness.” While the Brazilian flag is helpfully positioned to indicate location, Albarenga was drawn to the anonymity of the figure. “They could be any of us taking time for ourselves,” he says. He didn’t approach or make contact, wanting to preserve that moment for them. Albarenga was enjoying a day off, so didn’t have his digital camera with him. Instead, he snapped a couple of shots on his iPhone 11. Then came a rush of inspiration. Putting his phone away, he rested his bike along the barriers, stretched, and lay down for his own moment or two in the sun.Today in a nutshell: Norway started as they mean to continue with two golds in quick succession, but the windy conditions have been an issue for several events Next up: There is still some curling, speedskating, freestyle skiing and ice hockey left today, and tomorrow – conditions permitting – we should get the glorious sight of the men’s downhill Alpine skiing The first gold medal of the Games went to Norway’s Therese Johaug in the women’s 7.5km + 7.5km Skiathlon. She has won 10 world championship titles and it was the fourth Olympic medal of her career, but her first individual Olympic gold. She absolutely bossed it, finishing 30 seconds ahead of Russian Olympic Committee athlete Natalya Nepryayeva in second and Austria’s Teresa Stadlober in third after a gruelling race. The wind played havoc with the shooting in an exciting Biathlon mixed relay race, gusting up to 5.6 metres per second at some points. A gripping three-man finish gave Norway their second gold, France recovered from a dreadful first leg to claim the silver, while the Russian team took bronze. The wind was also buffeting the snowboarders. Great Britain’s Katie Ormerod – who missed out in Pyeongchang in 2018 due to a horrendous injury – failed to qualify for the finals of the women’s slopestyle. New Zealand’s Zoi Sadowski-Synnott leads the pack going into tomorrow’s final. Jamie Anderson and Julia Marino of the US, and Australia’s Tess Coady are all safely through. “It’s cold! It’s hard to keep your core temperature warm and then doing tricks feels a little bit more intimidating as you are just, like, stiff,” said two-time Olympic gold medalist Anderson. The Dutch have been a dominant force at Olympic speed skating for years, and there was no let-up as Irene Schouten claimed the Netherlands’ first gold in the 3,000m speed skating. She broke Germany’s Claudia Pechstein’s Olympic record that had stood since 2002. Incredibly, aged 49, Pechstein herself also broke a record today – becoming the oldest woman to compete at a Winter Olympics. In the mixed doubles curling Team GB’s Jen Dodds and Bruce Mouat continued to make progress with a convincing win over the Czech Republic. They’ve only lost one of their five matches so far. Later today they face Italy’s Stefania Constantini and Amos Mosaner. They are as yet unbeaten in their five. Something will have to give. Things you might have missed Shaun White, triple gold medallist and the oldest member of the US team in China has announced that the Beijing Games will be his final snowboarding event. He told a press conference that when he made the decision he was on a chairlift by himself. “I was watching the sun go down and it just hit me,” he said. “It was very sad and a surreal moment but really joyous as well.” A total of 45 new positive Covid tests have been announced, with athletes and officials accounting for 25 of the cases. “In general we think the situation is under control. The cases within the closed loop have not spread and they do not affect the competition” said Huang Chun, the Games’ deputy director-general of the office of pandemic prevention and control. Dutch journalist Sjoerd den Daas was dragged away by Chinese security officials in the middle of making a live broadcast for NOS last night. The IOC has rather blandly described it as “an unfortunate circumstance”. He was eventually able to continue broadcasting from the opening ceremony. You might also enjoy reading: China opens Winter Olympics with peace doves and a mighty provocation Video: ‘Crime against all humanity’: protests mark start of Olympics How tech, talent and money turned Britain into a winter sports nation Covid, Uyghurs and viewer apathy: is Beijing in danger of a US ratings flop? The briefing’s picture of the day Saturday’s men’s third downhill training run was cancelled due to high winds – but not before three runners – including favourite Aleksander Aamodt Kilde – had completed the course. This angered others who feel they have been given an advantage on a course that has never been competed on before. What to look out for next Times are all in local Beijing time. For Sydney it is +3 hours, for London it is -8 hours, for New York it is -13 hours and San Francisco is -16 hours. Later today – Saturday 5 February 7.30pm – 8.40pm Freestyle skiing – three runs of the men’s moguls culminating in the medal ceremony. Australia’s Brodie Summers came top in the first qualification round earlier today 🥇 8.05pm Curling – matches include the US v Canada and that crucial match-up of Team GB v Italy 🥌 9.10pm Ice hockey – the US take on Not Russia in the women’s preliminary round, which should have some bite, even if neither team is in jeopardy of not reaching the quarter-finals. Russian President Vladimir Putin is expected to attend. Canada laid down a competition marker earlier, beating Finland 11-1 🏒 9.26pm Short track speed skating – It is the final of the mixed team relay. Mixed relays were a source of joyous chaos at Tokyo 2020 on the track and in the pool. And now they’ve got added ice 🥇 Tomorrow – Sunday 6 February 9am and 2pm and 8pm Curling – more mixed doubles round robin matches 🥌 9.30am – 10.24am Snowboard – the women have three runs at the slopestyle to decide the medals. Jamie Anderson of the US aims for her third straight gold 🥇 9.30am and 11.50am Figure skating – the team event has two sessions, first the women single skating short programme, and then the men do their single free skating ⛸ 11am Alpine skiing – the men’s downhill is one of the key events of any Winter Olympics – providing the wind holds off 🥇 3pm Cross-country skiing – the men’s 15km + 15km Skiathlon 🥇 4.30pm Speed skating – 5,000m of skating very fast from the men🥇 6pm – 8.40pm Freestyle skiing– it is the women’s turn on the moguls 🥇 7pm and 8pm Ski jumping – it is the men’s first round and then the final round on the normal hill, again, weather conditions permitting 🥇 7.30pm Luge – there are training runs in the morning but the real competition of the day is runs three and four of the men’s single, which will decide the medals 🥇 Full Winter Olympics schedule | Results, sport by sport | Medal table How things stand Here’s what the fledgling emoji table looked like at 6.10pm Beijing time … 1 🇳🇴 Norway 🥇 2 🥈 0 🥉 0 total: 2 2 🇳🇱 Netherlands 🥇 1 🥈 0 🥉 0 total: 1 3 ◻️ Not Russia 🥇 0 🥈 1 🥉 1 total: 2 4= 🇫🇷 France 🥇 0 🥈 1 🥉 0 total: 1 4= 🇮🇹 Italy 🥇 0 🥈 1 🥉 0 total: 1 6= 🇦🇹 Austria 🥇 0 🥈 0 🥉 1 total: 1 6= 🇨🇦 Canada 🥇 0 🥈 0 🥉 1 total: 1 Do feel free to drop me a line at martin.belam@theguardian.com if there’s something you are particularly looking forward to or are enjoying so far. I very much enjoyed the opening ceremony myself yesterday – any production that includes a video interlude of small children falling over while trying to ski or ice skate gets my vote. Here were my 11 key moments from it, but it was certainly not without controversy. The last word On the selection of Uyghur athlete Dinigeer Yilamujiang as one of the people to light the Olympic flame That was very, very much a deliberate choice. I think it should be read as China saying we are not backing away from our stance on what we’re doing in Xinjiang and we don’t really care what the world thinks about it – Darren Byler, assistant professor of international studies at Canada’s Simon Fraser University, who has written extensively about the plight of China’s Uyghurs.In the low winter sunshine of Jo Hynes’s Devon garden, early bumblebees alight on snowdrops, crocuses and cyclamen. The temperature is still low, the days still short, but Hynes has nurtured a great carpet of early flowers, mingled together and stretched out beneath trees and shrubs, many of the shrubs winter-flowering too. She chose this style of planting partly to mimic the way they grow in the wild. “In the Caucasus you see these wonderful meadows of cyclamen and snowdrops, all mixed up together, great sheets of them,” she says. While the plants may be native to Turkey (which has the widest range of snowdrops), western Russia and the Mediterranean, Hynes’s garden, known as Higher Cherubeer, is very British. “We get a lot of rain here,” she says, “and the soil is acidic clay, so it stays particularly moist. And we are at the top of a hill – 150 metres above sea level in between Dartmoor and Exmoor.” You might think that Mediterranean plants would struggle here, but in fact, there is a great range of snowdrops to suit all sorts of conditions. The snowdrops that are commonly grown in the UK – Galanthus plicatus, G elwesii and G nivalis – all like moisture. In Higher Cherubeer, though, they are helped by being grown under trees and shrubs. “Cyclamen and snowdrops flower in the late winter and early spring, and in doing so they make the most of the time when there is no canopy to the trees,” Hynes says. “Then, when the trees are in growth, the conditions encourage them to go into dormancy, just as the heat does in the Mediterranean summer.” Hynes and her husband, Tom, arrived at Higher Cherubeer 31 years ago. It was a working dairy farm at the time, and what is now the garden was a rough, windy field with vegetable strips and a bit of orchard. The first thing they did was to put in a shelter belt of native trees to slow down the winds; over time gravel paths were put in place, and trees and borders were planted. Tom is a stonewaller and has created steps and walls from which ferns and cyclamen spring. They give the garden a strong structure that is particularly visible, and useful, in winter. The impetus to make it a winter garden came after Hynes took up basket weaving 10 years ago. “I wanted a source of colourful stems, so planted up willows that could be cut back each year to provide long, whippy, colourful weaving material. Then I wanted to plant flowers that would look good alongside them, so started planting snowdrops, cyclamen, hellebores, witch hazels.” She wanted to open the garden to visitors, but, she says: “Devon is a county with lots of gardens and not that many people.” So she decided to start a National Collection – which involves collecting and growing a significant number of one type of plant, and is overseen by the UK charity Plant Heritage – to draw visitors into the garden. She chose cyclamen as there is a manageable number to collect, and because they flower in winter: “There are only two or three gardens open in Devon in February,” she says. Hynes now grows 22 of the 23 known cyclamen species and many of their forms and cultivars in the garden, and more than 400 snowdrop varieties. She has developed some favourites over the years, such as snowdrop “S Arnott”, a late-flowered cultivar with a beautiful scent, which she uses as the main drifts within the borders, and “Daisy Hynes”, a neat snowdrop with green markings, named after their daughter. She recommends Cyclamen coum, C alpinum and C pseudibericum, all of which naturalise well under trees and shrubs, and flower with the snowdrops from January to March. Hynes grows all of the cyclamen and many of the snowdrops in pots in her greenhouses, where their subtle differences can be appreciated up close by aficionados. Beyond the beauty of filling the garden with flowers in late winter, and the joy Hynes evidently gets from her visitors, there is a great benefit to wildlife in planting such early flowers. “I was a beekeeper when I first arrived,” she says, “and I wanted to plant nectar-rich flowers for my bees. Honeybees are awake all through winter and on warm days they will venture out, so by planting in this way I was able to provide them with pollen. Late-winter and early-spring flowers help hives to make it through winter.” For native bumblebees this is possibly even more important. They will also fly on mild winter days, and unlike honeybees they have no store of honey to fall back on. “Insects of all kinds are increasingly likely to venture out in winter as our weather becomes less predictable,” says Hynes. “We can all help them out by planting crocuses, cyclamen, Anemone blanda and pollen-rich plants such as native Helleborus foetidus. They make the garden beautiful even in one of the coldest months of winter, and the bees love them.” Higher Cherubeer is open for the National Garden Scheme on 11 and 19 February.Full of anticipation, I scan the horizon, watching for black spots that will signal the start of the murmuration – my first ever. I wait, full of suspense. The ruby-red sun is setting across the lush, green hills. Suddenly, there’s a flood of black in my peripheral vision; they are here, roaring over my head – possibly at over 50mph. A writhing flood of birds sends tidal waves over the tranquil reeds. I look on in awe. The wind whistles through their wings; the dance of the sky unfolds. The rush, the flutter of feathers, the cries of weary starlings coming down to rest in their tightly packed roosts (as many as 500 birds per cubic metre); the sound is a song of travel and community. With the last of them quieting their calls, it is over in under 15 minutes. Ten thousand glorious, glossy-black starlings have come down to rest in the golden reeds. I am full of wonder; these beautiful birds moved in perfect synchronicity. Experts believe that they use scale-free correlation – one bird following the other, like a bicyclist putting their arm out to signal their direction. Shortly after the starlings have arrived, they seem to disappear … the only evidence of their arrival a chatting cacophony of community. Exhilarated, I go home to roost. Ash, 11 • Read today’s other Young Country Diary: ‘Anyone can look up and enjoy the scenic sky’I’m a huge sports fan, so revel in everything around a big sporting event: getting friends over, the TV set up and, of course, prepping the ultimate game-day spread. The Super Bowl next weekend is the perfect excuse to get some American-style dishes on the go, and it wouldn’t be right if I didn’t make a couple of Joe Allen classics. Today’s recipes have been a closely guarded secret – or at least until now – and, regardless of whether or not you’re a meat eater, together they make the perfect finger food for everyone who can’t take their eyes off the screen. Joe’s slow-braised smoked baby back ribs (pictured top) You can roast the racks a few hours in advance, then leave them to cool and refrigerate, ready for their final grilling. And if you’re willing to brave the chill outdoors, you could also finish them off on the barbecue. Prep 10 min Cook 2 hr 50 min Serves 4-6 For the rib spice rub 1 level tbsp garlic powder ½ tbsp mustard powder ½ tbsp cayenne pepper 1 tbsp ground cumin 1 tbsp onion powder 1 tsp smoked paprika 1 tbsp dried oregano 1 tbsp dried thyme 3 tbsp demerara sugar For the sauce 750g tomato ketchup 150g soft brown sugar 125ml apple juice 125ml cider vinegar 12g mustard powder 40g rib rub (see above and method) 125ml Worcestershire sauce 5g salt 2-3 garlic cloves, peeled and minced (15g) For the ribs 4-6 racks (4-5kg) short back pork ribs 2 big handfuls wood chips, for smoking Put all the spice rub ingredients in a large bowl, mix vigorously so everything is well combined, then put to one side. Put all the ingredients for the sauce in a medium saucepan, bring slowly up to a boil, then turn down to a simmer and leave to cook gently, whisking regularly to keep the heat evenly distributed and to stop the mix catching and burning, for 30-40 minutes. You will end up with a fairly thick glaze; if need be, thin it out with a little water. Peel off and discard the silverskin off the back of the ribs, rub them all over with all of the spice rub and place on a rack in a deep-sided oven tray. Heat the oven to 110C (90C fan)/225F/gas ¼. Turn on the oven fan to high and/or ventilate your kitchen. Put a scoop of wood chips in a heatproof oven dish, put them in the oven and set them alight. Once the flames have died down and the wood chips are smoking, put the ribs in the oven, shut the door and leave to cook for 30 minutes. Put another handful of wood chips in the heatproof dish, set them alight and wait until the flames subside and the chips are smoking. Turn up the heat to 160C (140C fan)/310F/gas 2½ and wet a large sheet of greaseproof paper. Brush each rib in the sauce mix, cover the tray with the wet paper, bake for another two hours and remove To serve, slather the ribs in more sauce, transfer to a hot grill and cook, turning regularly, for five to eight minutes, until nicely caramelised all over. Either serve the racks whole or cut them up into individual ribs, put in a bowl and serve as the perfect finger food, ideally with some coleslaw on the side. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from Ocado Vegetarian hot dog with quinoa chilli Prep 15 min Cook 1 hr Serves 4 For the quinoa chilli Olive oil 2 red onions, peeled and finely chopped 1 red pepper, stem, pith and seeds removed, flesh finely chopped 2 garlic cloves, peeled and minced 1 red chilli, stem, pith and seeds removed, flesh finely chopped 1 tsp ground cumin 1½ tsp ground coriander 1½ tsp dried oregano 1 tsp smoked paprika 1 tsp chilli powder ½ tsp ground cinnamon 2 x 400g tins tomatoes, drained and chopped (600g net) 400ml vegetable stock 250g quinoa, rinsed and drained 1 pinch dried chilli flakes, to taste Salt and black pepper 1 x 400g tin kidney beans, drained (250g net) Fresh coriander, to finish To finish 1 x 240g 4-pack good-quality vegetarian hot dogs 4 brioche hot dog rolls Butter, for spreading Crispy fried onions, shop-bought or homemade Warm a couple of tablespoons of oil in a large pan, add the onion and pepper, and saute gently for 10 or so minutes; add a splash of water if anything looks like it‘s about to stick to the pan. Add the garlic, red chilli and spices, cook out gently, stirring, for a minute or two, then add the tomatoes and stock, and leave to cook, stirring occasionally, for another 20 minutes, until the sauce turns thick. Stir in the quinoa and cook, still stirring, for a couple of minutes, until the spices smell fragrant. Bring up to a simmer, then leave to cook gently for about 20 minutes, adding a dash of water every now and then if the mixture looks like it’s drying out. Taste and adjust the seasoning with chilli flakes, salt and black pepper. Take the chilli off the heat, stir in the kidney beans and set aside. Either grill or boil the hot dogs for six minutes. Meanwhile, cut a slit along one side of each brioche bun and grill them until lightly toasted. Brush the inside of each bun with butter, add the dog, then ladle some chilli on top and serve sprinkled with crisp onions and coriander. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from Ocado • Gary Lee is executive chef at Joe Allen, London WC2When I was in tenth grade in Tampa, Florida, I was, like millions of other high school students, assigned to read The Catcher in the Rye for English class. Like millions of other high school students, I was extremely fragile. I was holding on by a thread. I was 15 and spent much of my time at school, on the days I would go, doing OxyContin, Xanax, cocaine and speed in the bathroom. I jittered and itched through class, and my internal life was, to say the least, stifled. It would continue to be stifled for the next few years, until it became so claustrophobic that I attempted suicide. Needless to say, I was pretty hit or miss with school assignments. But I had always liked to read. I decided to crack Salinger’s book and read a chapter or two. I stayed up all night and finished it. I came into class the next day wired, eyes wide: it felt as if I had been hooked up to a car battery. I remember walking into the classroom and saying to my English teacher, “What the hell was that?” I didn’t know anything about the book. I didn’t know that the men who shot John Lennon and Ronald Reagan were both obsessed with it. I didn’t know that it was the subject of endless think pieces debating the ethical ramifications of Holden Caulfield’s character. I didn’t know Salinger stormed the beaches on D-Day, carried scars from his years in war. I just got sucked in. It is a funny, polarising little book. I remember my girlfriend at the time saying she hated it, that she couldn’t get through it. But my teacher told me that every year at least one person does what I did, gets hooked up to the car battery. Looking back, it makes sense that someone in my particular situation would have this reaction to it. In fact, it is almost embarrassing just how cliched it is. But that’s what happened. And, in what would become a theme of my life, what stuck with me more than any of the particular content of the book was the feeling of being sucked in, of losing time trapped in someone else’s words and turbulent emotions. My English teacher was a “tough” Italian guy from the Bronx, and he knew what was going on with me. He once told me that if he saw me outside school, “on the corner”, he would kick my ass. I remember laughing at the idea I spent my time “on the corner” like I was selling drugs in a movie, but the sentiment was sweet. He was extremely adoring of the books we read, and he was pretty compelling. If I had been maybe a shade less lost, it might have been enough for me to devote my life to the study of English right then and there. But that isn’t how it went down. He did, however, hold me back after class and start feeding me extracurricular books. First was Ayn Rand’s The Fountainhead, which I am ashamed to say affected me. Once again, I was unaware of any of the larger political discussions surrounding the book, which was written as a testament to individualism and self-will. I don’t think I even knew the word “libertarian”, but I found the book’s ego-bolstering philosophy useful as my life started to fall apart, as I grew more distant from my loved ones and found myself inside the rigid structures of psychiatric hospitals, rehabs and jail. Then, even more affecting, was Invisible Man by Ralph Ellison. Here was a character getting pushed and pulled through the world, shaping his identity in spite of and in relation to everything and everybody else. He ran from the world but was always drawn back. As I was reading, I could tell that the book was vital and important. I felt that it was changing me in real time. In 2008, the number of “pill mills” in Florida almost tripled. These pain management clinics prescribed exorbitant amounts of opiates and accepted only cash payments with little to no regard for symptoms. In the last six months of the year, 45 doctors in south Florida prescribed more than 9m pills of oxycodone, which crept across the entire country. People started dropping like flies, overdosing or getting sucked into their own personal orbits of addiction and isolation. As this machine started to whir to life, I was 16 going on 17. The sudden influx of these pills made them cheaper and more ubiquitous. But even before this, while my peers were experimenting with weed and drinking at parties, I had been doing coke and “oxys”. I had tried these things after doing the more normal drugs in middle school. Like everyone else, I really enjoyed feeling good, but I didn’t appear to have any brakes. In this time of unprecedented addiction, my story is wholly unremarkable. Drugs, rehab, jail, self-help groups. I would guess that just about everyone in the US went to high school with at least a few people whose lives were on the same trajectory. In the midst of the inherently isolating circumstances of acute addiction, I felt no camaraderie or togetherness with them. In my self-absorbed world, books were my company. They gave me something that everyone needs: the thoughts and feelings of others. They didn’t just help me to understand myself, they provided me with messages from someone who had nothing to do with me. The temporary escape from self was intoxicating. As everyone was keen to remind me during this period, addiction is progressive; it gets worse over time. Once the needles came into play, I was pretty much helpless. By the time I dropped out of high school, I was shooting coke and meth, and things were starting to look very dire. There is a very real precipice there, a line that, once crossed, makes it hard to ever live a normal life again. It seemed like I was crossing it. My internal life was dominated by an all-consuming desire for drugs and fantasies of suicide, each one feeding into the other. Reading was the one activity that seemed to temporarily extract me from this cycle. It felt like a way for me to preserve something of myself – like trying to build a fire, guarding it from the wind and stoking it, trying to coax it into something bigger. Books engaged my brain, but also bypassed it, distracted it, so they could touch my heart and stir up sentiments that I might not have been able to access otherwise. I didn’t have a TV – half the time I didn’t even have a room. My living situations were temporary: motels, rehabs, couches, jail, the sidewalk or public parks. I passed through these places like a ghost. But the library was always there, always available. It also proved extremely useful because a book typically takes longer to get through than a movie. Time was crucial to me, or rather, escaping it was. And so, I continued to return to the library. Reading for hours, lost in the shelves. While opiates were the drug of choice for my demographic, the uppers I was hooked on gave me more energy than a person needs to live a life. I have always attributed the paranoia and psychosis that often follows these drugs as a side-effect of a pattern-seeking brain provided with too much energy. Starved of information, it starts to build systems of interpretation out of nothingness. Books helped me here as well: omniscience became something I craved, more information to stave off paranoia, and rich fantasy worlds to supplement the bare life in front of me. Yet there was an aspect of masochism in it. I punished myself with difficult books I couldn’t quite understand. I read The Idiot by Dostoevsky in two days at a public library, shooting coke in between chapters. I remember very little about the book, but I forced my eyes to touch every word. It became like that old punishment when you catch your kid smoking cigarettes and you make them smoke the whole pack. “Oh, you like reading, huh? How about you read it all in one sitting then?” *** In the institutions I was frequenting, my reading was viewed as a sort of idiosyncrasy, just a personality tic of a weird and troubled young man. After I was arrested for robbery in 2011 and no one bailed me out, I read compulsively. At first, I was in a cell where the lighting was dim, so reading was difficult but not impossible. My bunkmate hoarded books even though he had trouble reading them. He would lend them to me and ask me to tell him what they were about. They were mostly romance novels: engaged woman moves back to her home town and falls in love with a humble country boy; young widow is swept off her feet by an honest contractor, etc. I found it easy to immerse myself in them. They moved me to another facility that was open dorm, and, thankfully, they kept some lights on all night. I slept a lot during the day and read in silence most of the night. I read the Bible, I found an old copy of The Power and the Glory by Graham Greene, I read a Twilight book and one of the Game of Thrones books, I read Eckhart Tolle’s self-help book The Power of Now. It was an absurd syllabus, but I didn’t care. As Valentine’s Day approached, someone in my unit asked me to help him write a love letter to his girlfriend. He told me what he wanted to say, and I wrote it down for him, embellishing and adding things as I saw fit. The content got a little more explicit, and after he sent the letter, he wanted me to write him something else, something more explicitly explicit. He described the type of woman he wanted me to write about, or rather, her body. And I indulged him with three pages of pure sexual fantasy. We negotiated a price for this service: two “soups” (ramen packets) and a bag of Doritos. My first advance. He was grateful, and word got out. I wrote a few more of these stories for other guys in the unit, each one of them approaching me and giving me prompts about how they wanted their story told, what they wanted it to include. I only wrote four of them before I was transferred to another facility, but I could feel myself getting better each time, more attentive to detail but never allowing myself to get too far from the main point. The next institution was a facility focused on addiction and co-occurring mental disorders, and we weren’t allowed to have books. I was halfway through Moby-Dick when they confiscated it. I was livid – it felt like someone took away my pacifier – so I passed some of the time when I wasn’t reading doing the next best thing I could think of: writing. I wrote a few poems and a short story that strangely mirrored the novel I would write years later. It was very amateurish, but the preoccupations were the same: muddled perspective, first and third person fighting with each other, body and mind disconnected, and the chaos of amphetamine psychosis. *** When I left the facility after two months, I think I made it a few weeks before I was back shooting coke. I wouldn’t write again for three years, and I stopped reading. The world was harsh, and I couldn’t find a place in it for myself. I hated using drugs and I couldn’t stop. I was 19 and I was alone. I had five years of intense drug use behind me, the last two of which were so extreme and tumultuous that I couldn’t make sense of them. They itched and burned in my head like a wound that wouldn’t heal. It just felt like the machine of my self was totalled. Whatever little fire I was trying to build in that deep corner of my soul seemed to be extinguished. I was so exhausted by the cycle of my life, my imagination so eroded, that I couldn’t think of any way to get out of it except for one. I tried to kill myself, and when it didn’t work, the fatigue enveloped me again. I spent the next year like a zombie, bloated and groggy from the anti-psychotics. I slept close to 14 hours a day. My probation officer was on at me to take my high school equivalency degree test, and after I did, I started to wean myself off the anti-psychotics. I finished Moby-Dick and started to go to college. My teenage years had been full of teachers and counsellors warning me about the dangers of “squandered potential” of not “applying myself”. These types of comments have a way of boosting one’s ego, being heard as: “I am so special and smart that everything bores me,” and I think I did originally take them in this way. But as everything progressed, the comments stuck with me on a deeper, more spiritual level. Not “potential” as something special to me, but just regular old human potential. And the prospect of a life without “application” seemed like the most existentially terrifying sentence I could imagine. I started college with the aim of getting a degree that would help me get a cushy, well-paid job, but within a few semesters found myself completely sidetracked by the humanities and creative writing. Finally, in writing, I applied myself easily. I didn’t have to force it; every aspect of myself switched on comfortably. I exhausted every little bit of my intellect and emotional and spiritual being every morning as I wrote. I spent my afternoons reading, filling my brain with other people’s words, finding that battery that lives in language, the one I felt years ago. I started to see writing as something I could hand myself over to fully. As with reading and drugs, there were mornings where I would enter a sort of trance. I would lose my sense of time and space, and I think if someone were to burst through my door in those moments and ask me what my name was, it would probably have taken me a few seconds to come up with the answer. It was a beautiful feeling. Paradoxically, it was through these solitary activities that I found myself able to finally start engaging with the world and others. In sobriety, I met people who shared my desperate experiences with drugs. In college, I met people who shared my love of reading. The companionship I found in reading started to give way to real relationships with other people. In the past few months, I have turned 30 and celebrated 10 years of sobriety. My life is richer and deeper than those few miserable years when I was younger. In my day-to-day existence, I don’t think much about them, and even when I was writing a book that was born from these experiences, I didn’t think much about them after I was done writing for the day. My life is full of relationships, ideas and feelings wholly unrelated to addiction, a luxury I couldn’t afford back then. But I can’t deny the formative power of those experiences. What I take from them is this: having a brain can make you pretty self-centred. But the meaningful presence of others, at its best, can keep that in check. In the absence of others, in my isolated, solipsistic little world, I found a way to challenge my brain through reading, and, in doing so, preserved a faraway corner of my heart. • All Day Is a Long Time by David Sanchez is published by Sceptre at £16.99. To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply. In the UK, Action on Addiction is available on 0300 330 0659. In the US, SAMHSA’s national helpline is at 800-662-4357. In Australia, the National Alcohol and Other Drug Hotline is at 1800 250 015; families and friends can seek help at Family Drug Support Australia at 1300 368 186. In the UK, contact the Samaritans for free from any telephone on 116 123. You can call even if you don’t have credit on your mobile, and the number won’t show up on phone bills. Or you can email jo@samaritans.org or go to www.samaritans.org to find details of your nearest branch, where you can talk to one of our trained volunteers face to face. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international suicide helplines can be found at www.befrienders.orgThe sky. You might think it is useless and just there, however it is one of the most fascinating sights ever! When I wake up, I eagerly scramble out of my comfy bed, leap towards my window and yank open my curtains just to get a view of the scenic sky. The morning sun comes up and the ripple-like clouds (called cirrocumulus, which are my favourite) make the sky look like an upside down, pink river. When I walk to school, the neon-yellow sun grows brighter in the baby-blue sky. At this time, the sky produces high, wispy clouds (called cirrus) and big fluffy ones (called cumulus) that embrace the winter sky around them. At our lunch break, our faces light up when the snow starts to fall. We leap in the air trying to catch some. I love it when light grey clouds envelope the sky and give it a tranquil effect. At home when it gets to dinner time, I gaze at the sky outside and observe that it has become a soothing coal-black, and it does not change until I fall asleep. The beauty of the sky is: wherever you go, you see it differently, but it always looks nice. The sky is something that keeps us alive and allows us to experience amazing sights however rich or poor we are, so we ought to be grateful for it. Rohan, 9 • Read today’s other Young Country Diary: ‘Ten thousand starlings roar over my head. I am in awe’Several months after coming out publicly as a queer woman, Canadian ice dance star Kaitlyn Weaver was doing a show in Nashville when another woman approached her and asked, “Are you and Andrew dating?” The woman was referring to Andrew Poje, Weaver’s ice dance partner of 15 years. Weaver told her no, and the conversation flowed into a different topic, before the woman interrupted Weaver to ask her the same question. Weaver answered again: no. “I told her, ‘I have a girlfriend’ and she did not understand. She looked so disparaged that I wasn’t dating Andrew,” she recalls. Weaver, who represented Canada at the Sochi and Pyeongchang Olympics, had a long, successful career performing love stories on the ice with Poje. The two of them share three world championship medals, a loving friendship, but not, despite what fans may assume from their very well-executed acting, a romance. As an athlete, Weaver never wanted to let an audience down. “I was so afraid that people would think of us as inauthentic. I never wanted to risk feeling like I was faking what I loved to do,” Weaver says. “But there was so much more to who I was than what I was able to show.” Turns out, who she is is so much more than a figure skater. It’s a simple fact, but one that wasn’t always an easy pill to swallow. Weaver and Poje haven’t competed since March 2019, but the pair were still doing shows and as long as she was still skating, Weaver did not need to think about her identity outside of the rink. When the pandemic hit, however, she was forced to stop training for a while. “When we’re faced with a global pandemic and hundreds of thousands of people are dying, I didn’t want to consider the skating side of myself as important anymore,” Weaver explains. “At the same time, it was like, ‘Well, if I don’t have my identity as a skater, if I’m not winning medals, then really what value do I have as a person?’” That’s when she realized she needed to talk to somebody. The conversation around the mental health of athletes is still fresh, so it wasn’t until she retired from competition that Weaver got a therapist. As an athlete, she was taught to just push through the pain and while that discipline has served her well in many areas of life, Weaver acknowledges that should not be one’s approach to mental wellbeing. “I was feeling ongoing effects of depression. As soon as I started talking with a therapist, it all just came pouring out.” In therapy, Weaver also explored a part of herself that she never got to fully come to terms with while competing: her sexuality. In her early 20s, the now 32-year-old began realizing her queerness, but only when she was able to be a young person away from the rink. “At the time, I didn’t know any queer women in skating. I felt different. I felt ashamed,” Weaver says. It took a few years for her to realize that these attractions were not a phase. She began her journey by coming out to only one friend, who could relate to her situation. Meanwhile, Weaver also read a lot of research papers on bisexuality and pansexuality to understand herself better. “I still didn’t tell anybody else, but I could keep that knowledge inside for me, like a small gift to myself.” Weaver then began Googling queer celebrities. Her favorite was Megan Fox, who came out as bisexual. “I present more feminine, and I didn’t understand you could be queer and feminine,” Weaver says. “Then, I would see pictures of Megan Fox and be like, ‘She can be both. So I could be both.’” She also loves looking into old movie stars that were rumored to be queer, such as Billie Holiday and Greta Garbo. “I identify with them having to hide who they are, but also having this secret little space where they can explore who they are,” Weaver explains. Coming out while still competing never felt like an option for Weaver. In figure skating, athletes are scored by a panel of nine judges. In the discipline of ice dance especially, women are scrutinized for everything. “We are judged 24 hours a day. We are judged on what we wear, how we present, how we speak, how we relate to our partners, coaches, and even other women,” Weaver says. Women in ice dance were not even allowed to wear pants whenever they wanted until this current season. As one of the top ice dance pairs in the world, Weaver and Poje were very good at presenting themselves. They constantly made changes to their skating, their hair, the music they performed to, anything to get higher scores. Being queer then, was something Weaver saw as less than perfect that could not be changed. She also knew that being queer is illegal in many of the countries she competed in. The idea that revealing this part of herself could negatively affect her and Poje’s scores was far too terrifying to consider. More than a year after retiring, Weaver finally began to consider coming out publicly. By then, she had been hiding herself for too many years, despite always trying to be an honest person. In June of last year, Weaver made the announcement via Instagram. Within seconds of hitting “post”, she received hundreds of supportive messages; friends, fans, and strangers shared their love, congratulations, and even their own stories. “A lot of the messages were from parents saying that their kid had come out to them after seeing my article, or around the same time,” Weaver says. “That made me feel like I was doing the right thing.” Afterwards, people kept asking her if she felt relief. If Weaver was being honest with herself, the answer was no but she couldn’t understand why. A few weeks later, Weaver and Poje began training again for a show. The first day of practice, Weaver put on a rainbow sweatshirt. “I got on the ice as Kaitlyn, the skater, and I felt so proud to wear this little rainbow and be fully me,” Weaver recalls. It was the first time Weaver stepped onto the ice as an out woman, a moment of finally being herself in a sport whose rigid rules had once made it hard for her to accept her identity. The same summer, Weaver created Open Ice Collective, a charity nonprofit aimed to tell diverse stories in figure skating through a documentary series. Figure skating, Weaver acknowledges, is far from inclusive. “Overall, the rules are being made by older white European people so that limits the types of people whose stories are told through skating,” Weaver says. Through her own experiences, Weaver knows how isolating that can make athletes feel. As a producer, Weaver wants to keep talking about difficult subjects, to help create a safer environment within the sport. After the film was released, the International Skating Union contacted Weaver and her co-stars Elladj Baldé, Adam Rippon, Scott Hamilton and Kiira Korpi to discuss the ways in which skating could become more equitable. For the first time, there were discussions on racism in skating and the option for athletes to put their preferred pronouns in their bios. As an athlete, Weaver constantly asked if others were proud of her without ever considering if she was proud of herself. Now, her priorities are different. “I want to be known for the person that I am not necessarily the points I scored 10 years ago at the Olympics. What matters is how we make people feel, the impact that we have, what we do with our lives and how we be of benefit to the community around us,” Weaver says. Instead of worrying if her coaches and fans are proud of her, Weaver asks herself, “Am I proud of what I put out into the world? Of how I treat the people I love? That’s real success.”At this time of year, all I can think about is light. My houseplants are similarly obsessed: a few of them are challenging each other to do the best Leaning Tower of Pisa impression. I can torture them no longer, so I’ve changed a few lightbulbs, added a few timers and now, even in my darkest corners, life grows. Once upon a time, winter in homes that struggle for light meant unhappy, stunted plants. But the introduction of cheap, LED lights has meant this is rapidly changing. Now even the darkest basement flat or north-facing room looking on to a brick wall can have a jungle of growth. Plants utilise a wide range of the light spectrum, from far red to green and far blue; these affect the plants’ growth and habit in different ways. For instance, far-red light can trigger flowering, while far-blue and ultraviolet will influence root and leaf growth. For seedlings and young veg, any number of cheap LED grow lights offer red and blue light, and will give you wonderfully bushy little plants (try urbanplantgrowers.co.uk). The neon-pink glow from these lights is a little challenging, but if you put your whole set-up in a cupboard, you’re not exactly going to notice that. I use these lights to supplement the seedlings growing on my kitchen windowsill. It’s south-west facing, so in the day it’s bright enough to not need the lights, but by using a timer, I can extend the daylight. I supplement the light from 6am and again around 4pm for a couple of hours and it makes a huge difference to the growth. If pink isn’t your cup of tea, there are a number of LED lights that offer 4,000-Kelvin white light. This includes the green spectrum, which means you get a brilliant white that works for your home and also offers a balanced spectrum for plant growth. These bulbs are bright, so they’re not exactly suitable for the main ceiling light – unless you want to be blinded. But they are good in pendant, clamp and desk-top lamps, where you can direct the light at your plants. LEDs are useful, too, because they won’t get too hot and scorch young growth. Plus, they have a long life – of around 60,000 hours. A traditional bulb-shaped LED light (try uk.rs-online.com) is suitable for houseplants and seedlings, and wouldn’t look out of place in an open pendant lampshade. If the aesthetic of the bulb doesn’t matter much to you, try an LED bulb from Grow London (londongrow.com). It has a built-in timer (offering a 15-hours-on, nine-hours-off timetable), which means you don’t have to remember to switch the lights on and off.When the water company executive arrived, John Barker presented him with a bucket of dead fish. It was September 2020. Barker was furious. The fish came from the River Ems, which winds for six miles from Stoughton, West Sussex, to Chichester Harbour. Barker, 68, a retired environmental campaigner, owns a sustainable farm in the village of Westbourne. The Ems flows through it. Barker prizes it because it is one of only 200 chalk streams in the world. Shallow and clear, the streams rise from chalk aquifers and springs, and are beloved by many – 85% of the world’s chalk streams are in England. But across England, over-abstraction by water companies over decades has been damaging the balance of these unique streams, and the wildlife they harbour. (Abstraction means taking water from any source.) “Our chalk streams desperately need support,” says Barker, “and for people to stop hammering them.” For years, he had watched, incensed, as the water level in the Ems grew steadily lower – water was being siphoned from the aquifer that feeds it by utility company Portsmouth Water. Then, in 2020, it finally happened. In Westbourne, the Ems ran dry. “Portsmouth Water,” says Barker, “have, as part of their abstraction licence, a commitment to pump water back into the river if the flow gets low. But its pumps failed and its alarms didn’t work. The river dried up in the village for the first time in living memory.” Barker felt utter desperation. He had co-founded the Friends of the River Ems earlier that year. “John is a quiet achiever,” says Sandy Barker, a fellow Friend. “He gets a lot done and wears his considerable expertise lightly.” When the river dried up, Barker’s group sprang into action. “There were shallow pools of water with trout swimming around, getting picked off by herons.” They collected the fish in buckets and ferried them to a nearby lake. But not all of them could be saved. Hence the bucket of dead fish. When the executive saw them, “he held his hands up”, Barker remembers. A spokesperson for Portsmouth Water said the company was “absolutely committed” to protecting the Ems and working closely with Friends of the Ems and the Environment Agency. (It accepted that the river ran dry, and that this was not initially noticed because of a communications fault, but said the weather was also partly to blame.) Barker is now working with Portsmouth Water to prevent this catastrophe from happening again. The villagers measure the depth of the River Ems at 15 points. “We call it spring watch,” Barker says. Portsmouth Water has agreed to put sensors in the river to monitor water levels, and the Environment Agency is looking at the details of its abstraction licence. “None of these things would have happened if it wasn’t for the Friends of the Ems,” says Barker. But the problem with Britain’s water goes far deeper. Recent months have seen intense public scrutiny of water companies. Barker is scathing about the £90m fine paid by Southern Water for dumping billions of litres of raw sewage into the sea. “It should also be against human nature to do that.” Barker wants the environment agency to be given more resources, and further investment to put water back into Britain’s waterways. “We need more water,” he says, “whether it’s through reservoirs or recycling.” With more water in the system, companies may not need to rely on abstraction, but this sort of infrastructure costs money. Barker also wants to raise awareness about the situation of many English chalk streams. “We need to keep up the pressure on water companies,” he says. Barker has bought a stay of execution for the River Ems, for now. But without significant investment in infrastructure, he thinks his efforts will probably be just a sticking plaster. “If we’re successful with the Ems,” he says, “and get the water company to stop drawing from us now, they’ll just take water from another place on the aquifer.” Barker requests an underwater camera from Guardian Angel, to monitor the quality of the water and check for dangerous algae. Camera company GoPro provides a camera he can use in the Ems. We catch up after he’s tested it on a chilly winter afternoon. “It’s going to be really useful,” he says. “We can use it to catch some of the wildlife, and to show people how special these chalk streams are. Because that’s one of the most beautiful things about them. The water is so clean and clear.” He plans to send a live stream from the camera to the Friends of the River Ems website. “The more people understand how precious the river is,” Barker says, “the better it will be.” Want to nominate someone for Guardian angel? Email us – with their permission – and suggest a treat at guardian.angel@theguardian.comFashion has a new trend for spring. Well, of course it does – that’s how fashion works. Except this time round, the trend isn’t crimson or corduroy, or Peter Pan collars or platform shoes. The hot look for spring 2022 is the “forever wardrobe”. The key pieces of the season are clothes that come with the promise that they will never go out of style: think crisp white shirts and well-cut blazers; classic knitwear and timeless little black dresses. Throwaway fashion is so last season. This spring, chic comes with a lifetime guarantee. The irony is that the forever wardrobe never went away, it just went out of style. The fast fashion industry, which exploded in the last 30 years, turbocharged the trend cycle, abandoning the principles of enduring elegance in favour of a rollercoaster of plot twists (woah, jumpsuits!), comebacks (Crocs) and about-turns (black is back, again) designed to keep an audience hooked. Bored of your jeans? Why not try leather trousers! Throw out your neutrals, it’s the season for neon! Many stylish people ignored this all along, of course – even inside the fashion industry, where the front row cheerleads for apple green one season and salmon pink the next, while continuing to mostly wear navy. Now, an urgent need for sustainability has brought investment dressing back into the spotlight. But can fashion ever really come without an expiry date? Or is forever fashion just a feelgood label to make us feel better about buying new clothes? On an emotional level, the change of heart is real, among both the people who buy clothes and the people who design and make them. Fashion is about the future; without a future for the planet, there is no fashion. Everybody gets that now. But on an economic level, things are not so easy. The fashion industry generates 2% of global GDP, and employs more than 400 million people. It has grown to this size specifically through selling us more clothes than we need. And the thrill of transformation has always been part of the power of clothes. From Cinderella to My Fair Lady, Grease to Pretty Woman, the magic of a radical new look is ingrained in our culture. At the height of its imperial pomp, around the beginning of this century, fashion leaned hard into the lure of newness. In the 1970s and 1980s, teenagers tuned into the radio every Sunday to find out what pop song was at number one that week; in the 1990s and 2000s, they gravitated to the Topshop shop floor every weekend to find out what look was new for Saturday night. But that was a more innocent age, before we understood that we were running up a carbon tab we would never be able to pay off. Forever fashion is an easy sell for those lucky enough to be in a position to pivot from buying several new outfits in Zara at the beginning of a season to buying one designer dress. But for shoppers at the “value” end of the market, where jeans can cost as little as £10, there is no Chanel tweed suit (ballpark cost: £8,000) or Hermès Birkin handbag (circa £10,000) at the end of the rainbow. Fashion has become a cheap payday treat, with a new blouse often costing less than a takeaway pizza. High-street price wars have dragged down the quality of the clothes on sale in many shops. Shoppers have become accustomed to cheap, thin fabric which tears easily, to loose and irregular stitching which makes for seams that don’t hold, to buttons which snap or fall off. If your budget is tight and your experience of fashion is shoes with soles that come unstuck and sweaters that lose shape after the first wash, it is entirely rational to resist spending more than the bare minimum on clothes. Right now, investment dressing is an elite sport, like polo or skiing, a luxe pursuit for those with spare cash. At the lower price points, the trust level between shop and shopper has been eroded, and that will take some fixing. Forever fashion is not just about timeless classics over quick turnover trends, but about making clothes that last. The forever wardrobe really does exist, if well designed and properly made. A crisp white cotton shirt, a striped Breton, a simple black one-piece swimsuit, a camel trenchcoat, loafers: these were here all along, and they look as modern now as ever. It may be that we will come to look back on the breakneck-speed version of the industry we have known over the past two or three decades as an aberration, and fashion will return to being about beautiful clothes that are made to be treasured. In a perfect world, the label of a “forever wardrobe” would not be weaponised as a hard sell by retailers to entice consumers with already bulging wardrobes to buy yet more clothes. But the last train to a perfect world left the station some time ago. To use the phrase à la mode, we cannot shop our way to sustainability, but neither can we make an industry that employs one in eight of the world’s workforce disappear overnight. Clothes we want to wear for ever and ever might seem like the opposite of what fashion represents. But from where I’m standing, they look like the last word in chic. Jess Cartner-Morley is the Guardian’s associate fashion editorHidden behind the Andes in a quiet corner of South America, a formidable generation of former student leaders are putting together one of the world’s most exciting progressive movements. On 11 March, Gabriel Boric, 35, a tattooed leftist with a steely resolve to reform Chile from the bottom up, will become the country’s youngest ever president – and his green agenda is echoing across the world as time ticks away on an impending climate catastrophe. “It is so exciting to see what these young people have done,” says Maisa Rojas, 49, a renowned Chilean climate scientist who has been named environment minister in a cabinet including several of Boric’s student protest generation. “These people were university leaders just 10 years ago, but they’ve brought a completely fresh perspective to the challenges of the 21st century, including climate change.” On 24 January, Boric named a female-majority cabinet for the first time in Chile’s history. Rojas, one of 14 women among the 24 ministers, is a prominent academic at the University of Chile, where she first studied physics in the 1990s, and the director of the country’s interdisciplinary Centre for Climate and Resilience Research. She holds a PhD in atmospheric physics from Lincoln College, Oxford, and was one of the authors of August 2021’s ominous Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change report, which warned that big climate changes, caused by human activity, were now inevitable and irreversible. But now, after a distinguished career in academia, Rojas will lead the way on Boric’s ambitious promise to construct a green, sustainable and resilient future for Chile. “I think there’s a lot of space for Chile to become a leader in the fight against climate change,” she says, “I would love to be able convince other countries that ambitiously tackling climate change is in their best interests.” While international leadership would be vitally important in a region noted for its climate pariahs, led by the notorious Brazilian president, Jaír Bolsonaro, Chile’s extraordinary variety of landscapes and climates also make the country uniquely vulnerable to climate change at home, with prolonged droughts increasingly common. From the world’s driest desert, Atacama, in the north of the country, down through the arid valleys of central Chile to Patagonia’s dramatic fjords and glaciers, mining, forestry, agriculture and fisheries dominate a raw material-led economy that is among South America’s strongest. And just as Rojas speaks calmly and methodically about the climate crisis, she is clear in linking the health of the planet to the development models that have brought it to the brink. “Global warming is a symptom of the way that our civilization has developed over the 200 years since the Industrial Revolution,” she says. “That has had two consequences: one is obviously the degradation of our physical environment, but the other is structural inequality which, in the case of Chile, is the basis of the social unrest that started in 2019 – and led to the writing of the new constitution.” In October 2019, vast, era-defining anti-inequality protests exploded in Chile, leading party leaders to sign an accord to work towards replacing the current constitution, which was drafted under General Augusto Pinochet’s dictatorship (1973-1990). The assembly which was convened to write the new constitution has since passed a resolution declaring that the process is taking place in the context of a climate emergency. Elsewhere, Chile has committed to net zero emissions by 2050 as part of ambitious climate targets. In June last year, plentiful solar and wind potential led the lower house of congress to approve a bill which would bring forward a ban on the installation of new coal-fired power plants from 2040 to 2025. The senate is yet to rule on the law, which Rojas says is an absolute priority. “When we address climate change, it’s not just an environmental issue,” she says. “We need to look at structural elements of our society, which also means changing our development pathway.” “The narrative of economic growth in opposition to environmental protection is a false dichotomy that belongs in the 20th century – I’m not saying that we will transform Chile into one big national park without any industries, but we certainly have to do things differently.” Rojas is measured and thoughtful as she speaks, and she freely admits that she isn’t a natural politician. “It feels strange to be a climate scientist in the world of politics, I definitely feel a bit out of place,” she says. “But we definitely need both politicians and experts to be involved in this process. Just because I am an expert, it does not mean that I will make a better minister than someone who is a politician.” Rojas was pushed towards politics reluctantly at first. After the first round of Chile’s presidential election in November, a very different future seemed to lie in wait when José Antonio Kast, a conservative who made a point of rejecting and minimising the climate crisis, beat Boric by two percentage points. “I was heartbroken and left in total shock,” she remembers, “I said at the time, I cannot just stay in my comfort zone in academia now – I have to get involved.” Alongside a number of concerned scientists, Rojas wrote a letter to the British scientific journal Nature to express concern over a climate change denier winning Chile’s election. Soon afterwards, she was inducted into Boric’s campaign team as environmental spokesperson, before the he stormed to victory in December’s runoff, winning more votes in the process than any presidential candidate in Chile’s history. Although this is Rojas’s first political position, she has led international climate efforts in the past and was appointed coordinator of the Cop25 summit’s scientific advisory committee when Chile was due to host the conference in 2019. Although it was eventually moved to Madrid as unrest exploded in Chile, Rojas says the role was a wake-up call that helped her understand the dynamics of top-table politics, as well as the private sector – where she had no experience – and the various branches of government. She also says it signalled a turning point for the narrative surrounding the climate crisis. “Climate change really became front page news in 2019 with the Cop25,” she says. “It stopped being something that would occur at the end of the century and might harm polar bears in the Arctic.” But at Cop26 in Glasgow last November, as she worked with the team on the annual report on the climate crisis, Rojas felt an unfamiliar feeling. “For the first time in my life I felt something like ‘eco-anxiety’ – I was really worried about what was going on,” she says. Rojas says she is still trying to work out how she will manage expectations and adhere to the promises made during the campaign, saying that a “ratchet” mechanism, in which goals are set and made more ambitious periodically, could be preferable. “The expectations are so high,” she says of the incoming Boric government, which is still riding a wave of optimism ahead of its inauguration. “We all know that politics is the art of the possible, but I am confident we can deliver.”Lauren Smith-Fields was a beautiful young woman, a former high school track star who was studying to become a physical therapist. She was active on YouTube, TikTok and Instagram, posting pictures and videos of herself looking healthy and glamorous. She did not use drugs, say her family members, whose grief over her untimely death is as apparent as the sense that something is missing from the story of her demise, on December 12, at age 23. Her family does not believe that Smith-Fields died of an accidental overdose – as the Connecticut Office of the Chief Medical Examiner has said – and one can’t blame them for doubting this ruling. Smith-Fields’s friends and family have publicly wondered if racism may explain why the Bridgeport police were allegedly so careless in their investigation of the scene, saying that detectives failed to collect vital evidence, notify Smith-Fields’s family of her death, or rigorously investigate the last person known to have been in her company – the white man she met earlier that evening on a Bumble date. This wouldn’t be the first time that someone had been drugged on a dating app date – in fact, it’s a serious problem that has gone largely underreported. While there have been many stories of people being slipped drugs by their dating site matches going back years, this dangerous phenomenon has not made its way into the broader narrative of online dating culture. Just last week a 43-year-old man in Perth, Australia, was charged with drugging and raping two women in their twenties he met on a sugar daddy dating site, allegedly putting ketamine in their drinks before sexually assaulting them. In 2019, a Calgary anesthesiologist, Barry Wollach, was convicted of raping a woman he met on Bumble, who suspected she had been drugged, feeling “woozy” after having had dinner with him. (Wollach was convicted of rape though the judge ruled that there was insufficient evidence to say that he had also drugged the victim. Wollach denied both accusations.) Common date rape drugs such as Rohypnol are usually odorless, colorless, and tasteless, and leave the body quickly, so are hard to detect. But cases with medical evidence continually crop up in the news. In 2021, for example, a woman in British Columbia reported feeling so nauseous after a Tinder date that she went to a hospital, where she was given a drug test that showed MDMA and methamphetamine in her system, substances she had not knowingly ingested. As of now there is no proof that Smith-Fields was drugged by her Bumble date, or anyone else. But the lethal mixture in her system was powerful and strange – the toxicology report showed fentanyl, an opioid; promethazine and hydroxyzine, antihistamines that can be used as sedatives; and alcohol (her date told police that he and Smith-Fields had been drinking tequila) – raising questions about why a young woman with no known history of drug abuse would have such a varied mixture of substances in her system. The lawyer for Smith-Fields’s family, Darnell Crosland, told Bridgeport station WTNH: “Now to find out that all of these substances are in their daughter’s body that basically took her life, they’re so angry right now. This looks further like a manslaughter.” On January 25, after weeks of activism by her family and others, and a tweet from Cardi B (which the family credited with helping raise awareness), Bridgeport police opened a criminal investigation. Whether #justiceforlauren will become a reality remains to be seen. Meanwhile, Bumble has issued a statement saying that the “physical and emotional safety of our community is of paramount importance. We investigate member complaints and take swift, decisive action against any members who do not meet our standards.” While Bumble may be taking “swift, decisive action” in this high-profile case, they have not always been so quick to come to users’ aid. In 2020, ProPublica reported that the company failed to respond to a user’s complaint of being sexually assaulted and that her alleged attacker’s profile continued to appear on the app. The presence of sexual offenders on dating apps is another disturbing problem. In 2020, Bumble and other popular dating services became the focus of a House subcommittee investigation into sex offenders and minors using their services. It has become increasingly clear that the online dating industry is in need of regulation, and that the controversial Section 230 of the Communications Decency Act of 1996 needs to be amended. Section 230 grants internet companies immunity from liability in cases of third-party wrongdoing – which means that, even if it were to be proved that someone had died after being drugged by a dating app match, her family could not sue the company. Such protection from civil suits diminishes companies’ impetus to protect their users. Smith-Fields’s family is suing the Bridgeport police department, which “has been racially insensitive to this family and has treated this family with no respect and has violated their civil rights,” according to their notice of claim. “They have failed to investigate this matter and they refuse to view the last person with Lauren Smith-Fields before she died as a person of interest.” Smith-Fields’s brother, Lakeem Jetter, told NBC Connecticut that when he asked a police officer involved in the case about his sister’s Bumble date, “He said he was a very nice guy and they weren’t looking into him anymore. It was almost like he was sticking up for him and it seemed weird to hear that from a detective.” On January 31, Bridgeport Mayor Joseph Ganim said that two detectives involved in the case have been placed on administrative leave and are being investigated by the Bridgeport police department’s internal affairs office. Nancy Jo Sales is a New York-based writer. Her latest book is Nothing Personal: My Secret Life in the Dating App InfernoWho speaks for Israel? Rightwing lobby groups in Washington and US politicians would have Americans believe that it is them – and not Israel’s own former prime ministers and others who actually live in the Jewish state. Earlier this week Amnesty International released a report making a 280-page case that Israel’s treatment of Palestinians constitutes apartheid. The response in the US was a wave of orchestrated outrage – outrage that not only denies what many prominent Israelis say is true but, in effect, denies their right to say it. A joint statement by American groups that claim to be pro-Israel – including the American Israel Public Affairs Committee (Aipac), a powerful rightwing lobby organisation – accused Amnesty of seeking to “demonize and delegitimize the Jewish and democratic State of Israel”, a formulation frequently used to imply antisemitism. Groups that made little criticism of Israel’s military collaboration with South Africa’s white minority regime now profess concern that Amnesty’s report diminishes the suffering of black Africans under apartheid. As the Guardian’s correspondent in Jerusalem during the Palestinian uprising of the early 2000s, the second intifada, after covering the end of white rule in South Africa, I was struck by how frequently prominent Israelis drew comparisons between the occupation and apartheid. I also noticed how hard pro-Israel groups in the US fought to delegitimize any such discussion. Yet Amnesty explicitly said that it is not drawing direct parallels with the old South Africa. Its report accuses Israel of crimes against humanity under international laws, including the 1973 Apartheid Convention and the 1998 Rome statute of the international criminal court, which defines apartheid as systematic racial domination. That did not stop American politicians from piling in with accusations that Amnesty “hates Israel”, although not always to the best effect. The Republican senator Tom Cotton of Arkansas exposed his tenuous grasp on the situation by denouncing the human rights group for “attacking a free democracy where Jews, Christians, and Muslims live in peace”. If the critics of the report have read it at all, they rarely engage with its detailing of Israel’s system of military rule, segregation and forced removals that treats Palestinians as an inferior racial group. Instead critics are more focused on smearing Amnesty. A Wall Street Journal editorial, ignoring the report’s substance, called it a “libel” against Israel and claimed that Amnesty is in the company of Hamas, Hezbollah and Iran because the human rights group “all but says the Jewish state shouldn’t exist”. For those charges to stand up, you have to believe Israel has been led by antisemites who hate their own country. In smearing those who lay out a reasoned case that Israel is guilty of apartheid under international law, American critics are conveniently sidestepping years of damning judgments by Israeli leaders. As Yossi Sarid, a former Israeli cabinet minister, ex-leader of the opposition, and member of the Knesset for 32 years, put it in 2008: “What acts like apartheid, is run like apartheid and harasses like apartheid, is not a duck – it is apartheid.” Leading Israeli politicians have warned for years that their country was sliding into apartheid. They include two former prime ministers, Ehud Barak and Ehud Olmert, who can hardly be dismissed as antisemites or hating Israel. “As long as in this territory west of the Jordan river there is only one political entity called Israel it is going to be either non-Jewish or non-democratic,” Barak said in 2010. “If this bloc of millions of Palestinians cannot vote, that will be an apartheid state.” Israel’s former attorney general, Michael Ben-Yair, was even clearer. “We established an apartheid regime in the occupied territories immediately following their capture. That oppressive regime exists to this day,” he said in 2002. Ami Ayalon, the former head of Israel’s Shin Bet intelligence service, has said his country has “apartheid characteristics”. Shulamit Aloni, the second woman to serve as an Israeli cabinet minister after Golda Meir, and Alon Liel, Israel’s former ambassador to South Africa, both told me that their country practices a form of apartheid. Israel’s leading human rights group, B’Tselem, published a groundbreaking report last year that described “a regime of Jewish supremacy” over Palestinians that amounted to apartheid. Another Israeli group, Yesh Din, gave a legal opinion that “the crime against humanity of apartheid is being committed in the West Bank”. The reckoning is not confined to the political class. “The cancer today is apartheid in the West Bank,” AB Yehoshua, one of Israel’s greatest living writers, said in 2020. “This apartheid is digging more and more deeply into Israeli society and impacting Israel’s humanity.” Those views may be disputed by many in Israel, even a majority. But Aipac and other US groups – which have spent years shoring up support in America for rightwing Israeli governments intent on maintaining their particular form of apartheid – are not concerned about truth. Hardline pro-Israel groups are lashing out now in fear that the narrative in America is finally shifting. Americans no longer uncritically accept the idea that Israel is desperate for peace and that the occupation is temporary. More and more Americans now see the system Israel has constructed as oppressive and its governments as disingenuous. Perhaps most worryingly for the Israeli government’s apologists, an increasing number of Jewish Americans share that judgment. A survey of Jewish voters in the US last year found that 25% agreed that “Israel is an apartheid state”. The days of rightwing apologists for Israel imposing their false narrative may finally be numbered. Chris McGreal is the former Guardian correspondent in Jerusalem and JohannesburgThe trial in Greece of activists who protested against Beijing holding the Winter Olympics has been postponed amid accusations that proceedings were delayed to avoid embarrassing China on the eve of the Games. The highly anticipated hearing had been due to take place on Thursday in the town of Pyrgos, with human rights lawyers travelling from the UK and Athens to attend. The activists, who included a Briton, an American and a Tibetan-Canadian, were arrested when they briefly disrupted the Olympic flame lighting ceremony in October. “Our pleas to the court for the case to be heard fell on deaf ears,” said Michael Polak at the legal aid group Justice Abroad, who had flown in from London on behalf of the defendants. “They pushed it into the long grass so as not to have to deliver a decision before the Beijing Olympics.” Prior to rescheduling the trial for 1 December 2022, the three-member court’s presiding judge, Vassiliki Reppa, had instead focused on cases concerning boundary infringements and other minor disputes. “We made an express plea to bring the case forward, as it was towards the end of the listed hearings, but the bench strongly refused to do so,” said Antonis Bachouros, a local lawyer also defending the activists. “They could have prioritised the case, given its sensitivity and the seriousness of the accusations, but chose not to.” A court official told the Guardian on Friday it would not be commenting on the tribunal’s decision. Human rights defenders have called for the “farcical” charges to be dropped. The trio stands accused of attempting to “pollute, damage and distort” a historical monument – punishable by up to five years in prison under Greek law. All three were pinned to the ground before being detained in police cells for more than two days after waving a Tibetan flag and unfurling a “No genocide Games” banner during the ceremony. “The protest itself must have lasted less than a minute,” said Free Tibet’s Jason Leith, expressing disappointment that the trial had not gone ahead. “Our aim was never to cause damage, and it is absurd to say that we did. All we had was a flag and a banner. We just wanted our voice to be heard in solidarity with all those oppressed by the Chinese Communist party.” Speaking from London, where he lives, the 34-year-old described how he was tackled to the ground and told not to move or make any sound as the ceremony, filmed live by China’s state media, continued. “It was totally peaceful. We had hidden up in the hill above the ruins and when they saw us emerge, chanting, security forces pounced. I had the foot of a policeman on my back for about 15 minutes.” On 17 October, a day earlier, two student activists, a Tibetan-American and Hong Kongese-American, were arrested in Athens as they chanted “Boycott Beijing 2022” and attempted to drape a Tibetan flag and a banner in support of freedom in Hong Kong from the Acropolis. They, too, were detained in police custody overnight. Their trial, on the same charge, had been due to take place last week, but was postponed after a snowstorm forced the closure of courts and other parts of the public sector. In both cases, activists say they were protesting against the use of Olympic symbols for propaganda purposes by a Chinese regime responsible for crimes against humanity in Uyghur camps, repression of Tibetans and the continuing crackdown in Hong Kong. “There was neither destruction nor damage to the sites and the accusation is groundless and invalid,” said the prominent human rights lawyer Alexis Anagnostakis. “They chose the Acropolis and Olympia as symbols of democracy and the cradle of western civilisation … They deserve praise instead of arrests and handcuffs.” Rights groups described the “disproportionate” criminalisation of people protesting against abuses as especially worrying. “They are not criminals,” said Pema Doma at the New York-based Students For a Free Tibet. “The international community must not allow them to be scapegoated through Beijing’s growing influence in democratic countries.” But experts in Sino-Greek relations say the protests will undoubtedly have been seen as an unnecessary irritant. Athens has long been hesitant to censure Chinese president Xi Jinping, and infuriated other western capitals when it vetoed an EU condemnation of China’s human rights record at the UN in 2017. China is a major investor in the Mediterranean nation, pumping around €1bn into the country at the height of its debilitating debt crisis, when it acquired a majority stake in the strategic port of Piraeus. “Greek authorities, mostly for political reasons, are very reluctant to embarrass China,” said Plamen Tonchev, who heads the Asia unit at the Athens-based Institute of International Economic Relations. “Indicative of this cautiousness is its consistent abstention from any statements – and there have been many since 2019 – that criticise China’s policies in Hong Kong and Xinjiang.” Polak said that, despite their disappointment, the activists not only remained determined to fight “this politically motivated and ridiculous case”, but to take the matter all the way to the European court of human rights. “The Greek state is in breach of its international obligations under the European convention on human rights by prosecuting this case, no matter the eventual result,” he said, adding that freedom of expression and peaceful assembly were considered sacrosanct by the Strasbourg-based tribunal. “China’s strong influence over Greece’s leadership and institutions should be worrying for all Greek people, who have a strong history and belief in standing up against totalitarianism.”In November 1940, a priest plucked three large medieval nails from the ashes of the blitzed Coventry Cathedral. Fashioned into a cross, they would be at the centre of the altar crucifix in the modernist masterpiece that rose up alongside. That powerful symbol of resurrection and renewal has been replicated several times, sent out around the world as a reminder that wilful destruction need not be the end of the story. One such cross can be found in Odessa, where recently, as thousands of Russian troops massed on their border, Ukrainians told the dean of Coventry they had found strength and consolation in his cathedral’s support during eight years of fear and uncertainty. It reflects Coventry’s declared desire to be seen as a city that, defiant in the face of destruction, chose reconciliation over revenge; one that offers sanctuary, welcoming refugees, asylum seekers and migrants; a city where today, 27% of the population was born outside the UK. All these aims and achievements cry out to be expressed in profound music; music that might match the stature of Coventry’s cathedral and its signature work, Benjamin Britten’s War Requiem, performed at the opening of the new building 60 years ago. How disappointing, then, that Nitin Sawhney’s Ghosts in the Ruins, commissioned as a “new take” on Britten to mark the anniversary, made such little impact in its attempt to reflect the modern, vibrant city of culture. Britten dovetailed Wilfred Owen’s devastating poetry into the requiem mass. In his desire to take the story on from the grief and loss expressed by Britten, Sawhney interspersed three conventional motets with instrumental interludes and spoken poetry. But while each section was given a heading (Ashes, Phoenix Children, Seeds of Hope, etc), there was only a vague sense of narrative and precious little to stir our emotions. A massive projected portrait of Britten had greeted concertgoers as they arrived, while a recording of the Libera Me from his Requiem played softly in the background. Sawhney read Owen’s searing Dulce et Decorum Est before his remarkably tonal Anglican setting of the same words were sung by the cathedral choir. This proved to be the most successful part of the evening, followed as it was by portentously dull recorded orchestral sections featuring violinist Eos Counsell and Coventry singer YVA. New verse from local poets Emilie Lauren Jones, Landry Affton, Tiur Sitompul, Tanisha Chopra and Hawwa Hussain, extolled the virtues of multicultural Coventry, but we were shown only projected photographs of those communities. We heard none of their music. Counterintuitively, the audience moved out to stand in the ruins of the bombed building for the finale. Here, the cathedral choir was joined by the local singers of Spires Music and the Choir With No Name, which supports and encourages the isolated and marginalised. This warm gesture of solidarity might have been nourished with some thought-provoking music, but instead we had three short, unintelligible, wordless choruses. Such a lost opportunity.Luke Garrard is running through some of the players that Boreham Wood’s BW PASE academy has produced. “We’ve got some unbelievable success stories,” the club’s first-team manager says. “There is Iliman Ndiaye at Sheffield United, Pelly Ruddock at Luton, Sorba Thomas at Huddersfield, who has played for Wales. Ben Goodliffe went into Wolves and is now at Sutton.” There have been others and the headline statistic for the National League high-fliers, who travel to Bournemouth on Sunday for the first FA Cup fourth-round tie of their 74-year history, is that 12 of their youth products have earned contracts at professional clubs. Five of them have become full internationals. Garrard pauses. “It goes beyond all this for me,” he says. The 36-year-old has been associated with the Hertfordshire club since a brief playing spell in 2005. He would return in 2010 to see out a career that featured rejection by Tottenham at 16, a YTS deal at Swindon and 17 senior appearances for them, and more than 100 games for AFC Wimbledon in the non-league. Garrard got his foot on the coaching ladder at Boreham Wood’s academy in 2008 and he has been the under-18s manager, the academy director and is now the head of football at the academy. He has been the first-team manager since October 2015, having served as the assistant to Ian Allinson. “I’ve done every job from toilet cleaner,” he says with a smile. Under Garrard, Boreham Wood have established themselves in the National League, having been promoted in 2014-15, and they went close to what he calls the “Holy Grail” of the Football League in 2017-18, losing in the Wembley play-off final to Tranmere. They are well-placed this time for another push while the FA Cup run has been “spectacular” and a “fairytale” to borrow Garrard’s words, the high point being the third-round home win over AFC Wimbledon – the third time that the club have taken a Football League scalp in the competition after Blackpool (2017-18) and Southend last season. The excitement before Bournemouth is palpable but to understand Garrard and the club to which he has devoted most of his adult life is to understand the social role of the academy, which the chairman, Danny Hunter, founded in 2002. “We’ve got lads in it that are coming out of the estates in Tottenham and Hackney, in parts of east London, south London, and we have turned their lives around,” Garrard says. “They could either take the wrong road or the right road. So as much as we have the Ilimans and the Sorbas, it is some of the others, the ones that were on the road to prison or death, which are the huge success stories for us.” Garrard mentions one boy who “came in off the streets – from Wembley, Stonebridge way” and is now a fully qualified teacher. The pride is unmistakable. “Look at knife crime, look at gun crime, look at the crime that’s going on in London,” Garrard continues. “When I was growing up in Barnet, there were youth clubs, safe environments, but it’s no longer the case. I don’t think there are many setups for people in lesser privileged areas and that’s a big problem for me. “I’m not preaching and saying we have converted the devil but we are a good club, we’re a good academy. We work ever so hard with our ethics, our mindsets and, yes, we change peoples’ lives. Maybe not all of them but most definitely the majority.” The academy’s acronym stands for “Programme of Academic and Sporting Excellence” and the idea has been to run education courses alongside the football for boys aged between 16 and 19. “When the chairman started it, I think he had 12 lads but it has grown,” Garrard says. “Two or three years ago, there were almost 650 lads and we’re currently running with about 400.” It is the largest programme of its kind in England and everything is on site at the club’s Meadow Park HQ. There is the 5,000-capacity stadium, which is also home to the Arsenal women’s team and stages development-level matches for the Gunners male players. There is the training facility for the first team, academy and third-party hires, which are to do with the grassroots game. And there are the 11 classrooms and additional study suites. The academy’s education partner is the SCL group, which works with various clubs around the country. Boreham Wood are able to draw down funding that SCL receives from the government in the form of grants to help provide subsidised meals for the academy players, travel allowances and free kit. Garrard is not the only member of the first team with responsibilities at the academy. The midfielder Connor Smith is the head academy coach while four other players – David Stephens, Femi Ilesanmi, Jamal Fyfield and Kane Smith – also coach there. So does the assistant manager, Lloyd Doyley, the former Watford and Jamaica defender. Boreham Wood’s connection to Arsenal is well established with Hunter, who took over in 1999, feeling that one of his best decisions was to link up early on with the Premier League club’s women’s team. “It gave us a platform, in partnership with Arsenal, to build the club,” Hunter has said. The Arsenal men’s team have played a regular pre-season fixture at Meadow Park throughout Hunter’s tenure. He had been a player for Boreham Wood, as was his son, Charlie, who is now the chief executive, while his father, Mickey, managed them in the 1970s. “The chairman is unbelievable,” Garrard says. “The amount of infrastructure he has put in place, the money he has put back into the club for the academy … Our model is not to have a first team and then worry about the rest. We are built from the academy up.” One of the drivers for the academy is to help boys who have been released by clubs at 16 – always a shattering blow. It happened to Garrard, who had initially been on Arsenal’s books up to the age of 12, although he says that Spurs actually let him go towards the end of his under-15 season before he ended up sticking around for a final year. Garrard can tell the funny story of how he turned up to his Spurs trial in an Arsenal kit. He had been asked at short notice to wear white and blue and all he had was a strip in those colours from his time at Arsenal, complete with club badge. “When we get lads who come into the system at Boreham Wood, I can talk to them about the hard knocks of getting released, dropping into League One with Swindon and then into non-league,” Garrard says. “Then there is Lloyd Doyley, who has played in the Premier League and in big international games. So they are getting a broad understanding of what it takes to be a player.” And so to Bournemouth, who made eye-catching signings at the end of January to fire their promotion bid from the Championship. “They are unbelievable, Scott Parker is an unbelievable manager and they are really a Premier League club,” Garrard says. “But we are going there to cause an upset. There will be no phones beforehand. We’re not going there to film anything. We are going there with a focus – to win a game of football.”At the height of the tense second phase of the cold war, a group of Stasi majors, propaganda officers and border guards convened at a heavily fortified compound in socialist east Berlin. From spring 1982 until winter 1989, they gathered once every four weeks, from 4pm until 6pm, at the House of Culture inside the premises of the Felix Dzerzhinsky Guards Regiment (the Stasi’s paramilitary wing), in Berlin’s Adlershof district. They met in a first-floor room adorned with portraits of East German leader Erich Honecker and Vladimir Ilyich Lenin that was closed with a security seal overnight. But the Stasi men did not gather to gameplan nuclear war scenarios, work up disinformation campaigns or fine-tune infiltration techniques. They set out to learn about iambic pentameter, cross-rhyming schemes and Petrarchan sonnets. The group, which internal memos referred to as the Working Circle of Writing Chekists (a reference to the fearsome Bolshevist secret police, the Cheka), produced two anthologies over this seven-year period. I got hold of a copy of one shortly before I moved to Berlin in 2016. The slim paperback, its title Wir Über Uns (“We about us”) falling down the front page in curling calligraphic letters, felt like something out of a Monty Python sketch, or a spin-off from the film The Lives of Others. How had a secret police synonymous with the suppression of free thought ended up writing poetry? Over the coming months I tried to track down former members of the circles, and contacted them to see if they could tell me more. The first Writing Chekist to reply was Jürgen Polinske, a former border guard who now worked as an archivist at Berlin’s Humboldt University. He was happy to meet up, he wrote in an email, but “how much time we will need will depend on your questions”. We met at a restaurant under the railway arches in Berlin’s Mitte district, just down the road from Friedrichstrasse station where he used to wave people across the iron curtain. What had the Stasi tried to achieve with its poetry programme, I asked Polinske over a currywurst with potato salad. Was the idea to help East Germany’s working-class warriors better understand the decadent bourgeois mind? Polinske shook his head. The reason he had joined the Stasi poetry circle was simple: “I had artistic ambitions, and I thought I could learn something from the real poets who ran the workshop.” His own poems were technically accomplished, but could verge on the whimsical, and didn’t always earn praise. Many of the young soldiers who turned up to the Working Circle of Writing Chekists had left with tears in their eyes after being informed of the poor quality of their work. He, too, had stopped attending after a few months. If I really wanted to understand why the Stasi had set up the circle and how they planned to use it, Polinske said, I should try to contact the circle’s former artistic leader, a thin man with thick glasses called Uwe Berger. He had instilled the group with a dogma: poetry had to rouse emotion and boost the hunger for victory in class warfare. I paid our bill. Outside the cafe, before we waved our goodbyes, Polinske said something that I couldn’t quite make sense of at the time: “The question mark at the end of a poem is worth a hundred times more than a full stop. I know that now, after thinking about it for a long time. But I didn’t know that then.” *** In theory, there is nothing surprising about the East German politburo declaring a matter of statecraft the vaguest of all literary disciplines, what Edmund Burke once called the “art of substantiating shadows, and of lending existence to nothing”. In the 1970s, the East German government had warned that the relatively small number of readers of schöne literatur, or high literature, represented a “key problem” for the socialist country. A mere 35% of the adult population reading Goethe and Pushkin was deemed insufficient: in East Germany, that number was to rise to 90%, and ideally within five years. A 1973 decree prescribed that larger East German factories must have an on-site library with 500 to 1,000 books, staffed by a librarian. Bigger factories needed more books, 18,000-30,000, in any enterprise employing between 5,000 and 10,000 employees. In terms of books printed, the stated aim was a yearly increase in productivity of 4-5%. Between 1950 and 1989, the number of books printed each year and the proportion of those that were fiction more than tripled. An International Study of Reading Literacy, conceived before the fall of the Wall but carried out just after, found that “the average reading comprehension of East German eighth-graders was significantly higher than that of their West German contemporaries”. The poetic and political destiny of East Germany were intertwined: that had been the credo of an influential group of poets who had returned from exile after the second world war to take up political posts in the fledgling satellite state of Soviet Russia. One of them, poet-turned-culture-minister Johannes R Becher, argued that creative writing would not merely reflect the social conditions of East Germany, but shape them. This utopian vision would rattle around policymakers’ heads even after Becher’s death in 1958. A year later, the Socialist Unity party launched a programme designed to bridge the divide between the working classes and the intelligentsia: writers would be made to work in factories or coalmines, where they would teach their craft to their comrades in so-called Circles of Writing Workers. Within a few years, every branch of industry had its own writers’ circle: train carriage construction workers, chemists, teachers. East Germany’s secret police did not wait long to get in on the act. The first passing references to Writing Chekists in the Ministry for State Security appear in the files as early as 1960. In 1961, the Stasi’s administrative branch in Berlin records a second “lyrical evening”, attended by three of its full-time employees. But the intelligence agency’s dedication to lyrical praxis would remain sporadic for the next two decades. The Stasi major who ran the informal poetry meet-ups at the Adlershof compound in the late 70s had an inexhaustible appetite for jaunty ditties (“This song is very popular / In our country the GDR” went one), and the poems produced by his students were often similarly lighthearted. Soldiers in their late teens penned love poetry that paid little attention to political debates. One young member of the secret police fantasised in free verse about being kissed by a young maiden who was unaware of his lowly rank, thus elevating him to a “lance corporal of love”. “Patiently I wait”, the lusty teenager wrote, “for my next promotion / at least / to general”. One soldier imagined, in a sestina, writing the words “I love you” into the dark night sky with his searchlight. “An egotist / in love I am”, went another verse. “Want you / to be mine / just mine / and hope never / to be nationalised”. Love poetry could be awkwardly at odds with a state that valued collective ownership over private property. *** For reasons that are not explicitly spelled out in the paperwork that survives in the Stasi records archive, East Germany’s Ministry for State Security decided in spring 1982 that it needed to professionalise its poetry circle. It put out feelers to Uwe Berger, a prize-winning poet with an impressive 20 anthologies and novels under his belt. Berger seemed a strange choice for such a mission. Born in 1928, he had been one of about 200,000 teenagers who were drafted into the Luftwaffe in the dying days of the Third Reich as auxiliary staff, or Flakhelfer: a traumatic experience that seemed to have made him unable to later join the rank and file of party politics. Unusually, and unlike roughly every sixth East German citizen over the age of 18 at around that time, the 54-year-old was not a member of the ruling Socialist Unity party – an organisation that saw itself not as a political party in the conventional sense but an “avant garde of the proletariat” that existed beyond all checks and balances, commanding authority over the judiciary, executive and legislative. Berger had died in a Berlin hospital in September 2014, but contemporaries I spoke to recalled an almost monkish ascetic, a man whose most extravagant hobby outside writing was a collection of rocks and minerals he had picked up on travels around the Soviet bloc. One poet published by the same imprint said their mutual editor, who used to visit Berger in his apartment every Christmas, had realised one year that the glass of schnapps they drank together always came from the same bottle on his kitchen shelf: in the 12 months between their meetings, Berger would not take so much as a sip. A Berliner Zeitung profile from August 1965 portrayed Berger as a “lone wolf”, who “did not find or seek a connection”. Nonetheless, he accepted the invitation to run the Stasi poetry circle. Under Berger’s tutelage, a new discipline descended. Young soldiers who were doing their three-year military service in the Guards Regiment had to wear their uniforms; officers could attend in civilian clothing. Lessons had a clearer structure. Members of the programme were required to take turns reading out their poems and Berger would encourage feedback. Only once this discussion had finished did he himself comment, always in a polite voice, rarely overtly critical. The poems produced in the Stasi’s creative writing class became less frivolous. The utopian underpinning of socialist East Germany faded into the distance. One 32-year-old with a strong stutter, a second lieutenant in the Stasi’s central information service, read out a poem called Dialectics: “Then / at the shooting range / I take aim with calm / and precision”. Poetry, one of the circle’s other members I tracked down told me, was the sound of a little bird, singing. But Berger didn’t want to hear birdsong, “he wanted every poem to sound like The Internationale”. The group’s new syllabus leaned more heavily on a phrase coined by the poet-turned-GDR-diplomat Friedrich Wolf (father of Markus, one of the most well-known spymasters of the cold war): art is a weapon. “The material of our age lies in front of us, hard as iron”, Wolf had written in a 1928 poem. “Poets are working to forge it into a weapon. The worker has to pick up this weapon.” *** Working my way through piles of paperwork in the Stasi records archive, I discovered hundreds of poems that were produced by the Working Circle of Writing Chekists, including those that weren’t included in the secret police’s official anthologies. What became increasingly clear was that not all the young men who gathered at Adlershof once a week wanted to write weapons in verse form. They wanted to write poems that did something poetry was good at: asking questions rather than giving answers. In none of the poems was this tendency more pronounced than in those of 18-year-old soldier Alexander Ruika, one of the few members of the circle with a genuinely interesting way with words. The Guards Regiment was not just an ordinary unit where East German teens could while away their military service. It was an elite training ground from which the Stasi would frequently recruit new talent for special missions, such as the “tunnel unit” that was tasked with preventing underground escapes to the west. But Ruika’s poems voiced existential fears about life as a full-time spy. “Every human / has a craving / for disguise”, he conceded in Masks. The hunter’s instinct may even be a “habit from pre-human times”. But to him, “pretending to be someone else” looked like “courting behaviour / play acting”. His generation had been offered a chance to do things differently, Ruika wrote, to have the “courage to disrobe”: Away with the masks the world of humans no longer a hunting ground admit you are yourself accept yourself and your neighbour too. The more the Stasi tried to weaponise poetry, the more it seemed to backfire. As tensions between east and west began to rise, the poems produced in the circle became ways of expressing what the East German regime deemed unsayable. In November 1983, the West German Bundestag voted to allow the US to station Pershing II and Tomahawk cruise missiles in southern Germany. Soviet leaders walked out of nuclear arms talks a day later. All the most dangerous pieces in a giant game of cold war missile chess were pointing at Berlin. East Germany was insistent on not showing any weakness in this cold war game of chicken, with state leader Honecker in denial about the existence of a growing youth peace movement. But even within the Stasi, fear of nuclear war accentuated a generational divide. In June 1984, a junior officer within the Stasi’s propaganda unit, called Gerd Knauer, presented the circle with a 52-page poem called The Bang. At the top of page three, there’s a noise as loud “as a thunderclap”, followed by a blinding white light, “daggers stabbing into your pupils”. Something is wrong, the narrator realises: the world is “hovering / on a precipice”. Knauer poured forth feelings he wasn’t usually allowed to express to his comrades. Across two full pages, he described “the fear / that everything might end”, “fear / of the explosions”, “fear that something – by mistake – / will not go to plan”. Locked into an ABAB rhyme scheme, the poem picks up pace, jumping from the personal to the political, the political to the biblical, the biblical to the mythical. By page 10, the poem is narrated by Odysseus, running in terror through “the fog of history”. Hounded by rolling thunder, Odysseus flees into an ivory tower where the philosophers live, seeking spiritual guidance in this hour of need. But Plato, Hegel and Kant all remain silent. Only a man with a bushy beard rises from his seat with an apologetic look on his face: Karl Marx tries to make a plea Looks Odysseus in the face Says gravely: They’re doing it because of me But they put their faith in the wrong place. By page 13, the narrator, who at this stage may or may not be Odysseus, is stumbling across a hellscape strewn with dead bodies, “some naked others wearing clothes / Some sliced right open from head to toes”. On the poem’s final pages, the narrator joins a community of nuclear war survivors, disfigured men and women who live off stews made of bugs and flies. When Knauer finished reading it to the circle, he told me over lunch at a Vietnamese restaurant in Marzahn in 2019, there was a moment of silence. An ashen-faced kitchen worker, who had joined the group for the first time that day, rushed to the toilet. All the remaining eyes in the room were on the circle’s artistic leader. Uwe Berger said the poem was very technically advanced, and he was impressed with the skills the Chekists had acquired. *** What the Stasi officers didn’t know was that Berger had a relationship with the secret police that predated his deployment to the Adlershof compound. One summer morning in 2020, an archivist placed a weighty file on my reading-room desk at the Stasi Records Agency: marked “IM Uwe”, it consisted of six volumes held in faded brick-red cardboard folders, each holding approximately 350 pages. They dated back to November 1969, when the Stasi first approached Berger about working as an informal collaborator. Over a period of 12 years, the poet without party membership had proved himself to be one of the most productive informants on East Germany’s literary scene. Berger borrowed friends’ unpublished manuscripts to report on their political leanings, or just to comment on them “being a bit senile”. He informed the Stasi which of his literary colleagues was suspected of having an affair with whom, which jokes they told and which western TV programmes they allowed their children to watch (a Tarzan film merited particular disapproval). Berger’s activity as an informant enabled him to punish enemies, sideline rivals and build up allies, all with the stroke of a pen. In his reports, he eventually made a habit of referring to himself in the third person, as if he were writing small dramas with himself as the protagonist: “Uwe Berger said”; “Uwe Berger rejected this”. He described one writer with surrealist tendencies as having a “fascistoid fondness for intoxication and magic”, while denouncing another for making “the absurd accusation that we have fascists over here [in East Germany]”. In one case he even volunteered to suggest a put-down that the Stasi could place in book reviews of a female singer-songwriter he deemed insufficiently loyal to the state (his humble proposal: “tampon poetry”). In February 1982, the Stasi rewarded Berger for his enthusiastic service by handing him the silver Brotherhood in Arms medal, a military honour that the Ministry for State Security would only occasionally grant to individuals outside the armed forces. Berger does not mention the medal in a memoir he self-published after the fall of the Berlin Wall. The book makes his collaboration with the secret police sound like a tiresome chore, and rather short-lived. “A couple of years” after starting to write reports, Berger recalls, he asked his handler to release him from his commitment. As an artist, he reasoned, he could not be constantly exposed to the “negative aspects of life”. From reading Berger’s memoirs, you would assume that his appointment as poet-in-chief at Adlershof in 1982 was when his career as a spy came to an end. But the Stasi wasn’t just gathering information on civilians. It was, especially in the 1980s, also looking in on itself. When the Ministry for State Security was set up in 1950, it had recruited predominantly those from underprivileged, proletarian backgrounds. But in the 1970s a growth spurt made it harder to stick to its founding principles. The Stasi had 20,000 employees in 1961, when the Wall was built; by 1982, its ranks had swelled fourfold, to 81,500. Many were the sons of Stasi officers, and thus only “working class” by a rhetorical sleight of hand. “The candidate comes from a progressive family loyal to the party of the working class” is a phrase that pops up regularly in the Stasi’s recruitment files from that period. Could this new generation be trusted? In Berlin, staff were housed in self-contained districts, which were managed by an internal administrative unit. Stasi officers were looked after in Stasi hospitals, their children went to Stasi nurseries or Stasi schools: a privilege, but also a sign of the lengths to which the state was going in order to maintain complete control. The officers themselves were made to share offices, so that comrade would always keep an eye on comrade. But what about the moment they left their desks? The Stasi needed someone to watch the watchers when they let their guards down. It had to find a method to gaze into their hearts to identify any desires that could grow into a temptation, to X-ray their souls for deviant fears and aspirations. It had a job for Uwe Berger. As the Stasi men at the Adlershof House of Culture became increasingly accomplished poets, the man brought in to teach them verse turned spy again. Berger resumed his activity as an unofficial collaborator in October 1982 with a series of short profiles. One 20-year-old corporal was “clumsy” with a “low level of education”, but also “open and direct”, and therefore useful: he naively confessed that other comrades had warned him off joining the poetry circle because he would be forced “to wave the red flag” there. Not all of the poems were sufficiently confessional: some of the aspiring poets had a disconcerting habit of disguising rather than revealing their true feelings. One sergeant-major, though “undoubtedly talented”, was worryingly “cool, sceptical, self-controlled”. “The thing to get to the bottom of,” Berger wrote in his report, “would be to find out what is really behind the mask, at the bottom of his soul.” Berger’s reports revealed a deeper kind of paranoia at the heart of East Germany’s secret police: an instinctive suspicion not just of themselves but also of the literary creativity that the GDR’s cultural founding fathers had put at the heart of the state. There seemed to be something integral to what poets did that subverted the authority of the Socialist Unity party – a party that was “re-elected” every three to five years in a non-free, non-secret vote, yet claimed that only it was able to read Marx, Engels and Lenin in the correct way. Intellectuals who came up with alternative readings were an instant threat. Berger’s report on Gerd Knauer’s long nuclear-war poem The Bang was particularly troubled by the stanza about Odysseus and Karl Marx. The syntax was ambiguous, he wrote: when Marx said “they are doing it because of me”, was the “it” referring to the other philosophers’ silence, or to nuclear war? And if the latter, were “they” Marx’s followers or his enemies? “The question of guilt is not answered unambiguously,” Berger noted in his report. Knauer implied that “Marx has invented social revolution and is therefore to blame for the imminent annihilation of mankind,” a thesis that amounted to nothing but “idealism and acceptance of surrender”. The poems of the talented teen Alexander Ruika, Berger wrote in a report in April 1983, were “ambivalent”: he had a problem with “power” under socialism. On subjects like collectivism, life in the army and revolution, he reported, the young lyricist was hard to pin down: he was “openly in favour”, but “subliminally against”. But poems didn’t even need to deal with politics to arouse suspicion. In April 1980, the Ministry for State Security’s own thinktank, the Chair for Scientific Communism, had produced a 30-page paper on “solutions to problems in the field of cultural politics”. It claimed that art and culture were especially prone to “covert and subliminal assaults”, because their practitioners employed techniques such as “allegories, metaphors, fables, alienation effects”. On 25 October 1984, Berger wrote that Knauer had read out a poem about a dream in which he flew a kite that “escapes from narrow confinement and sails into freedom”. Berger explained that the kite was what poets called a metaphor, and that the poem was a covert call for East German army personnel to cross over to the west. *** As Russia, Poland and Hungary embarked on their courses of political and economic reform over the course of the 1980s, the GDR put its foot on the brake and tried to cover its citizens’ eyes and ears. But the new world order was confusing, dizzying even, for many East Germans, including the Stasi major who had run the poetry circle before Berger. Once sidelined for his relentlessly jolly rhymes, he now presented a poem called Stop Going Around in Circles, which sounded more like a blues ballad: Sometimes you are strong, and sometimes weak Sometimes you are tired, sometimes awake Sometimes you are brave and don’t know no harm Sometimes a single word has the strength to disarm. Sometimes the hottest summer day leaves you cold Sometimes you grasp a spider’s web for hold Blues songs are often about loss and despair: “The thrill is gone / It’s gone away for good”, laments BB King. But they tend to end on a flick of redemption, a glimmer of hope in the act of voicing their grief: “You know, I’m free, free now baby / I’m free from your spell”. But the major’s melancholy verses are about a terror that dare not speak its name, ending on a positive note that is even more unsettling because we know its optimism is fake: “And yet you carry on and pretend / That you are happy inside and always content”. I found this poem in a cache that Berger had started to compile for an anthology to commemorate the GDR’s 40th anniversary in 1989, with the working title Man, Soldier, Communist: Poetry and Prose by Writing Chekists. The cache was full of loose pages that looked as if they had been shuffled and reshuffled. The title of the anthology kept on changing, with Berger eventually opting for one that sounded like a gesture of defiance: In My Raised Fist. Pages full of poems were cut, including Stop Going Around in Circles. Instead, Berger picked a poem called Letter of Recruitment: We are Dzerzhinsky’s men To us our mission is clear ready to rise once again ready to fight with no fear. A Stasi printing permission slip for the Working Circle of Writing Chekists’ last anthology was issued on 31 December 1989, almost seven weeks after the fall of the Berlin Wall. But the booklet never made it to the printers. In the final manuscript, the dedication to the 40th anniversary of the foundation of the GDR and the Ministry for State Security is crossed out. Uwe Berger’s publisher informed him three months after the Wall came down that they would allow his contract to expire the following month. His request for a reissue of his 1987 memoirs, showing his “turn to perestroika”, went unanswered. Two years after his death, in February 2014, a new poetry prize in Berger’s name was to be set up at a literature festival in Berlin’s Köpenick district. But, following objections by Berger’s former colleagues and contemporaries from the East German literary scene, the prize was renamed. • This is an edited extract from The Stasi Poetry Circle by Philip Oltermann, published by Faber &amp; Faber on 17 February, priced £14.99. To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com.Nottingham Forest proved in January the progress they are making. For many, the victories over Arsenal and arch-rivals Derby were the biggest moments, but for others getting expensive flops off the books and not overpaying in the market were significant. The departures of Carl Jenkinson and Lyle Taylor, among others, take the club one step closer to escaping the previous era of excess, when players were signed on inflated wages in the hope of securing a return to the Premier League. In recent years many shortsighted incomings have not lived up to their billing, leaving Forest, who face Leicester in the FA Cup on Sunday, losing money without the reward of promotion. Jenkinson joined in summer 2019 but played 11 games in two and a half years. Taylor, who was earning more than £30,000 a week, has left on loan after scoring eight times in 60 appearances since signing a three-year deal aged 30, a further sign of financial exuberance. Forest’s latest accounts showed a £32m operating loss for the year ending March 2020, a sign things needed to change. Dane Murphy arrived last year from Barnsley to become the chief executive and a new statistics-led recruitment team was installed with a remit to lower the cost and average age of the squad. Murphy plays a key role in recruitment, offering a different perspective after playing professionally in the United States and Germany. Fifteen first-team players have left on permanent or loan deals since the end of last season while summer recruits had to be 26 or younger and cost less than £10,000 a week. This season’s departures have reduced the average age and saved millions in wages. Despite optimism the squad was capable of promotion, things started badly under Chris Hughton, six defeats in their first seven matches leaving them bottom with one point when the manager was sacked in September. The former Swansea head coach Steve Cooper arrived to galvanise a squad low on confidence. Cooper was Forest’s first choice thanks to his work improving young players at Liverpool and Swansea and within the England setup. He has made the players believe in themselves and they have dragged themselves into play-off contention with 12 wins in his opening 22 games. The game that pushed the two-times European Cup winners back into the limelight was their FA Cup third-round win over Arsenal. Smart recruitment was plain as Djed Spence, on loan from Middlesbrough, was a standout performer at right-back, leading to interest from numerous Premier League clubs. In front of him was the academy graduate Brennan Johnson, who was then the subject of recording-breaking bids from Brentford. Spence was not wanted by Neil Warnock at the Riverside and Hughton was keen to loan Johnson for a season in League One to aid his experience but both have flourished in the Championship. It is a sign of progress on and off the pitch that Forest felt able to reject the money on offer for Johnson because they did not want to damage a squad on the up. Cooper’s success has quickly earned him the respect of the Greek owners, who sanctioned the signing of Steve Cook from Bournemouth on a deal running to 2024 even though the centre-back is 30. Cook is seen by Cooper as the experienced player who can help coach his young side through games as they look to secure promotion. Cooper and the recruitment team operate in tandem. On deadline day they missed out on the wingers Jed Wallace and Josh Bowler because of Millwall’s and Blackpool’s valuations. Previously, Forest might have panicked and paid for players but the regime held firm to avoid overpaying. Instead, they moved for Sam Surridge to cover for the injured Lewis Grabban and the defender Jonathan Panzo joined from Dijon, both within the business model. The net has been spread far to find bargains. Forest targeted Benfica’s Gonçalo Ramos and Internazionale’s Martín Satriano in January, and Richie Laryea arrived from Toronto FC. They have been smart in the loan market, bringing in Spence, Max Lowe, Philip Zinckernagel and the returning James Garner in the summer, and in January adding Keinan Davis, who would have joined before the season started but for injury. In the long term the club would like to move away from having so many loan players. Leicester, the next Premier League side to be tested by this evolving team, won the top flight thanks to careful scouting and management, making them a role model for Forest. If promotion does not come this season, it would not be the crushing blow it was previously. Instead, Forest would go into next season with a platform to build on, rather than making the wholesale changes that have become tradition at the City Ground.Any hope of the controversies that have dogged the Beijing Winter Games fading into a feelgood blur of medals once the torch was lit was quickly swept aside on Saturday as the first gold went to a convicted doper. Therese Johaug, the decorated Norwegian cross-country skier who was barred from competing at the 2018 Pyeongchang Winter Olympics while serving an 18-month suspension for a positive drugs test, obliterated the field to win the 7.5km+7.5km skiathlon on a windblown afternoon in the tiny village of Taizicheng in the mountains roughly 120km northwest of Beijing. Few, if any, of the 109 gold medals that will be handed out in 15 sports over the next two and a half weeks will be won in more dominant fashion. The 33-year-old, who tucked herself into the leading pack from the mass start before opening a lead of nearly a minute on a chasing group of four during the final lap, raised her arms in jubilation as she crossed the line in 44min 13.7sec to win the contest regarded as cross-country’s ultimate test. Natalia Nepryaeva, the Russian perched atop the overall World Cup leaderboard, rallied to overtake a pair of skiers in the final kilometre to win the silver, coming in 30.2sec off the pace. Austria’s Teresa Stadlober settled for bronze after she was pipped by 0.3sec at the finish by Nepryaeva. Kerttu Niskanen of Finland finished fourth and Frida Karlsson of Sweden was fifth, eight seconds ahead of sixth-place Jessie Diggins, who became the first American to win a gold medal in cross-country in the team sprint at Pyeongchang. The skiathlon race is designed to determine the best all-around skier. That mantle belongs to Johaug after her runaway victory, which played out in punishing conditions of icy gusts and -1C (30F) temperatures, but not without the spectre of controversy. For Johaug, it was her fourth Olympic medal and second gold after helping Norway to a 4×5km relay win at the 2010 Vancouver Games. The 14-times world champion also won a silver and bronze in team events at Sochi four years later. But she was forced out of the 2018 Olympics due a lengthy suspension after testing positive for the anabolic steroid clostebol, which she claimed was the result of a lip ointment bought by the team doctor, Fredrik Bendiksen, on short notice to treat sunburn during high-altitude training in Italy. Her explanation was deemed implausible by skiing’s international governing body – not least because the cream in question included a doping warning label on the box – which appealed against the 13-month suspension initially handed down by Norwegian anti-doping authorities. The court of arbitration for sport subsequently tacked on five months to the punishment, acknowledging Johaug’s “otherwise clean anti-doping record” but citing her negligence in missing a clear warning label and ruling one of the sport’s biggest names out of Pyeongchang. “Johaug failed to conduct a basic check of the packaging, which not only listed a prohibited substance as an ingredient but also included a clear doping cautionary warning,” the court said in a press release. Bendiksen resigned after taking the blame for Johaug’s positive test. Since returning from her suspension, Johaug has finished off the podium once in 53 races. She is widely expected to add to her medal haul in the coming days as the women’s cross-country programme moves forward. “It means a lot,” Johaug said. “I’ve never had an [individual] Olympic gold medal. I’m so happy. “At first I was really happy just to come here because we have the Covid in our team. And today when I’m reaching my goal, I’m so happy. I’ve trained thousands of hours for this and been away from home a lot over the years. So it’s beautiful to reach this goal.” Johaug’s win came shortly before speed skater Irene Schouten of the Netherlands won the second gold of the Beijing Games in the women’s 3,000m.The wry observation – no joke given the seriousness of the material – that the Royal Opera’s new staging of Theodora failed to deliver the sex and violence promised may have worn thin by the time you read this. All to the good. Katie Mitchell’s take on Handel’s late oratorio, first performed in London in 1750, is far superior to the blizzard of warning signals that preceded it, and far less radical too. Most of the advance alerts were irrelevant for anyone with even mildly robust 21st-century sensibilities. This tragedy of a virginal Christian woman persecuted by the Romans, set to an English libretto by Thomas Morell, contains some of the most affecting and inward-looking music Handel wrote. Therein lies the shock: that his economy of means could produce music of such grief. Mitchell’s updating honoured that solemnity, as did the star cast led by the soprano Julia Bullock as Theodora, the mezzo-soprano Joyce DiDonato as her friend Irene, and the countertenor Jakub Józef Orliński as the Christian convert Didymus. You can take or leave the directorial interventions, the hallmark slo-mo sequences, the gun-toting and bomb-making. So, too, can you accept the shift in narrative emphasis: Mitchell wants this religion to be active and political rather than, as she sees it, passive, though we could argue at length about whether an interior faith can ever truly be passive. None of her interpretation, thoughtfully conveyed on its own terms, obscures the work’s simple message – a cry for tolerance urged at the outset by Didymus: “vain is the attempt to force belief/ with the severest instrument of death”. Handel asks the same question with equal force in Messiah: “Why do the nations so furiously rage together”. Humanity wins out in Theodora. Neither the misogyny Mitchell finds in the work, nor the rescue from it by a feminist interpretation and a reworked and unconvincing ending, can alter that central plea. Conducted by Harry Bicket, whose familiarity with Theodora goes back to Peter Sellars’s Glyndebourne production of the 1990s, when Bicket played harpsichord continuo, the music took time to settle, with nervous scrambling between pit and stage at the start. Yet during the course of this four-hour evening, Handel’s genius shone with ever greater luminosity, supported by a staging of care, perception and mostly – a second encounter is needed to understand every aspect – coherence. Designed with stylish attention to detail by Chloe Lamford, with costumes by Sussie Juhlin-Wallén and lighting by James Farncombe, the setting is a modern embassy. The covert Christians work in a catering kitchen, in service to the Romans who hold champagne parties next door, both rooms visible at once in the sliding-boxes set. Bullock’s Theodora, heartfelt and strong, is ardently sung by this versatile performer. Handel may not be her central musical territory, but she gave it her all, with nuance and vitality. The role of Irene, taken by DiDonato, has greater dramatic scope and matchless arias (including As with rosy steps the morn). DiDonato and Bicket together showed how Handel’s long da capo arias – in which the first section returns after a contrasting middle – move forwards not back, not a repetition but an emotional transfiguration. They did this via ornamentation and dynamics, subtle in execution, absolute in impact. DiDonato, whether pushing her Dinnerladies cleaning trolley or spooning out instant coffee as if for a homely prayer meeting, electrified, especially in Lord, to thee. (Asserting my non-passive self, I would happily thwack the person who shouted “Brava!”, fortissimo solo, each time DiDonato finished singing.) The production’s dominant visual image, gallingly, will be that of the two near-naked pole dancers who spiral up and down in their red padded velvet boudoir like birds of paradise. They do this, nearly to distraction, in Theodora’s sorrowing aria, With darkness deep, underlining the disparity between the dancers’ pride in their work and the Christian virgin’s horror at her enforced prostitution. Yet they can coexist, and offer mutual solace. Crass humour is narrowly avoided when Didymus, now disguised in Theodora’s short, tight, sequined sex worker garb, takes over on the pole. Orliński, singing with limpid clarity in a striking house debut, is also a brave and game actor. This episode is merely the most titivating part of a rich visual whole that offers so much more. Ed Lyon as the conflicted Septimius (triumphing in From virtue springs each gen’rous deed), Gyula Ordent as Valens and Thando Mjandana as Marcus completed the lineup. The orchestra sounded more meaty than we are now used to in baroque repertoire, but still lithe and responsive. Five-star praise to the ROH chorus, and to the basso continuo players, the linchpin of this music, who give colour and character: harpsichordists Andrew Griffiths and Mark Packwood, cellist Chris Vanderspar and, especially, theorbo player Eligio Luis Quinteiro, sinewy and sensuous throughout. Handel’s contemporary Bach may never have written any operas, but his conservative employers in Leipzig, on his appointment as cantor, warned him against being too operatic. One of his cantatas from that period, Jesus schläft, was soll ich hoffen?, BWV 81 (Jesus sleeps, what should my hope be?) uses expressive colouring, whether in the drifts of woodwind that suggest slumber in the opening alto aria, or in the bursting storm music that follows. Dramatic? Without question. This was the work featured in the latest Bach, the Universe and Everything by the Orchestra of the Age of Enlightenment, an ongoing Sunday series performed on the same day at Kings Place, London and Oxford Mathematical Institute. Directing from the organ, Steven Devine led eight singers and nine instrumentalists in a taut programme of short works with the cantata as centrepiece. Bethany Horak-Hallett, a member of the OAE’s Rising Stars of the Enlightenment scheme, sang the opening aria with persuasive freshness and assurance. A feature of these events is the choice of a science-connected speaker to give a “sermon”. Tim Harford, economist, journalist and wonderful presenter of BBC Radio 4’s More or Less, spoke fluently about how random obstacles can inspire us to be more creative. His central example was Keith Jarrett’s Köln concert, when a bad back and a bad piano nearly forced the jazz master to cancel, but resulted in a bestselling album of improvised brilliance. We should all bear that in mind as we embrace our current chaoses – and yes, let’s put that in the plural. Star ratings (out of five) Theodora ★★★★ OAE: Bach, the Universe and Everything ★★★★ Theodora is at the Royal Opera House, London, until 16 FebruaryTwo more Conservative MPs, Nick Gibb and Aaron Bell, on Friday called for Boris Johnson to resign because of “partygate”, bringing the total so far to 15. In order for a no-confidence vote to be triggered, the chair of the 1922 Committee, Graham Brady, must receive letters from at least 54 MPs – 15% of the Conservative party. Here is the full list of MPs who have urged the prime minister to stand down, although not all have said that they have formally communicated their demands to Brady. Nick Gibb The former education minister and MP for Bognor Regis and Littlehampton wrote in the Telegraph that his constituents were “furious about the double standards” and said Johnson had been “inaccurate” in statements to the Commons. He said he had submitted a letter of no confidence, adding: “To restore trust, we need to change the prime minister.” Aaron Bell The MP for Newcastle-under-Lyme, one of the Conservatives’ 2019 “red wall” intake, announced he had submitted a letter of no confidence, saying: “The breach of trust that events in No 10 Downing Street represent, and the manner in which they have been handled, makes his position untenable.” His statement, on Friday, came days after an emotional moment in the Commons when he asked Johnson if he thought he was a “fool” for following Covid restrictions at his grandmother’s funeral. Roger Gale The North Thanet MP said he submitted a letter of no confidence more than 18 months ago after the Dominic Cummings Barnard Castle scandal in 2020. He recently described Johnson as a “dead man walking” politically after his apology for attending a lockdown “bring your own booze” party in the garden of No 10. Douglas Ross The Scottish Conservatives’ leader described the prime minister’s position as “untenable” following his admission to attending the BYOB event and that he “could not continue” to lead the British government. The MP for Moray is understood to have submitted a no-confidence letter. Andrew Bridgen The Brexiter and MP for North West Leicestershire accused Johnson of presiding over a “moral vacuum at the heart of our government”. In an article for the Daily Telegraph, he urged him to “go now with some semblance of grace”. “With a heavy heart” he said he had submitted a letter of no confidence. Peter Aldous The Waveney MP tweeted on 1 February that “after a great deal of soul-searching” he had sent a letter of no confidence. He said he had “never taken such action before” but that it was “in the best interests of the country”. Tobias Ellwood The MP for Bournemouth East and chair of the defence select committee said Johnson had lost his support, calling on him to “call a vote of confidence rather than waiting for the inevitable 54 letters to be eventually submitted”. He said it was “horrible” for MPs to have to defend partygate and confirmed on Wednesday that he had submitted his letter. Anthony Mangnall The Totnes MP, part of the 2019 intake, spoke against Johnson’s “actions and mistruths” as he said he was calling for a no-confidence vote. He tweeted: “Standards in public life matter. At this time I can no longer support the PM.” Gary Streeter Calling for a motion of no confidence in the prime minister, the South West Devon MP said: “I cannot reconcile the pain and sacrifice of the vast majority of the British public during lockdown with the attitude and activities of those working in Downing Street.” William Wragg The Hazel Grove MP and chairman of the public administration and constitutional affairs committee said last month that the prime minister’s position had become “untenable”. He has not said publicly whether he has submitted a letter. Caroline Nokes Describing Johnson as “a liability”, the former immigration minister and MP for Romsey and Southampton North said on 12 January that Johnson must either leave now or in the next general election. She has not confirmed whether she has sent a letter. Tim Loughton The former children’s minister and MP for East Worthing &amp; Shoreham said in a Facebook post on 15 January that he had “regretfully come to the conclusion that Boris Johnson’s position is now untenable”. It is not known whether he has submitted a letter. David Davis The former Brexit secretary and MP for Haltemprice and Howden sent shock waves when he told Johnson during prime minister’s questions on 19 January: “You have sat too long here for any good you have been doing. In the name of God, go.” But he later said he wanted to wait for details of Sue Gray’s report before submitting a letter of no confidence. Asked whether he had made a submission as of 31 January, he told LBC: “No, not yet.” Andrew Mitchell After Johnson’s House of Commons statement following the publication of the update on the Gray inquiry on 31 January, the former cabinet minister and Sutton Coldfield MP said the prime minister “no longer enjoys my support”. He has not said whether he has contacted Brady. Charles Walker The vice-chair of the 1922 Committee and Broxbourne MP said on 1 February he would “applaud” the prime minister if he decided to stand down but that it was “his decision”. It was not clear whether he had submitted a formal letter.For decades, artists have worked across physical and digital canvases, especially in public installations, where a virtual component can lend a futuristic frisson to traditional works. The current brouhaha about NFTs – digital artworks to which proof of ownership can be bought, assigning currently indeterminate rights to the buyer – makes the Serpentine Gallery’s New Fiction exhibition feel especially of the moment, however. The show (admission free) features physical and digital works by Kaws, AKA the Brooklyn-based artist Brian Donnelly, the digital works viewed via a third-party augmented reality app downloaded on to a smartphone. Visitors must calibrate the app on arrival; point your phone camera at a QR code outside the gallery and the scene fills with towering, brightly painted figures, including an emaciated Cookie Monster-like character who sits, legs a-dangling, from the plinth above the entrance. Inside, you must again calibrate the app, at which point you wander around the rooms, figuratively brushing shoulders with virtual “visitors” who also form part of the installation. It’s an uncanny feeling seeing virtual characters observe physical works of art (typically, these days, it’s us, the corporeal, who perennially gaze upon the digital), and the sense of discombobulation is compounded by the fact that the exhibit features actual brightly painted bronze statues. Donnelly’s work is ideally suited to the moment in its aesthetic and subject matter, too. His cartoonish characters have the feel of post-apocalyptic Disney classics, cuddly but also fraught, with Xs for eyes. On the canvas, these characters seem lost in mazes built from the debris of modern civilization: snapped steel beams, tyre fragments. This feels like Armageddon, but painted in the fashionable neon colours of 90s-era sports Lycra. Donnelly’s juxtaposition of candy curved shapes and colour with scenes of desecration resonates with our current species-wide anxieties: our saturated state of constant entertainment (usually administered via digital channels) at odds with our fears about the state of the physical world, and our complicity in its decline. Fitting, too, that this show should have been made in collaboration with Epic Games, creators of Fortnite, arguably the dominant digital playground for young people. Epic were responsible for last year’s superlative Kid A Mnesia digital exhibition, released for PlayStation, Mac and Window to coincide with the 21st anniversary of the release of Radiohead’s seminal records, which succeeded in providing players with a mesmerising and highly memorable experience by blending the traditional gallery experience with flourishes that would have been impossible outside a virtual context. New Fiction, which has also been rendered in Fortnite to allow players anywhere in the world to “visit”, is a more conservative effort, perhaps due to the fact it also had to work in person. It is, nevertheless, a mostly successful experiment in this rapidly evolving blend of the physical and digital. Some argue that the old distinctions between the real and the virtual are now meaningless (anyone who has experienced an online pile-on and been left feeling as though they had been physically attacked will agree). New Fiction shows that it is possible, in an artistic context, to ignore those old distinctions. Then again, put the phone in your pocket and, in reality, you won’t miss too much. • Kaws: New Fiction is at the Serpentine North Gallery, London, until 27 February, and is also available onlineBristol Old Vic’s outgoing artistic director Tom Morris has defended his decision to publicly highlight the slave trade riches that financed the theatre’s construction and urged the city to face up to slavery’s legacy if it is to battle the scourge of racism today. Morris, who is stepping down in the autumn after 12 years, said it had been vital – in order to engage with the city’s African-Caribbean community –to acknowledge the brutal origins of the vast fortunes that paid for the theatre in the 18th century. “Our theatre was built in 1766 when really the only source of income in the whole British economy was directly or indirectly related to the transatlantic slave trade – but it was undeniably so in Bristol,” he said. “That represents something important to [African-Caribbean] communities, and it is our duty to be honest about it. As soon as you start to be honest you are in a conversation, not a standoff.” At least 15 of the 50 people who contributed £50 to found the celebrated Georgian theatre were merchants involved in the slave trade, with the others benefiting indirectly. In return, the founders were given specially minted silver tokens granting them seats to see all performances. Morris, who is best known as the co-creator of the National Theatre’s hit show War Horse, revealed that he faced a backlash from some of the theatre’s donors who accused him of “dragging up history” unnecessarily. But he insisted it was the right course of action. “The history of this theatre and this city can’t be buried, if we want to make social change now, partly because its burial is a denial of the very real legacy of damage, which it leaves on our fellow citizens,” said Morris. “But partly because there are lessons about how to make social change happen now.” There are many in the city, he added, still seeking to diminish the horrors of a trade in human beings by suggesting the moral standards of today cannot be applied to a bygone era. “But accounts of the time show that almost everyone [in Bristol] thinks the trade is execrable – meaning extremely morally repugnant. The idea they didn’t know it is wrong is complete fiction. But they couldn’t seize the opportunity to change it because the economic and social cost was – they thought – too high.” Morris also played a key role in encouraging the Bristol Post to offer an apology for a notorious front-page splash in 1996, which featured the mugshots of 16 black men, convicted of drugs offences, under the headline “Faces of Evil”. Morris brokered a meeting between the newspaper’s editor and the race equality campaigner Roger Griffith, which led to the apology in 2018. The theatre’s new season, which will be Morris’s last, includes The Meaning of Zong, a play by the Olivier award-winning Hamilton actor, Giles Terera, about Olaudah Equiano, a former slave, who helped galvanise the abolition movement in Britain. The 12 years of Morris’s tenure have been eventful. He has steered the theatre through austerity arts cuts and the pandemic, which is still affecting the arts sector. The most perilous days, however, came during the early stages of the pandemic, before the government stepped in with a £1.57bn culture recovery fund in July 2020. “We got to the point of if something doesn’t happen in six to eight weeks, we’re going to have to mothball and dismantle the business in a way that would take decades to recover,” he said. “That was our worst-case scenario.” The Old Vic, which is the oldest working theatre in the English-speaking world, found itself exposed because it had come to rely on ticket sales during the austerity era. The theatre was forced to make a third of its workforce redundant. “We’d gone from a situation where 40% of our turnover was commercially earned to the situation, after 10 years of austerity, where 75% of our income was trading income, essentially ticket sales and bar sales,” he said. “When we were suddenly forced to close, we lost 75% of our income. The job retention scheme stopped us from going bust. If the culture recovery fund had been quicker, we wouldn’t have made so many people redundant.” Morris, who is credited with reviving the ailing theatre, is leaving in the autumn because he feels it needs fresh leadership and he wants to pursue other interests, including potentially making films and putting on a classical music prom. Nevertheless, he is excited by his last season, which is seeking to provide an opportunity for people to think about the major themes emerging from the pandemic, including public health and racial justice. “Our main job is to entertain people, otherwise they won’t return – but at the same time it’s part of our civic role to hold the space for the big topics of our times.”Personal Jesus In the 1970s and 80s Tammy Faye Bakker and husband Jim Bakker were enormously successful televangelists, until their Christian TV network empire collapsed amid fraud, jail and divorce. Her story is being told in a film starring Jessica Chastain and Andrew Garfield, The Eyes of Tammy Faye. Think House of Gucci with a side salad of Jerry Falwell. The second coming In the 80s, Tammy’s outreach to the LGBTQ+ community during the Aids crisis angered her morally certain, if not correct (morally or otherwise), brethren. Bakker also featured in Jon Ronson’s recent BBC podcast Things Fell Apart, exploring our culture wars. In a previous guise, Ronson was briefly a member of Frank Sidebottom’s band. Abnormal people Chris Sievey, AKA musician-comedian-life performance Frank Sidebottom, was loosely the inspiration for the 2014 film Frank, co-written by Ronson and directed by Lenny Abrahamson (Normal People, the forthcoming Conversations With Friends). In Frank, Michael Fassbender plays the enigmatic hero with a papier-mache head. The Scottish plays When not driving fast cars, Fassbender remains a major movie star. In 2015, he played opposite Marion Cotillard in the film Macbeth (“operatic verve”). Streaming now on Apple TV+ is the Joel Coen film-noirish adaptation, The Tragedy of Macbeth, with Denzel Washington and Frances McDormand (five stars!). Golden Graham In the latest iteration of Macbeth, Banquo is played by Bertie Carvel. The English actor who appeared as Rupert Murdoch in James Graham’s acclaimed 2017 play Ink. Graham’s back catalogue includes Quiz, This House and Brexit: The Uncivil War. Now he’s teamed with Elton John and Jake Shears for a musical based on the life of … Tammy Faye Bakker, who became an unlikely hero for the gay community. Pairing notes Watch The new film was inspired by a 2000 documentary with the same title, which is narrated by the queen of drag queens RuPaul. Eat On a 2019 episode of Jamie Oliver’s Friday Night Feast, Chastain, a long-term vegan, shared a recipe for tempura rolls. “Insanely good!”It only took two days for Louan Bengmah’s French-language version of the viral Wordle game to run into trouble. His online dictionary threw up “slush”, Québécois slang that was essentially an English word co-opted in North America. French players hoping to join the hundreds of thousands of English speakers cluttering up social media with boastful grids showing how quickly they had guessed a mystery word, were frustrated. “I got a lot of criticism, and I understand why, because it wasn’t really French,” he said ruefully. He has since combed the wordbank used for his game to weed out similar loan words from other languages. Despite these teething problems, his program has taken off – one of dozens of Wordle copies around the world drawing in non-English-speaking audiences that may soon rival the millions playing the original game. There are few languages in the world, dead or alive, that don’t seem to have at least an amateur Wordle clone. The game’s relative simplicity – just one five-letter word a day, and six chances to guess it – make it relatively easy to create similar programs from scratch, helping drive the global spread of the craze. A “Wordles of the World” page on the website GitHub lists over 350 entries. Some are English-language versions like a Harry Potter-focused “wizarding wordle” and the self-explanatory Sweardle (swear words), but over 100 are in other languages, from Somali to Icelandic, Hindi to Hebrew. A few have become juggernauts in their own right, like the Portuguese version Termo. “I worked on it for a week or so – I did not expect it to go the way it did,” said its creator Fernando Serboncini, 40, who now has 400,000 users but makes no money from the game. Others remain a bit more niche. Old Norse was spoken in the late medieval period in Iceland and Norway, surviving only in written form after the 16th century, but it too has a Wordle, created by Tarrin Jon Wills, a dictionary editor. It has been wildly successful by the standards of a language that only a few thousand people read regularly. Since he put it up two weeks ago, visitor numbers to the dictionary site have doubled and there are a couple of hundred regular players. “Part of it is just a game, but part of it is a way of seeing if we can get people to engage with the dictionary and the project that we’re working on. And that’s worked out quite well,” Wills said. Linguistic differences mean adaptation to other languages can be challenging, and require major changes. In China, words are formed from characters rather than the letters of an alphabet. Li Zhong, a programmer living in the historic city of Hangzhou, wanted to create a version for Chinese players. It took him a few days chatting with his sister to think about how to adapt a game based on guessing letters. Rather than words, his game throws up a kind of Chinese idiom known as chengyu, always composed of four characters, and dotted through daily speech. It now has over 70,000 users, the majority in Singapore. “The success of Wordle shows that not everything has to be an app, and you don’t always need a big company to create a product that really takes off,” he said. The New York Times bought the rights to the original Wordle last month, but declined to comment on whether it would seek to crack down on clones in other languages. Lawyers say it might struggle to push them offline. Depending on local copyright laws, it might at best be able to lean on imitators to change their colour scheme and layout away from Wordle’s green, grey and yellow grid. “Generally speaking, copyright does not protect ideas, only specific expressions of those ideas,” said Kathy Berry, an intellectual property lawyer at Linklaters. That would cover the code and graphics of a game like Wordle, but not the underlying idea. Wordle’s simplicity, which is a large part of its appeal, might also make it harder to chase copycats, because its format echoes ones used by many other games and gameshows in the past. Awais Athar, a computer scientist from Cambridge, created an Urdu language version three weeks ago – Urdle. He decided to make the words shorter and add an extra guess, to reflect a different linguistic structure. “A four-letter Urdu word can have as much phonetic information as a seven-lettered word in English,” he said. “Decreasing the word length made sense from the start to increase playability without making it too challenging.” Like other creators of Wordle in different languages, he combines experience of programming with a love of word games, and was initially drawn in to playing the English-language version before deciding to launch his own three weeks ago. He’s hopeful the New York Times won’t try to crush the global Wordle movement. “I hope they don’t shut adaptations down,” he said. “[It seems from media reports] their acquisition aims to introduce more word games to existing Wordle players, and I am all for it. Word games make people happy and we should spread the joy as much as possible!”The culture secretary, Nadine Dorries, has suggested new laws would hold to account streaming sites airing jokes such as those made by Jimmy Carr about the Gypsy, Roma and Traveller community and the Holocaust. Anti-hate groups including the Holocaust Memorial Day Trust, the Auschwitz Memorial and Hope Not Hate have condemned the comedian’s comments in his Netflix special. Carr issued a “trigger warning” to the audience at the beginning of his one-hour special, His Dark Material, admitting his performance contained “terrible things”. In a widely shared clip from the show, Carr joked about the horror of “six million Jewish lives being lost” before suggesting the deaths of thousands of Gypsies at the hands of the Nazis had been one of “the positives” of the Holocaust. Speaking on BBC Breakfast on Saturday, the culture secretary said the comments were “abhorrent and they just shouldn’t be on television”. She said: “We are looking at legislation via the media bill, which would bring into scope those comments from other video-on-demand streaming outlets like Netflix.” It was put to her that in a tweet in 2017 she had claimed that “leftwing snowflakes are killing comedy”. She said: “Well, that’s not comedy. What Jimmy Carr did last night is not comedy. And you know, I’m no angel on Twitter, nobody is, but I just would like to say that nothing I’ve ever put on Twitter has been harmful or abusive. “But that last night … Jimmy Carr’s comments, no one can call that, you know, snowflake or wokeishness, that’s just … it was just appalling.” She said the comments were “shocking and abhorrent and unacceptable, not just because he was making fun on the basis of people who died in the most appalling circumstances, but on the pain and suffering of many thousands of families”. Dorries told Times Radio: “We don’t have the ability now, legally, to hold Netflix to account for streaming that, but very shortly we will.” The comedian and writer David Baddiel condemned Carr’s comments on Twitter on Saturday and suggested they were “cruel and inhumane and mean-spirited and racist”. Baddiel shared an excerpt from his Trolls: Not The Dolls tour “as part of a bit arguing that it’s not the subject matter of a joke that counts, it’s the specifics of the individual joke”. “Meanwhile, away from stupid discussions about the limits of comedy, my sympathies are with the Roma and Sinti community who suffered so much during the Holocaust,” Baddiel added. The chief executive of the Holocaust Memorial Day Trust, Olivia Marks-Woldman, said she and the rest of the organisation were “horrified that gales of laughter followed [Carr’s] remarks”. “Hundreds of thousands of Roma and Sinti people suffered prejudice, slave labour, sterilisation and mass murder simply because of their identity – these are not experiences for mockery,” Marks-Woldman added. The Traveller Movement, a charity supporting the traveller community in the UK, said the comments were “truly disturbing” and went “way beyond humour”. In a tweet, the charity announced that it had launched a petition to Netflix calling for “the removal of the segments of His Dark Material which celebrate the Romani genocide”. The Auschwitz Memorial urged Carr on Twitter to “learn about the fate of some 23 thousand Roma &amp; Sinti deported to Auschwitz”, adding: “It’s sad to hear words that can fuel prejudice, hurt people &amp; defile memory of their tragedy.” A representative for Carr has been contacted for comment.I had asthma as a kid and still do. I started blacking out a little at the end of training runs. Then, at 14, I was diagnosed with exercise-induced asthma by a brilliant doctor who told me, “This isn’t going to stop you doing any of your sport, you’re just going to have to learn to control it.” I have inhalers in pretty much every bag. What makes me sad? Losing people I care about – I lost my dad in 2020. And hearing stories about kids who weren’t as lucky as my daughter, who beat cancer last year. I burst into tears when the doctor gave us the initial diagnosis, but she’s been so brave. The chemotherapy made her hair fall out, which was obviously difficult for a teenage girl. But she’s bounced back so quickly. I could probably beat my kids in a race, but it depends on the distance. If it’s more than 100m, yes – any less, probably not any more. They’re getting faster all the time. I got funny looks when I was chasing them around the supermarket when they were younger. The most famous person I’ve met is probably the Queen. I was awarded an MBE and was invited to lunch with about eight others at the palace. She was friendly, welcoming, genuine – an inspirational lady. I once saw Muhammad Ali sitting on the other side of an airport lounge. My husband was starstruck and staring, so Ali started jokingly punching the palm of his hand, then called him over and asked if he wanted anything signed. I remember coming out of hospital in New York after giving birth to my son and being in a shop, looking for a handbag. A lady looked over and started saying what a cute baby he was. When I looked up I realised it was Sarah Jessica Parker. She said, “I know you, you run the New York City marathon, we live on the route, my husband’s a big marathon fan.” I couldn’t believe it. I thought she was winding me up. The last mile of a marathon is easier than the couple of miles before it because you can almost see the finish. The biggest dangers at that point? Lurching spectators – and dogs, of course. When you’re running on very tired legs towards the end of a long run, it’s hard to react to a loose dog and move yourself out of the way quickly. The etiquette with needing the toilet during a run is probably try not to, but be prepared. If you can find a Portaloo in time, then that really helps. Obviously, it’s something that happened to me, but it’s not the highlight of my career. Being the best in the world at something is a surreal feeling. But it’s very much a team effort, it’s not all down to me. You haven’t seen me on roller-skates! I think I’m definitely better at running marathons. Paula was a team captain at last year’s RunFestRun, which returns 20-22 May. See runfestrun.co.ukPakistani exiles seeking refuge in the UK are being advised by counter-terrorism police to keep a low profile following warnings that their lives may be at risk after criticising Pakistan’s powerful military. Counter Terrorism Policing, a collaboration of UK police forces and the security services, has told possible targets that they need to inform police if they intend to travel within the UK. One British-based dissident said she had received information that hitmen linked to Pakistani drug gangs would be contracted to target her. The heightened alert follows a recent trial in which a London-based hitman was found guilty of conspiring to murder a Pakistani dissident. The trial heard how Muhammad Gohir Khan was offered £100,000 to kill a dissident blogger and fierce critic of the Pakistani intelligence services, Ahmad Waqass Goraya, in the Netherlands last year. However, the mysterious middleman behind the plot – known as “Muzzamil” – remains at large, with the Metropolitan police yesterday confirming they are still attempting to establish his identity and whereabouts. The Met would not comment on whether it is liaising with the Pakistani authorities to locate him. Officers have also issued a plea to the public for information on Muzzamil, who speaks with a British accent and, during a voice message heard at the trial, told Khan that future “jobs” in the UK and Europe would follow after killing Goraya. Days before the trial started last month, officers from Counter Terrorism Policing, whose brief is to “prevent, disrupt and investigate dangerous extremists”, visited the UK home of Pakistani political commentator Rashid Murad to review his security. Police have already installed a panic alarm and CCTV at his home and shared guidance on personal security from the national counter-terrorism security office. Murad said: “Two police officers visited my home in 2021, informed me that they had intercepted a communication in which it was revealed that some people were planning to harm me. They didn’t tell me who but indicated they were from the Pakistani authorities.” His brother, based in Manchester, has also been approached by the British authorities and informed of a potential threat. Another apparent target of the Pakistani authorities, lawyer Fazal Khan, said he had been informed by officers from the Met’s counter-terrorism command, SO15, to notify other UK police forces if he intended to travel outside the capital. The officers, he added, had discussed the mysterious death of Pakistani dissidents such as Karima Baloch, who campaigned for an independent Balochistan and was found dead in a lake in Canada in 2020. Khan, who has filed court petitions involving Pakistan’s military, said: “In the UK, a severe threat exists. London, Birmingham and cities like Sheffield with big Asian communities and where they [the Pakistani authorities] have people on their payroll. I was asked not to move around, not to leave the city and provide the police details of my contacts.” Khan has already survived a previous assassination attempt, in Pakistan in July 2020. Ayesha Siddiqa, an outspoken Pakistani political scientist and commentator based in London, has also been warned of threats to her life, and revealed that a well-connected lawyer had told her that the method used to target her would involve British-based Pakistani drug gangs. “That sense of being secure is gone,” she said. Siddiqa urged the UK government to pressure Pakistan to also identify a figure named in Khan’s trial who was referred to as the “boss” behind the murder plot, which ultimately failed because Khan could not locate Goraya. Goraya, a critic of the Pakistani military and government who the Met believes may have been targeted because of his “political views”, told the Observer that the attempt to kill him was “a transnational crime” in which Khan was merely the tool. “The EU and the UK should take up this matter with their Pakistani counterparts to end this. We didn’t move to Europe to live under the terror of the Pakistani military,” he said. The Observer spoke to a further five Pakistani dissidents, living in exile in five different cities in Europe, who all expressed similar concerns for their safety. Two had received police warnings of a potential threat to their lives. Zar Ali Khan Afridi, a Pashtun rights campaigner, who fled to the Netherlands after an abduction attempt, revealed he had received a life-threatening call from a British number. “The best thing about moving to Europe was that I thought I would be safe. Now there is always the fear of being attacked, killed or harmed,” he said. In France, journalist Yunas Khan said he had received an email in December from the French authorities, informing him of leaked audio files in which a figure from Pakistan’s ruling party, Tehreek-e-Insaf, tells the Pakistani community in Europe to attack Khan. “It is a matter of Pakistan’s honour,” says the man on the recording: “Go and make him accountable if you are legitimate sons of your parents.” The government of Pakistan said: “The levelling of malicious allegations such as Pakistani authorities targeting its critics through hitmen in foreign countries is nothing but absolute lies and sheer absurdity.” It added: “Those who are baselessly defaming and spreading propaganda against Pakistan military and intelligence agencies are doing it to accomplish either their own ulterior motives or that of their sponsors.” It added that when the Khan trial began “propagandists further amplified the smear campaign against Pakistan military and intelligence agencies without due regard for the law of the land by passing absurd judgments and initiating reckless propaganda over social and mainstream media on a matter that was subjudice”. It said the court had found Khan guilty “in his personal capacity”.In primates, what looks like a smile usually signifies submission. In humans, it’s more complicated. “There is a smile of love and there is a smile of deceit,” intones a disembodied voice – actor Cillian Murphy’s – at the start of the third live performance in a series by the Smile, the latest band headed up by Thom Yorke of Radiohead. The power trio is completed by fellow ’Head Jonny Greenwood, latter-day composer of film soundtracks, and drummer Tom Skinner of jazz activists Sons of Kemet. (Producer Nigel Godrich is a silent partner.) It’s a sunny January morning outside, contrasting with the dimly lit, alternative Sunday service indoors, in which a churchy Fender Rhodes features. The band have snuck a few hours’ kip after their earlier 11pm and 1am live streams. The only sign that they are not fresh as daisies is one slight mistake on one song. The opening invocation is by William Blake, that great observer of humanity’s double nature. But there’s confusion too: last May, Yorke declared the Smile to be named after a particularly intense Ted Hughes poem. That confusion lingers. The songs that make up the Smile’s 15-song set list come under this new alias, but Yorke and Greenwood’s preoccupations and aesthetics are ongoing. In May, when the Smile debuted online at Glastonbury, they were hailed as a raw, almost post-punk outfit, in sharp contrast with Radiohead’s more rococo output. This morning, the clear blue water between the bands is less clear and less blue. As last spring, they play an unreleased song, previously thought to be by Radiohead – Skirting on the Surface. Yorke’s wracked croon takes centre stage and Greenwood’s effect-laden instrumentation now provides a trebly counterpoint. There is also Open the Floodgates, previously a solo Yorke tune, now warmed by the glow of Greenwood’s guitar notes and analogue blooping from the multi-talented Skinner, who frequently leaves the kit during this gig to man an electronic workstation. It climaxes as something akin to 60s systems music, one of the key features of the set. As these songs spool out, it seems the Smile’s rawness has proved ephemeral. The vast bulk of these songs are intense, layered and feature Yorke’s vocals and Greenwood on guitar. Exactly how is this not a Radiohead gig? Because Colin Greenwood, Ed O’Brien and Phil Selway are not here? So many of Yorke’s non-Radiohead projects have privileged digitals over instrumentation. It has been easy to interpret his extracurricular activity as the restless singer exploring electronic sounds that other members of Radiohead did not wish to. But the Smile is chock-a-block with guitars – electric and acoustic – with live drumming, and harp for good measure. Greenwood, who usually plays no part in Yorke’s side hustles, is in full swing in the Smile, fringe flopping, bowing his bass on Free in the Knowledge, hitting effects pedals with stockinged feet and playing keyboards with one hand as he attacks the harp with another on Speech Bubbles. (The downside is that the track sounds like three different songs being played simultaneously.) Free in the Knowledge starts off very Radiohead. But the keening and spacious percussion that closes the track is a beautiful departure. As the gig unfolds, there’s a sense that the Smile have been tuning in to much older electronic music, with resonant analogue synths providing clear division between the bands – like the insistent oscillations of The Same. Obviously there’s the magnificent Skinner too, whose default time signature is trigonometric. While not strictly playing jazz, he scrapes bells along his hi-hats, lifting the trio with his dynamism. The hectic clatter of Thin Thing is a revelation, with all three instrumentalists going hell for leather. Just Eyes and Mouth is practically Afrobeat, Greenwood’s guitar and Skinner’s kit doing genuinely new things. Most of those present (or tuning in online) will probably be thrilled at this not wildly novel iteration of the Yorke/Greenwood partnership. But the Smile are most musically convincing when they stretch farther away from Radiohead. Two Smile songs are, by now, familiar. The Smoke finds Yorke playing dubby, hip-swivelling bass – traceable, perhaps, to the influence of Red Hot Chili Pepper Flea and his sinuous work in that other great Radiohead spin-off, Atoms for Peace. The set ends with the excellently angry You Will Never Work in Television Again, whose lyrics about “bunga bunga” have confused those not familiar with the more unpleasant ins and outs of Italian public life in the Silvio Berlusconi era. (Yorke’s other half is a Sicilian actor.) The deceit of politicians is a welcome through line in Yorke’s work. It’s hard not to think of the Smile without thinking of Berlusconi’s shark-like dentistry, or the Tony Blair grimace.The inanity of evil Actions have consequences. Unless, of course, you’re rich and powerful, in which case it seems you can just go ahead and do whatever you like. Lie, cheat, stick your hand down your trousers when you find yourself in a hotel room with a woman young enough to be your granddaughter. Knock yourself out! The chances you’ll face any meaningful repercussions are low. The chances you’ll be asked on a reality TV show and have your reputation laundered, on the other hand, are high. Exhibit no 476, Rudy Giuliani: the guy who was once considered “America’s mayor” and a candidate for the Republican presidential nomination but then proceeded to set his reputation on fire and stomp on the ashes. Donald Trump’s former personal lawyer. The guy who helped Trump with all his unhinged and very undemocratic attempts to overturn the 2020 election. That guy. Well that guy has managed to thrust his way into the headlines once again – in one of the most inane ways possible – after he was unmasked as a contestant during a taping of the Fox show The Masked Singer. Unfamiliar with The Masked Singer? It’s a ridiculously popular competition in which celebrities sign and dance in costumes that hide their identities; at the end of each episode the losing celebrity’s identity is revealed and everyone is stunned. This season’s panel of celebrity judges were certainly stunned when Giuliani revealed himself: two of the judges, Ken Jeong and Robin Thicke, walked off the stage in protest. (Thicke, by the way, is not exactly a social justice warrior. He’s a singer whose most famous song, Blurred Lines, has been described as “kinda rapey”. The model Emily Ratajkowski, who appeared in the video for Blurred Lines, has also accused Thicke of sexually assaulting her while the video was being filmed. As a number of people have observed, you know you’ve messed up when you’ve offended Thicke’s moral sensibilities.) Thicke and Jeong aren’t the only ones outraged over Giuliani’s musical number. It has attracted the ire of a few late-night TV hosts. “The guy who’s trying to destroy our country? He’s singing on a show!” Jimmy Kimmel scoffed on his own show. “No headline has captured the national zeitgeist of existential dread combined with ridicu-stupo-lousiness better than this,” said Stephen Colbert of Giuliani’s Masked Singer appearance. Getting an overwhelming sense of deja vu? I certainly am. From Sarah Palin to Sean Spicer to Anne Widdecombe, a wide variety of odious figures have gone on the reality TV show circuit to reinvent themselves. If they don’t get a gig on reality TV, they get a gig on Fox News, which is essentially the same thing. There’s a little bit of outrage but it quickly dies down. The reputation laundering works. Just look at George W Bush, for example. He may not have gone on reality TV but he hung out with Ellen DeGeneres and painted a few terrible portraits. Now an embarrassing number of liberals have forgotten all about that nasty Iraq business and think of Bush fondly. He’s morphed from man-accused-of-war-crimes into cuddly grandpa in a scarily short period of time. I’m all for giving people second chances. I’m all for giving people the chance to rehabilitate themselves. But that doesn’t mean forgetting and forgiving just like that; accountability is important. When you reward liars and cheats with TV appearances then you send a message that lying and cheating is fine (hilarious even!) as long as the right sort of person is doing it. You give the worst sort of people carte blanche. You help pave the way for monsters. This isn’t a complicated issue: the lines are by no means blurred. The Black woman sentenced to six years in prison over a voting error Giuliani, under Trump’s orders, tried to get the Department of Homeland Security to seize voting machines in an attempt to overthrow the 2020 election. We all know what happened to him next. Now compare his case with Pamela Moses, an activist in Memphis. Last November Moses was convicted for trying to register to vote while she was ineligible. On Monday she was sentenced to six years and one day in prison. Meanwhile, behind the scenes, Tennessee officials have conceded that they had made a series of mistakes concerning Moses’ voting eligibility. Everyone’s equal under the eyes of the law, eh? Eating poppy seed cake got a pregnant woman reported to child services “[H]ospitals disproportionately [drug] test and report pregnant and postpartum patients of color,” a representative from National Advocates for Pregnant Women told ReWire News Group. One study found that despite similar rates of substance use among Black patients and white patients, Black women were reported to social services at about 10 times the rate of white women. Uncontrollable Women: history’s secret heroines The Guardian reviews Nan Sloane’s new book, which profiles the working-class female radicals overlooked by history. One reason why these women have been “hidden from history”, Sloane suggests, is that a lot of feminist history is focused on voting rights. These women were more concerned about feeding their families than the right to vote: they marched for bread and smashed machinery in protest at unregulated capitalism. “The vote, for them, is a luxury that [would] have to wait.” The US reckons Amnesty International isn’t worth listening to In certain instances anyway. During a recent press briefing Associated Press reporter Matt Lee asked the Biden administration to explain its rejection of Amnesty International’s new report on Israel, which explicitly said its US-backed policies amount to apartheid. “Why is it that all criticism of Israel from these [human rights] groups is almost always rejected by the United States and yet accepted, welcomed and endorsed when the criticism is of other countries?” Lee asked. It’s an essential question: if you undermine human rights groups when it comes to their work on Israel-Palestine, you undermine all of their work. Your regular reminder that being a woman on the internet is exhausting as hell I barely go on social media any more because the amount of online harassment I get. My experience, of course, isn’t unusual. If you’re a woman, particularly a woman of colour, with any sort of platform you are expected to deal with grotesque levels of harassment – it’s part of the job description! Aubrey Hirsch covers the exhaustion of existing as a woman online beautifully in this essay, That’s How It Works When You’re a Woman on the Internet. Why are you a spinster? A British weekly magazine asked women that question in 1889 and got some very witty answers. The week in pawtriarchy Years of domesticity has done a number on cats’ brains, according to a new study. A bunch of researchers measured cats’ heads (which one imagines was no easy feat) and concluded that the brain size of domestic cats is smaller than their African ancestors. Size isn’t everything, of course. They may have tiny little heads but you should never underestimate a cat. Arwa Mahdawi’s new book, Strong Female Lead, is available for orderIt’s when leather-jacketed Serra Petale fans out a hand of flaming playing cards and lights her cigarette off them that you know it’s going to be love. This scene from the video for Las Panteras, part of a linked series of pulpy tales in which the London-based quartet Los Bitchos portray Charlie’s Angels-style secret agents on the trail of a criminal cat gang, encapsulates their charm: silly, self-aware, swaggering with punked-up global psychedelic grooves. Formed in 2017 over a mutual love of cumbia (Afro-Latin dancing music, laced with rock guitar), Los Bitchos are Australian Petale, ex-drummer of dreamy indie rockers Kid Wave on guitar; Uruguayan former model Agustina Ruiz on keytar; Swede Josefine Jonsson, once of garage rockers Thee MVPs, on bass; and Londoner and NHS physiotherapist Nic Crawshaw on drums. As the million-plus views on their KEXP live session attest, they’re a band who need to be experienced live, though they’ve bottled their lightning with debut album Let the Festivities Begin!, on which cumbia parties with Turkish and Middle Eastern psych-rock and distorted, fuzzy surf-garage. Recorded pre-pandemic, it was produced by Alex Kapranos of Franz Ferdinand (also the creepy quiz host in the video for Good to Go!), who provided vintage synths and razor-sharp discipline. It’s music made by crate-diggers who aren’t chin-scratchers, whose laudable main ambition, as they told NME, is to “play all over the world and make people dance”. • Let the Festivities Begin! is out now on City Slang. Los Bitchos tour the UK, 15 February-2 MarchThe culture secretary, Nadine Dorries, has rejected calls for Boris Johnson to resign in order to restore trust after the “partygate” scandal, claiming that the “vast majority” of the party were behind the prime minister. It comes after the former schools minister, Nick Gibb, became the latest Conservative MP to publicly call for Johnson to go, citing constituents “furious about the double standards” and the prime minster’s “inaccurate” statements in the Commons. It also follows reports that the Metropolitan police, which was given 300 pictures by Sue Gray for its investigation into Covid rule-breaking social gatherings, has a photograph of Johnson holding a can of beer at his lockdown birthday party in June 2020. According to the Mirror, the prime minister is pictured with a can of Estrella while standing next to the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, in No 10’s Cabinet Room. The newspaper reported that the picture was taken by Johnson’s official photographer, funded by the taxpayer, who was documenting the event. Dorries said on Saturday that the Conservative expressions of dissent, including from Gibb, the MP for Newcastle-under-Lyme, Aaron Bell, and former policy chief Munira Mirza, were “disappointing” but insisted “it’s not many”. “The vast majority of Conservative MPs are right behind the prime minister because he has delivered, he has consistently delivered, and he will continue to do so,” she told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. Gibb, the MP for Bognor Regis and Littlehampton, wrote in the Daily Telegraph: “I am sorry to say that it is hard to see how it can be the case that the prime minister told the truth.” He has also reportedly submitted a letter of no confidence to the chairman of the 1922 Committee. In response, Dorries insisted that “the prime minister has told the truth.” She suggested remainers are plotting against the prime minister. She said: “There are a small number of voices, whether they are people who were ardent supporters of remain, who see this as their last opportunity to reverse Brexit.” But the Conservative MP Stephen Hammond said that was “predictable rubbish from a predictable source”. He told the BBC’s Week in Westminster: “I think, as far as I can see, the people who so far declared that they’ve written a letter are from all wings of the party and none.” Asked whether Johnson needs to change, Dorries launched an impassioned defence of the prime minister, saying: “I’d be cautious of asking the prime minister who’s delivered us the largest majority since Margaret Thatcher to change.” She added: “That commitment to delivery, both on vaccines and on employment and on many issues, I want the prime minister, that prime minister, who has that kind of onwards mentality, I want that to remain. I don’t want that to change.” Responding to Rishi Sunak’s response on Thursday distancing himself from the prime minister’s false claim that the Labour leader, Keir Starmer, failed to prosecute paedophile Jimmy Savile, Dorries said the chancellor was “entitled to his views” but defended Johnson’s response. “What I would say is that when you lead an organisation, you are responsible,” she said. Speaking on Sky News, Dorries insisted that 97% of Tory MPs back the prime minister and that Sajid Javid, the health secretary, is fully behind him, despite distancing himself from Johnson’s Savile claim. She said Javid was “quite shocked” about how his comments had been reported and that he was “100% behind the prime minister”. During another media appearance, on BBC Breakfast, Dorries said the prime minister was “very positive” when she communicated with him in the past 24 hours, but questioned why she was being asked whether she had spoken to him. Meanwhile, former minister Liam Fox said he has not submitted a letter of no confidence and that “it’s very clear” that the Conservatives’ 15% threshold for a no-confidence vote had not been reached. But the MP for North Somerset said he was “waiting to see what comes out of” the full Gray report. The partygate debate, he said, was “diminishing the focus” from other political issues such as inflation rises and Ukraine and damaging perceptions of UK politics both at home and abroad. He said: “The whole issue round whether rules were broken in Downing Street in 2020 now needs to be resolved by what the police are investigating. We didn’t get the full coverage of what Sue Gray had said and I think we need to get all this information.”A father who was released without charge after ploughing his car into a knife attacker to try to stop him killing a woman has said it was his “duty” to act. Abraham, 26, who was originally arrested on suspicion of murder, said he had prayed for God’s forgiveness following the incident in Maida Vale, west London. Yasmin Chkaifi, 43, a mother of two, died on 24 January when she was ambushed in the street by her former partner, Leon McCaskie, 41, who also used the surname McCaskre. Witnesses had tried unsuccessfully to stop McCaskie before Abraham ran him over with his blue Renault Clio. McCaskie was pronounced dead at the scene. Abraham, reportedly an electrician and married father with two children aged under five, told the Daily Mail: “Should you see an evil it is your duty to stop it with your hands. “If you cannot, then you should stop it by speaking out. So I was thinking: ‘How could I face God if I don’t help? It is my duty, my religion.’ In that moment I knew I had to act.” Abraham, originally from Chechnya, said he was on his way to work when he heard shouting and screaming and saw a man with a steel blade in his hand stab a woman on the floor three times in the chest, an experience that left him “shocked and terrified”. He said: “I thought: ‘I cannot go away and leave her.’ I had to help, to try to save her. I did not have time to consider. I thought the safest and quickest option was to push the man away from the woman with my car. “So I put my car into first gear and drove up the kerb and on to the pavement. It was a short distance, 10 or 12ft, and I pushed him, I made an impact. I managed to avoid the woman. “Then I took my foot off the gas but my car didn’t stop. The momentum continued and I knew the man was under my car. I opened the door and I saw his hand sticking out from under it. That sight stays with me and always will: the man’s hand sticking out. “My car hit a garden wall and stalled and I tried to reverse but the engine wouldn’t turn over. I kept trying to start the car, to free the man, but I couldn’t. I shouted for help.” The Metropolitan police originally launched a murder investigation against the 26-year-old, but said on Tuesday that investigators had reviewed the law around self-defence and defence of another person, and now considered Abraham “a vital witness”, rather than a suspect. Det Ch Insp Neil Rawlinson, who has led the investigation, added that Abraham would be “offered support from professionals to help him come to terms with the terrifying situation he was confronted with”. More than 75,000 people had signed a petition in support of Abraham, and his lawyer, Tasnime Akunjee, said members of Chkaifi’s family had hailed him as “a hero”, called for his release and were in the process of arranging a private meeting with him. Abraham said he was in “shock” when he was arrested. He added: “I took my head in my hands and thought: ‘How has this happened?’ I’d tried to save a woman’s life and I’d killed a man. I said a prayer: ‘God forgive me for what I have done.”’ McCaskie, it emerged, was wanted by police after failing to turn up to court on 4 January over allegations that he had breached a stalking order by approaching Chkaifi in west London in July last year.And that’s it for today’s blog. I’ll leave you with Maryam Naz’s match report. Thanks for reading! Manchester United head coach Mark Skinner gives his reaction. “Disappointed maybe in the way we conceded the goal but I’ve got nothing but admiration for us because we’ve played three games in a week. We’ve played away against Chelsea in midweek and Arsenal have had a lot of time to prepare for us and we’ve come in and put in a performance like that. It wasn’t vintage Manchester United but it was what a tight game needed. What a show of growth from us that we’re coming to Arsenal now and we’re thinking we should have been taking these points. It’s a massive step forward for our team.” Arsenal head coach Jonas Eidevall says: “I feel pretty drained right now. Obviously it was quite a bit of a rollercoaster during the match but I’m very proud of the team.” Arsenal (30) now lead Chelsea (25) by five points having played 13 games. But Emma Hayes’ side have two matches in hand and could cut that gap to just two if they beat the Gunners on Friday night. Man Utd also have 25 points but are third due to Chelsea having a superior goal difference. Arsenal forward Viv Miedema speaks: “Incredbily tough. I think Man U came out really well, they were better the first half. We made it really difficult for ourselves, obviously, with the sending off but I think what we showed after that is what we’re about right now and we need to fight hard. In the second-half the performance was really good from our side.” A more muted, factual response from Man Utd’s social media team. Arsenal’s super-sub saves the day. Arsenal looked to be staring at defeat there when 1-0 down and seeing Katie McCabe sent off with just 15 minutes remaining. But they found an equaliser thanks to a bit of quality and probably deserved their point. Gunners boss Jonas Eidevall punched the air when the full-time whistle sounded so his relief was clear. They’ve kept their lead over Man Utd to five points. As for his opposite number Marc Skinner, the United boss must be feeling this was one that got away. Even so, a point away to the leaders is still another hugely positive sign for his improving team. It’s all over! 90+6: Groenen tries a backheel in the box but the offside flag goes up to Arsenal’s relief. 90+4: United still struggling to make their extra body tell and Thomas’s pass has too much on it and runs through to Zinsberger. 90+3 min: Little’s corner is headed clear by Thorisdottir and the danger passes. 90+2 min: Arsenal go long again and win a corner near the right corner flag. Maritz then drives to the line and wins a corner. 90 min: The fourth official’s board goes up and there will be SEVEN added minutes. Plenty of time for a winner. 89 min: Arsenal have been much better at dealing with Zelem’s set-pieces in this second half but there are dangers coming from elsewhere. Galton finds space in the box and Zinsberger has to dash out and smother her shot/cross in the six-yard box. 88 min: Not this time. Zelem’s ball is booted away by Maanum and then Rafaelle does well to stop Arsenal conceding another corner. Only temporarily though as United press again and add to the corner count. 87 min: Can either side muster one final big opportunity? United could do here after winning another corner. 86 min: Maanum has looked lively since coming on and her cross from the right has to be dealt with by Earps. 85 min: Arsenal still trying to win this despite being a woman down after the red card. 84 min: Mead goes off, walking quite well it has to be said, and on comes Boye. 82 min: Can United respond? They’ll have to wait though as there are more stoppages. It’s Arsenal’s Mead now down on the ground; she’s pointing to her left knee. The Gunners won’t want another player out given that McCabe is now suspended for the big clash with Chelsea on Friday. 78 min: The 10 of Arsenal are level! What a crucial goal that could be. Miedema drops deep and sends a superb through ball to Blackstenius, who steadies herself and fires past Earps. The United goalkeeper got something on it but not enough. It’s Blackstenius’s birthday as well! 78 min: Batlle needs some cotton wool up the nose to stop the blood. She’s okay to continue though. 77 min: Another stoppage as Batlle takes a knock. It’s all becoming stop-start but United won’t mind that one bit. They’re a goal up and have a 11 v 10 advantage. 75 min: Arsenal are down to 10 as McCabe is shown a second yellow for a wild challenge. Huge blow for the hosts. 73 min: Break in play as Thorisdottir takes a knock on her foot. United shuffle the pack as Thomas and Groenen come on for Russo and Bruun. 71 min: Glorious opportunity for United to make it 2-0. Galton does superbly down the left and Toone is through on goal after a deft touch past the final Arsenal defender. She opens her body and goes for the side-foot curler but starts the ball out too wide and it misses the left post. What a chance! 70 min: United’s energy levels still good as they clear after good dribbing skills from McCabe. 69 min: Some rare possession for United in the Arsenal half but it’s halted by an offside flag. It gives Arsenal the chance to bring on Rafaelle for the tiring Catley. 68 min: Arsenal preparing another substitution with Rafaelle set to come on. 66 min: Arsenal trying to step it up now and win a corner on the right. McCabe’s delivery looks dangerous but clears everyone with Arsenal having no-one at the back stick. 65 min: Drifting towards the last 25 minutes now and United are keeping Arsenal at arm’s length pretty much. 63 min: Toone presses Catley and then United win a free-kick halfway inside the Arsenal half. Set-piece taker Zelem ties her lace as Miedema goes into the book, perhaps for saying something. The cross comes in but Arsenal head clear. Actually, Miedema’s yellow was for clipping Russo’s heel. The Dutch forward is cutting a frustrated figure today. 60 min: Now it’s United’s turn and Bruun’s shot is blocked for a corner. Zinsberger punches away the first ball and also gets her fist to the rebound, earning a free-kick in the process. 59 min: Arsenal’s shuffle almost pays off immediately. Little finds space down the right, curls in a cross and Foord’s left-foot volley from a narrow angle is palmed away by Earps. 58 min: Arsenal decide to change it up with a double substitution. Beattie and Nobbs go off and on come Maanum and Blackstenius. 56 min: The free-kick is wasted. Arsenal get the ball back though and Mead whips it into the box and Beattie isn’t far away from getting something on the ball. McCabe then goes into the book for a robust challenge. 55 min: Super driving run from McCabe and Caldwell goes into the book for chopping her down just on the left edge of the box. Chance here for Arsenal. 54 min: Miedema latches on to a ball over the top but Batlle goes with her and doesn’t fall for the trickery. Possession back with United. 53 min: Maritz and Little work it well down the right and tee up Nobbs just outside the box but the Arsenal No.8 is leaning back and skies it well over the bar. 52 min: Earps’ clearance is a bit of a squiffy one but there’s enough on it to float out for a throw. 51 min: Four United players hovering near one Arsenal defender just now sums up the match. 50 min: United still pressing hard and Arsenal have to pass the ball across their own box, all stifled and frustrated. 48 min: Early corner for Arsenal as Thorisdottir clears behind. McCabe’s ball drifts in and Beattie looks certain to score but prods the ball onto Russo’s shin just shy of the goal-line and the chance goes begging. So close and goalscorer Russo now a hero at the other end. 47 min: An early United clearance flies over the stand. A souvenir for an afternoon dog walker perhaps. 46 min: Peep peep! Arsenal start the second half. They’ve made a change, bringing on Foord for Heath. The Aussie joins the Arsenal huddle before the hosts get the ball back in play. As it says on the tin... That’s half-time and the leaders are losing. United are on track to move to within two of the Gunners and if they can keep this press going while threatening from set-pices, the hosts could be in big trouble here. Still, only 1-0 and Arsenal came back from a similar position to beat Brighton. All will be revealed after our half-time cuppas. 45+1 min: United break swiftly, Batlle plays a one-two with Toone and then curls a shot, or was it a cross, not far wide of the Arsenal post. 45 min: Arsenal are pressed deep inside their own half - the theme of this first half. Two added minutes coming up. 43 min: The corner comes in and Ladd’s flicked header drifts only just past the post. Not far away from 2-0 there. Arsenal still look vulnerable from corners and United are winning their share. 42 min: All still a bit ponderous from Arsenal and they cough up possession once more, Toone winning United another corner after being found by Bruun. 40 min: Earps gathers a right-wing cross with confidence. The England goalkeeper has a record 38 clean sheets in the WSL and she’s been excellent in this first half. 39 min: Heath takes a knock to the face after falling in a tackle. It’s a painful one but she’s okay. Free-kick to Arsenal just inside their own half. 38 min: Free-kick for United on the right-wing. Zelem curls it to the back post but Zinsberger does well to fist the ball away. It’s a windy day and the ball was moving. 36 min: Just a few signs that Arsenal have lost some momentum again. The United press remains relentless and another rushed pass up the line slices out of play. 35 min: Zelem pings in the corner which Arsenal head away. It drops to Batlle but she skies her attempt way, way over the crossbar. 34 min: Arsenal just playing it around at the back for a while as they struggle to find gaps. United pinch the ball and, after a neat backheel from Bruun, win a corner. Here we go... 32 min: Arsenal come forward again but are caught offside with plenty of players in the box. Frustration for the home fans. 30 min: United have been good without the ball but haven’t really strung many passes together when they’ve won it back. They remain a big danger from set-pieces of course but Arsenal are working their way back into this game now and perhaps an equaliser is coming sooner rather than later. 28 min: A somewhat half-hearted penalty appeal by Arsenal as Heath goes down in the box but nothing doing. The Gunners win another corner which they take short... and then lose possession. 27 min: It’s been a pretty breathless first half but we’re just going through a quiet patch. Russo tries to drive forward but is bundled off the ball. 25 min: Arsenal going a little more direct now as they bid to beat the United press. They win a corner down the right which the visitors deal with comfortably. 24 min: Lovely lay-off by Nobbs to Miedema on the edge of the box but the Arsenal striker rather skews her left-foot shot well wide of goal. 23 min: Arsenal lead the possession stats 69%-31% but it’s not easy possession given the amount of pressing United are doing. 22 min: Arsenal’s best moments are coming on the break and they have another opportunity as Heath let’s go from distance, her shot rising narrowly over Earps’ crossbar. 21 min: Corner alert! United have another, again down the right. United form what Glenn Hoddle calls a “love train” and when the bunch split, Galton sends her header over the bar. Another anxious moment for the hosts. 19 min: There was an Opta stat pre-match that said United had scored more goals (5) from corners than any other team this season. Well, make that six. Arsenal were warned but they couldn’t prevent it. 18 min: United still harrying Arsenal in their own half. A real theme of this opening period. 15 min: Not seen much of Miedema yet but wait! She picks the ball up in the left channel, smashes in a goalbound shot from 20 yards but Earps does brilliantly to tip it onto the crossbar which is still shaking 20 seconds later. Fantastic effort. Fantastic save. 13 min: First corner for Arsenal but Earps claims the catch after the ball is headed up into the air. Replays, meanwhile, suggest a push in the Arsenal box before the corner which United scored from. 11 min: More drama at the Arsenal end. Bruun’s rather weak shot is saved but Galton is quick to the rebound and turns the ball across goal but there’s no blue shirt to prod it home. That could easily have been 2-0. Yes, they are dangerous from set-pieces. In comes the corner and Russo rises at the back post and heads home. A deserved lead. 9 min: United still pressing and Maritz gives away a free-kick. Chance to put one in the mixer and the visitors are dangerous from set pieces. Arsenal deal with it but at the expense of a corner. 7 min: First chance of the match and it goes to United. Batlle surges forward and smashes a shot from 20 yards which Zinsberger beats away slightly unconvincingly. The Spanish right-back takes a knock when getting her effort away and requires treatment but she’s okay. 6 min: United goalkeeper Earps causes brief panic with a, let’s say, composed bit of footwork before clearing. Confidence isn’t lacking! 5 min: A bright start by Man Utd. They’re pressing Arsenal at the back and forcing them into errors and rushed clearances. 3 min: Lovely play by Russo down the right wing as she lifts the ball over a defender and fizzes in a cross. Strangely, Galton goes for it with her hand and Arsenal have a free-kick. 2 min: Bruun gets clattered near the halfway line and United have a free-kick which Arsenal clear. United are in their away strip of dark blue shirts and black shorts. 1 min: Peep peep! After a false start, the two teams take the knee and the visitors get the game in play. Manchester United are wearing black arm bands to commemorate the Munich Air Disaster. The kick-off is only a few minutes away, and here come the teams on a bright but chilly day at Meadow Park. Now Arsenal boss Jonas Eidevall has his say. He explains Leah Williamson’s absence from the squad. “It’s due to her physical status. It’s minor,” says Eidevall, adding that she hopes the defender is available for the Chelsea game. Is this a massive match? He flat bats it with an “all games in the league are equally important” response. Man Utd boss Marc Skinner speaks: “We’ve played each other recently and when it’s tight games you have to be at your very best and find little moments. The players that we have in - new signings Bruun (from Lyon) and Caldwell (North Carolina Courage) - will hopefully swing it for us in this game.” Karen Carney (three league titles), also on the panel, slightly disagrees. She reckons Arsenal’s game at second-placed Chelsea next Friday is the pivotal fixture. Kelly Smith, who won 20 major trophies with Arsenal including six league titles, is one of the pundits in the Sky Sports studio and describes this as a “must win” game for the Gunners. United all set... For Manchester United, Ella Toone and Hayley Ladd return after serving suspensions while new signing Signe Bruun gets her first start after coming off the bench in the loss to Chelsea in midweek. Another new addition, Diane Caldwell, makes her debut. Alessia Russo, who bagged the winner when these two last met in the League Cup a couple of weeks ago, is also in the United starting XI. Arsenal look set to play a 4-2-3-1 with Walti and Little at the base of midfield and Heath, Nobbs and Mead in a three behind Miedema. Arsenal: Zinsberger, Maritz, Beattie, Catley, McCabe, Walti, Nobbs, Little, Mead, Miedema, Heath. Subs: Williams, Boye, Souza, Wienroither, Maanum, Foord, Parris, Blackstenius. Man Utd: Earps, Thorisdottir, Toone, Zelem, Galton, Ladd, Caldwell, Bruun, Batlle, Russo. Subs: Middleton-Patel, Harris, Boe Risa, Thomas, Fuso, Groenen, Smith, Jones. Manchester United... Arsenal’s team... A snapshot of the WSL table makes happy reading for Arsenal. They sit top on 29 points from 12 games. That’s four in front of Chelsea although Emma Hayes’ side have a game in hand. But it’s been far from plain sailing for the Gunners of late and their recent stumbles include a 1-0 home defeat to today’s opposition in the League Cup last month. Manchester United have also been going well in the WSL and head to Meadow Park in third place. Victory here and they’d move to within two of Arsenal. Impressively, they’re also unbeaten away from home in the top-flight although their goal-laden recent run of wins in all competitions was ended by a 3-1 League Cup loss at Chelsea on Wednesday evening. All three outcomes appear on the table so game on!Born in Auckland, New Zealand in 1992, comedian and actor Rose Matafeo started doing standup aged 15 and performed in late-night comedy sketch show Funny Girls. In 2018, she won the best comedy show award at the Edinburgh fringe with her show Horndog. She regularly appears on TV panel shows and in 2020 played the lead in comedy feature film Baby Done. Last year, she created, co-wrote and starred in BBC series Starstruck, a romcom about a young woman who begins a relationship with a world-famous actor played by Nikesh Patel. Season two starts on Monday on BBC Three’s new broadcast channel, with the entire series available on BBC iPlayer. Theatre Spring Awakening (Almeida) My friend Emma got us tickets for the New Year’s Eve matinee of this and it blew my mind. Since then, I’ve been obsessively listening to the soundtrack, then last night I saw it for the second time. It’s a mid-2000s musical based on a German play and it’s about youth and sex and intimacy. It would be reductive to call it horny – it’s so much more than that. It’s so energetic, with an amazing young cast – Stuart Thompson, who plays Moritz in it, is incredible. Film World of Wong Kar-Wai (Prince Charles Cinema) I’ve been going to the cinema a lot at the moment – well, I always go to the cinema a lot. London is a dream for a person like me: you guys have things like the BFI and smaller cinemas like the Castle or the Rio. There’s a Wong Kar-Wai series at the Prince Charles at the moment and I’ve been to see Chungking Express, Happy Together and In the Mood for Love in the space of two weeks or so. If you can’t see them in real life, you can buy the very expensive Criterion box set. Music Akiko Yano I love J-pop – Japanese pop – and I’ve been listening to a lot of Akiko Yano. She’s been very, very inspiring, particularly for her album covers: they’re the coolest things I’ve ever seen. My favourite album by her is Piano Nightly, which is a good entry point, where she does covers of lots of other things. Her music is quite jazzy, with a bit of 80s YMO (Yellow Magic Orchestra) synth, and she’s got an amazing voice. It’s my kind of music – basically, it’s what’s playing in my head when I’m walking around London. Documentary This Is Joan Collins (BBC iPlayer) I really liked this little doco in which Joan Collins narrates her life. I love her: she’s the last of that golden age of Hollywood stars from an era of films I’m obsessed with. My most prized possession is a signed copy of Can Heironymus Merkin Ever Forget Mercy Humppe and Find True Happiness?, which is a film she was in with her husband at the time, Anthony Newley, and I’ve got that up on my wall. I walk around doing Joan Collins’s voice a lot to myself in the house. I think I’m nailing the impression. TV Northern Exposure I’m getting into this 90s show: it’s a fish-out-of-water story about a doctor who moves to the middle of nowhere in Alaska, where he meets lots of funny characters. It’s quite lovely and friendly and warm and John Corbett is just so good-looking in it – I hate to focus on the hot guy but he’s stunning. Unfortunately, it’s very hard to find. It’s not streaming anywhere, so I bought a box set off a random website and have had to get a DVD player that plays the region code. So good luck if you want to find it. Restaurant Indian Veg, London N1 I haven’t been out to dinner in so long, but this is the place I really feel like going tonight. It’s an all-you-can-eat buffet, really pretty cheap, and it’s got very interesting signs on the walls – things such as “Why quitting smoking will make you better at sex” or “Why vitamin C will give you cancer somehow”. It’s wild, but it’s delicious and I love it so much. It actually reminds me a lot of home: they do a banana pakora, which is very similar to a Samoan food called panikeke, which are deep-fried banana pancakes.Where do you stand on sharing your Wordle results? In recent weeks, that innocuous little grid of yellow, green and black squares has become as much a staple of social media as pedantry and passive aggression; it is a cute little flashback to when people’s annoyance at online content peaked with seeing too many pictures of what a stranger had for breakfast. The word-guessing game continues to grow and grow and millions of people are now playing it. One newish poll by Morning Consult suggested that as many as 14% of Americans have joined in and that 59% of players share their results, either “often” or “sometimes”. Whether people post often or sometimes, a kind of grid rage is growing. Perhaps it is the sudden influx, or the sense that people are showing off, or talking about something of little interest to others, all of which are about as standard on the internet as someone choosing My Way on Desert Island Discs. MI6 chief Richard Moore caused a minor stink last week when he tweeted that he was “thinking of unfollowing those who post their Wordle results”, which led to the double whammy of winning support from Anneka Rice and a jovial apology from GCHQ in the form of a mocked-up Wordle page. I’ll admit, I had a moment. I popped over to Facebook to check in on the conspiracy theorists – odd that Facebook has seen its first ever drop in usage; I can’t think what might be putting people off – and I saw a few grids and clicked away even more hastily than usual. But then I mentioned this to my partner, who promptly told me off for being a misery. “What’s the harm?” she said, pointing out, with irritating reasonableness, that it was quite a nice thing to do. Much of Wordle’s appeal is its niceness. It’s not too hard, not too demanding, and even when it dares to use American spellings or double-vowelled monstrosities, sharing the fact that nice old Wordle is being a pain in the arse is also a very unifying thing to do. Josh Wardle, its creator, sold the game to the New York Times last week and it’s hard to blame him for cashing in. After “Black Thursday”, plenty of households will be looking down the back of the sofa for a Wordle. For now, it will remain free, which is nice. “At the time it moves to the New York Times, Wordle will be free to play for new and existing players,” said the buyer, although I note that it was choosing its words carefully. The Queen: I can’t wait to celebrate her lovely Jubbly Once seen, it cannot be unseen. At first, the commemorative plates, teacups and mugs made in China to be sold in the UK, created to commemorate the Queen’s platinum jubilee, look like any other lot of royal memorabilia. Elegant-ish portrait, bit of heraldry, a few flowers, the special dates and a crown. But look closer and it’s there. This batch of 10,800 items failed to commemorate the Queen’s platinum jubilee. Instead, it pays tribute to Her Majesty the Queen on the occasion of her Platinum Jubbly. Lovely. A Jubbly may not sound quite as regal, but something about this affair is fundamentally British, which should please the play-the-national-anthem-on-the-BBC types. Four days off for a Jubbly? I’ll take it. It sounds like one of those old folk traditions, like cheese-rolling or shin-kicking. A competition to invent a special commemorative Jubbly pudding? I’ll order mine today, because it sounds delicious. Plant some trees for the Jubbly? As if schoolchildren won’t love it. Karl Baxter, the entrepreneurial boss of the clearance website that is selling them, told the BBC he is pitching the items as “limited edition” and “unique”. This is the kind of behaviour that wins people The Apprentice, if not the world. Taylor Swift: in-depth study of a superstar? Bring it on It isn’t quite a degree in Taylor Swift studies, but students at New York University’s Clive Davis Institute can study a three-month course on the star, which “proposes to deconstruct both the appeal and aversions to Taylor Swift through close readings of her music and public discourse as it relates to her own growth as an artist and a celebrity”. It will be taught by Rolling Stone writer Brittany Spanos and, as someone who has read a collection of academic essays on Buffy the Vampire Slayer, I have some envy for those who made it on to the course. Apparently, there is a long waiting list. Look what she made you do. I would definitely read, for example, a paper that deconstructed the rise and fall of the Squad, though I do wonder what can be taught in the field of Swiftology that thousands of internet theorists have not already painstakingly pieced together and analysed. After all, this is a woman who can write a scarf into a song and revive that scarf’s status as an international obsession an entire decade later. I have no time for snobbery about the study of pop culture, whether that’s an MA in the Beatles at the University of Liverpool or a module in Beyoncé, gender and race at Copenhagen University. But on hearing about Swift studies, my first thought was clearly conditioned by the shocking expense of higher education in this country. I didn’t think, that sounds intriguing. I thought, that sounds like it would be an expensive frivolity and that seems like such a shame. • Rebecca Nicholson is an Observer columnistThe Covid booster campaign has stalled, and declining trust in the prime minister is part of the problem, say scientists. Only 26,875 people in England had a third dose or booster on 1 February, the latest complete figures available, and 6 million people are at least six weeks overdue for their shot. Behavioural scientists, including government advisers, and public health leaders say the huge drop in take-up in just one month is fuelled by the widespread belief that Boris Johnson flouted his own Covid rules. Although Omicron is less deadly than previous variants, it remains a significant health risk to the estimated 5.1 million unvaccinated people aged over 12 in the UK, and the rolling seven-day average of deaths in Britain is above 240. Double-jabbed people have a substantially lower risk of dying. But they remain more vulnerable to infection that can lead to long-term health problems and being taken to hospital, as well as death, in some cases. The perception that Omicron is less dangerous is a major reason why only 64.6% of over-12s in England have had their booster, according to behavioural scientists. The winter surge in infections has also had an impact, since people have to wait 28 days after their infection has cleared before they can be boosted. “Worry about infection has fallen to 52% of adults,” said John Drury, professor of social psychology at the University of Sussex, referring to ONS data published last week. “You can trace that to 27 January when the government announced that we didn’t need to have any measures. That communicates something about risk, that infection is OK because it’s not associated very strongly with death.” UCL’s Covid Social Study, which has tracked attitudes to pandemic measures, released a report last week showing that unvaccinated and double-jabbed people were much less worried about catching Covid, becoming seriously ill, developing long Covid, or possible future variants. But they were more concerned than triple-jabbed people about being asked to get more vaccinations. “In addition, most people who aren’t vaccinated have chosen not to because of a lack of trust,” Drury said. “And who has trust in this government now?” Research by Dr Simon Williams, a behavioural scientist at Swansea University, showed that the partygate scandals had created “variant fatigue” with some participants in his December study saying they would ignore rules at Christmas because of the Downing Street parties. “Trust in authorities has taken a battering recently,” he said. “One of the predictors of vaccine decisions is trust in authorities – we saw that in a big study in Denmark – and trust has certainly not got any better recently.” He cited opinion polls showing declining trust, including a YouGov survey in December showing that one in 10 people would not follow Covid rules. Prof Susan Michie, director of the UCL Centre for Behaviour Change and part of the SPI-B group that advises the government’s Sage group, said: “We know vaccine hesitancy is often associated with not trusting authority. The ‘get boosted’ message was heralded by the prime minister and recent events have meant that trust in politicians has decreased, undermining the ‘get boosted’ message.” The NHS has been attempting to reverse the decline in booster uptake by reminding people to come forward. It sent texts to 2.4 million people last week and has opened 1,000 walk-in “Grab a Jab” centres. It is also working with employers to vaccinate people in workplaces. Dr Emily Lawson, head of the NHS England vaccination programme, said new ONS research showed the risk of death involving Covid was 93% lower for people who had had a booster or third dose of vaccine compared with unvaccinated people. She said: “It is vital that as soon as you can get the vaccine you take up the offer and book a guaranteed slot online. “Despite the Omicron variant seeming milder, it is important we don’t lose sight of the fact that Covid is still a very serious illness that is affecting thousands of people’s lives every day.” Dr Doug Brown, the chief executive of the British Society for Immunology, said: “Three doses of the vaccine doesn’t completely stop transmission but the rate of transmission is halved between people.” Immuno-compromised people, such as cancer and kidney patients, did not respond as well to vaccines as those with healthy immune systems, he added. “By getting your booster, that reduction in transmission really does play an important role in not just keeping ourselves safe, but those who are more clinically vulnerable as well. Prof Maggie Rae, president of the Faculty of Public Health, said: “I know people are tired. I know the government wants to move on. But we will only be able to get through this with people getting the vaccine. We need to establish who hasn’t been vaccinated, and how we help them.” National Immunisation Management System data shows that by 11 January, 78.7% of people over 18 in the richest areas had had a third dose, compared with 46.9% in the most deprived. ONS data shows that 35.9% of pupils eligible for free school meals have received a first dose, compared with 58.9% for those not eligible. “It’s heartbreaking to see the discrimination and the health inequalities between the poorest in our country,” Rae said. She said that ministers must continue to fund the vaccination programme. “I think the Treasury is trying to recoup the money that it spent during the pandemic and they want the Covid response money back. I think it’s right and proper that some of the private sector spending on test and trace does go back, because I’m not convinced all of it was spent effectively. But what I don’t want is further cuts to the public health system. “The booster campaign was introduced at the last minute. Throughout this pandemic, they have been three weeks behind every sensible action or decision – the first lockdown was a classic example. The virus has outrun them the whole time. “We need to keep up momentum because we’ve still got another few months of winter to go with all the vulnerabilities that brings. I’m not comfortable that 350 people a day are dying in our country. I think that’s shocking – absolutely shocking.In the middle of Paris’s third Covid lockdown last March, a hashtag appeared on Twitter with a photo of a lock on the Canal Saint-Martin that runs through the north of the city clogged with litter, plastic bags and bottles. Images of Paris looking worse for wear are nothing new but, within days, dozens of pictures of overflowing bins, broken pavements and graffiti-covered walls appeared with the same hashtag – #SaccageParis – which roughly translates as Trashed Paris. Today, less than a year on, the hashtag has been used more than 2.7m times on Twitter alone and has become the battle cry for those who fear the once beautiful city is losing its soul. To others, it is a political smear campaign aimed at the Socialist mayor Anne Hidalgo, also a candidate in this year’s presidential election. Unlike traditional protests, Saccage Paris photographs the streets instead of occupying them. The informal campaign has given disgruntled Parisians a catchy hashtag under which to complain about anything from potholed pavements and roads to ugly park benches, litter, fly-tipping and graffiti. Whatever the motivations behind the hashtag – the account PanamePropre that coined it remains resolutely anonymous – the movement is gathering momentum and has prompted City Hall to publish a “manifesto for beauty” to smarten up the city, which hosts the Olympic Games in 2024. Jacques Desse does not look or sound like an extreme urban warrior. The softly spoken bookseller would almost certainly prefer to bury his nose in a rare manuscript than speak to the press. But he is angry, and he is not alone. A member of Saccage Paris, he laments the destruction of the city’s historic symbols. Much of the movement’s fury has been targeted at City Hall removing, neglecting or replacing Paris’s instantly recognisable architectural heritage, notably the street furniture, much of it dating from the 19th-century second empire of Napoléon III. “For many of us, Saccage Paris has no political motive. It’s a citizens’ movement and there’s a wide mix of political opinions. What we reproach Anne Hidalgo and her team for is that they have the power to do something about this but they do not use it positively,” Desse told the Observer. “City Hall is annoyed with us because what we show damages its image… but we have no other way.” To outsiders – especially fans of Netflix drama Emily in Paris – the French capital is the picture-postcard city of romance and dreams, of baguettes and boulevards, of high culture and haute couture. Parisians, who live in one of the most densely populated cities in the world, often paint a different picture. Last month, France’s best known royal commentator, Stéphane Bern, announced he was moving out of Paris because it had become dirty, violent and was “a rubbish bin”. “What has happened to the City of Light?,” he said. However, Bern pointed the finger at ordinary Parisians not Hidalgo. “Her job is far from easy, and, as far as I’m aware, she’s not the one making it dirty, nor are the refuse collectors at fault. The biggest culprits are first and foremost the people. She certainly has her share of responsibility but she doesn’t deserve all the attacks aimed at her,” Bern added. Art historian Didier Rykner was less forgiving in his recent book La Disparition de Paris (The Disappearance of Paris), a detailed critique of Hidalgo’s management of the city. But even writing books about the state of Paris is hardly novel. In 1832, Victor Hugo published a pamphlet decrying the “vandals” razing the crumbling medieval towers and churches to build replacements in the then fashionable neoclassic style, and Baron Georges-Eugène Haussmann, credited for the vast 19th-century transformation of Paris and creator of the celebrated grands boulevards, faced bitter opposition and controversy. PanamePropre has said he is only expressing “the anger of seeing the city I have lived in for more than 20 years deteriorate before my eyes. Thousands of Parisians, and Paris lovers from all over France, ordinary citizens like me, spontaneously united under this hashtag,” he wrote. “It’s amazing how it has caught on,” said Quentin, a young engineer and Saccage Paris activist, who preferred not to give his full name. We are in a cafe near the Porte Saint-Martin in Paris’s 10th arrondissement, where a local hairdresser has painted a large pair of scissors on the pavement under the 17th-century arch. “That is the sort of thing Saccage Paris is about. I’ve reported it but it’s still there,” he said. “It’s true the hashtag has been used by some on the far right, but it’s a hashtag, anyone can use it. That’s just an excuse, the real issue is the damage and removal of the very things that make up Paris’s heritage: its fountains, lampposts, the grilles around the trees, the Metro entrances, the benches … if you see a picture of these things you know exactly where you are. You don’t need a picture of the Eiffel Tower to know it’s Paris, it is instantly recognisable. But the city authorities have been wilfully destroying them for years. When they replace an old bench seat with a new concrete one, it is the identity of Paris they are destroying. It’s deliberate vandalism of the city.” He denied supporters of Saccage Paris are architectural reactionaries. “They say we are against anything modern, that we are opposed to change, but again that’s an excuse. There are some very good modern things, but is a modern concrete bench that is ugly a good thing?” Desse’s cavernous bookshop, behind an anonymous-looking door in the Goutte d’Or, in what is called a “quartier populaire” – a poor, working-class area, with a large migrant population – is down from the Porte de la Chapelle, the northern “gate” where visitors arriving by road meet the chaos of the city head on. The bookseller, who lives above the shop, says the local community feel the municipal authorities have abandoned them. “We have seen the destruction of the urban landscape and disorganisation here and across the city over the last 10-15 years,” Desse said. “The authorities try to do something – more social housing, more cultural centres, more of this and that – but the result is more often than not catastrophic, and they don’t listen to us. It’s like a company run by a bad boss – things are bad all the way down and nothing works. “They are not in touch with reality: perhaps they consider this is normal, that in the north-east of Paris it’s normal to have poor districts where everything is dirty, where there are social problems and drug problems and nothing is done about them. Perhaps they will only notice these problems when they spread elsewhere. Before it was just a few districts like ours that suffered, but now…” City Hall maintains that the movement can be traced back to supporters of the far right and is orchestrated by Hidalgo haters. Like the rubbish on the streets, it is easy to see why, when a social media post about the state of Paris often sparks virulent, sometimes defamatory, attacks on the mayor. Still, officials have reacted to the barrage of criticism. One of Hidalgo’s deputies, Emmanuel Grégoire, recently announced City Hall would publish a three-volume “manifesto for beauty” with plans to smarten up the city and admitted Saccage Paris had made some “useful” points, though he accused it of exaggerating. Grégoire said measures included replacing ugly urban furniture, zero tolerance for rubbish dumping and increased efforts to combat graffiti tagging and illegal fly-posting. Carlos Moreno, a French Colombian scientist, university professor who has lived in Paris for 42 years and acted as an independent adviser to Hidalgo, said the problem was one of centralised authority and lack of joined-up thinking, particularly on rubbish collection and disposal. He urged officials to delegate more to local mayors and appoint an international “chief city designer” with a team of urban experts to oversee aesthetic changes at street level. “The beauty manifesto isn’t enough. These things shouldn’t be decided by civil servants, we need experts,” Moreno said. “Of course, we should keep things that are part of Paris’s heritage, but that doesn’t mean everything old should be kept. And, of course, Paris shouldn’t be a museum so we should have things that are modern and cool but not if they are ugly.” Moreno pointed out Paris has unique challenges caused by its density and the fact it was one of the most visited cities in the world. “It’s not right to say Paris is a rubbish bin; there have been some failures but there have also been some great successes under Anne Hidalgo. Say what you want about her, she has a great vision for the city and I am optimistic for the future,” he said. One thing both sides agree on is that the future for the City of Light is, or could be, bright. “When we started this, City Hall claimed we were all reactionaries. We’re not, but they need to start listening to us,” “I’m optimistic, but I must fight for this city and its heritage,” Quentin said. “We have to find a way to make Paris beautiful again.”Superstar televangelist Tammy Faye Bakker was a queer ally; with her tattooed lip liner and drag queen makeup, she was a queer icon too. Disappointingly, Michael Showalter’s biopic couldn’t be straighter. Based on the 2000 documentary of the same name by Randy Barbato and Fenton Bailey, Jessica Chastain and Andrew Garfield star as Tammy Faye and Jim Bakker, a husband-and-wife duo whose cheery evangelical sermons and handmade puppets help them develop a cult following. By the mid 1970s, they’ve become successful enough to start their own TV network, a business venture that funds their opulent lifestyle. Their lakeside palace is a riot of cream, gold and fur. For Tammy Faye, it’s evidence that their piety has been rewarded – except Jim has been fudging the accounts. The film smiles politely at Tammy Faye’s tacky aesthetic without ever fully embracing it, a bad-faith approach to its heroine. It reveres her feminist impulses – one scene sees her literally drag a seat up to a table of men – but then implies she had no agency when Jim drove them into debt. Her lust for money is glossed over; there is the sense that acknowledging her complicity could make her a less blandly likable heroine. The real Tammy Faye was more complex. Chastain, ordinarily so good at projecting innocence, is unable to imbue the character with a sense of inner life. Beneath the prosthetics, she’s simply a collection of tics and mannerisms, all pawing hands and Betty Boop giggle.Stina Blackstenius was the saviour as Arsenal came from a goal down with 10 players to secure a vital point against Manchester United in the WSL title race. They could have had all three but familiar failings in defence denied them the chance to really put some distance between themselves and their closest challengers, Chelsea. The Gunners were missing two first-choice defenders in Leah Williamson and Lotte Wubben-Moy, with Jen Beattie and Steph Catley replacing them in a rigid back four. Both found it difficult to stifle United’s interchangeable front three, and it seemed as if the United manager Marc Skinner had planned it that way, with his team set up in a 4-3-2-1. There was an obvious target in all this: Katie McCabe, who was facing Alessia Russo on the left flank. With the United forwards’ darting runs causing problems on the counter, midfielders Jordan Nobbs and Tobin Heath often had to track back to help McCabe. The combination marking, however, was not enough to prevent Russo popping up to score with a header from Katie Zelem’s corner after 10 minutes to make it 1-0 to the visitors. Marc Skinner expressed delight at how his captain and Russo had combined for the goal. “The positioning, concentration, it’s so much more than physical to be in the right places in those moments,” he said. “Coming to Arsenal on the back of the week we had and to do that, it was brilliant.” Confusion continued to reign in the Arsenal defence and it seemed likely Russo would add to her tally. There was no reprieve in attack either. Though Arsenal were working to create opportunities, United’s high press effectively cut out spaces for their runs. It took a real moment of magic from Vivianne Miedema to change the pattern. The forward made her trademark run down the middle of the United defence but her fierce shot rattled the bar. It was exactly what Arsenal needed to breathe some life into their attack. Where Heath and Beth Mead had cut lonely figures in what should have been quite an attacking 4-3-3, they were now making frequent runs into the United box. The response from Jonas Eidevall at the break was to replace Heath with Caitlin Foord. The Australian international provided more stability in the middle, giving Beth Mead and Vivianne Miedema more space to operate in. The latter was really coming to life after moving from the centre to the left wing. Eidevall then shifted from a 4-3-3 to a 4-4-2. That meant Lia Wälti was back in defence and Kim Little pushed up higher into the attack. The impact was immediate, resulting in one of Arsenal’s best chances of the game. Mead made a swashbuckling run from midfield, delivering a fierce cross that was met by Foord’s left-footed volley, only just parried away by Mary Earps. United really should have made it 2-0 halfway through the second half when Ella Toone latched on to a stray pass from Nobbs. She was through on goal but uncharacteristically her strike flashed past the post into the side-netting, a miss that would come back to haunt her. Arsenal’s Katie McCabe was shown a second yellow card for a tackle on Ona Battle. With no substitutions left the only option looked to be to double up in midfield and abandon their high press. In typical Eidevall style Arsenal did the opposite, and the substitute Blackstenius blazed through to slot the ball past Earps, levelling the game against the run of play with 11 minutes remaining. Both teams held on through seven minutes of added time. Arsenal will be the more disappointed of the sides, both at their defensive failings and at what this might mean for their hold on top spot in the league. “We had to adjust things,” Eidevall said afterwards. “It was disappointing that we didn’t start the game with better relationships but it was always a part of the plan.”Chelsea eventually saw off Plymouth, by the way, 2-1 after extra time. So a couple of huge shocks failed to materialise in the end, but it remains a day fans of Kidderminster and Plymouth will remember for a long time. Plenty of other ties being played this afternoon, though, so please join Tim de Lisle for FA Cup Clockwatch. Thanks for reading this MBM! Declan Rice joins in with the applause. A class act, he’s still clapping when the BBC collars him for an interview. “Massive, massive respect to Kidderminster. We watched a few videos of them. They’ve been flying. They’re tough lads. We scraped it today, we weren’t at our best. They probably deserved that today, if I’m being honest with you. We really need to improve, but massive congratulations to them, because they were impressive. I’m really delighted we got through.” Russell Penn responded to that gut-wrenching blow by pulling his snood over his face, to grab a brief moment for himself. Then he yanked it back down, and he’s currently doing a lap of honour with his players, a bittersweet smile playing across his face. Everyone’s staying back to give Kidderminster the ovation they deserve. These are lovely scenes. The FA Cup, right here. It’s still special, you know. Almost unbearable heartbreak for a second time for Kidderminster, who have been superb. Once the shock of West Ham’s late, late winner subsides, the crowd emit perhaps the biggest roar of the afternoon in honour of their players. Every one a hero, despite it all. More heartbreak for Harriers! Yarmolenko crosses deep from the right. Cresswell, at the far stick, rolls back across the face of goal for Bowen, who slams home from a couple of yards. What a smash and grab this has been! ET 30 min: There will be one extra minute. ET 29 min: Bowen needlessly fouls Cameron to release the pressure on the hosts. Kidderminster so close to penalties now. Will they have their hearts broken a second time? ET 28 min: Zouma is still struggling. He’s not quite at passenger status, but he’s certainly not moving freely, and isn’t best pleased when a pass is sent his way. He clears, but it hurts him to do so. ET 26 min: Benrahma dribbles with grace down the left and wins a corner. White, calm and collected, deals with the set piece by running the ball away from danger. ET 25 min: Lowe takes a speculative swipe from 30 yards. It sails about 30 yards wide left. ET 24 min: Zouma is happily back up on his feet, although he’s hobbling badly. ET 23 min: Zouma is down in some distress, having stood on the ball and then fallen heavily, possibly twisting something. He’s in a lot of pain. ET 22 min: Lowe comes on for Bajrami. ET 21 min: West Ham have the ball in the net, Bowen forcing the ball over the line from six yards, teed up by Yarmolenko’s low cross from the left. But Yarmolenko was a yard offside as he was sent free by Benrahma’s pass down the channel. Up goes the flag. A roar of relief from the home crowd. ET 20 min: Rice aims a curler towards the bottom right. The ball takes a huge deflection but doesn’t fall to Fornals. Kidderminster clear their lines. ET 19 min: White is in the mood to create, and now he foxes Rice with a cute dragback and dink forward. The crowd enjoyed that. ET 18 min: White tries to get something going for the hosts, but a long diagonal pass in the vague direction of Sterling-James flies out for a goal kick. ET 17 min: This is already shaping up to be a backs-to-the-wall period for Kidderminster, who are struggling get out of their final third. Some blessed relief as the ball’s blootered up the other end. ET 16 min: Fornals has a couple of digs from the edge of the box. Both are blocked. West Ham get the second half of extra time underway. Martin comes on for Morgan-Smith, perhaps with a view to holding out for penalties. The sixth-tier side are holding their own in extra time. Meanwhile at Stamford Bridge, Chelsea have taken the lead against Plymouth through Marcos Alonso. They’re 2-1 up as they go into the second half of extra time. ET 15 min: A long free kick lumped into the West Ham box. Areola comes out to claim, and drops the ball in the environs of Morgan-Smith. The Kidderminster striker chests down, but the ball springs away from his control, allowing Areola to gather at the second attempt. For a second, Morgan-Smith’s eyes lit up there. ET 13 min: Cresswell whips towards the top right. A deflection off the wall takes the ball out for a corner. Dawson meets the set piece, but can’t keep it down. ET 12 min: Montrose blocks Bowen, 25 yards from goal. Free kick in a dangerous position, just to the right of centre. ET 11 min: Kidderminster replace Hemmings with White. ET 9 min: Benrahma, out on the left, overhits an awful cross out for a goal kick. He soon comes again and delivers a much better one, low towards the near post. Bowen races in to meet, six yards out, only for Richards to stick out a leg to block. What a fine last-ditch challenge. ET 7 min: West Ham stroke it around to little effect. ET 5 min: Sterling-James channels his inner Ronnie Radford and sends a 30-yard screamer inches over the bar. What a goal that would have been! ET 4 min: Hemmings works his way down the right and wins a corner. Kidderminster dream of a repeat of the opening goal, but Sterling-James takes, and Soucek heads clear. ET 2 min: Fornals crosses low from the right. Yarmolenko doesn’t connect properly, six yards out, but earns a corner nonetheless. From that, Bowen slices a shot wide right. Kidderminster get the first period of extra time underway. They’d have grabbed this situation with both hands at 12.30pm, to be fair. The game between Chelsea and Plymouth has also ended 1-1. They’ll be going to extra time as well. Kidderminster hearts were broken at the last ... but there’s still extra time and possibly penalties to come. 90 min +3: Rice nearly completes the ultimate smash and grab. He’s teed up by Benrahma, 25 yards from goal, and sends a heat-seeker towards the top right. Just wide. Too high. Rice exchanges passes with Fornals down the left, and dribbles into the box. He drops a shoulder to see off ... who else? ... poor Preston, and roofs a shot from six yards. What heartbreak for Kidderminster! West Ham save themselves at the death! 90 min +1: Cresswell dribbles down the left, then along the byline. Preston, who is named man of the match, blooters clear. But then ... 90 min: There will be three added minutes. 89 min: Bowen makes his way down the right and thinks he’s won a corner off Sterling-James, but the referee points for a goal kick. Kidderminster ever closer to one of the great FA Cup shocks! 87 min: A long free kick pumped into the West Ham box. Hemmings heads over from 12 yards. The visitors go up the other end. Yarmolenko dribbles into the box and lays off to Benrahma, just to the left of the six-yard box. Aggborough holds its breath. Benrahma prods goalwards. Some pinball, and then the ball floats into the arms of Simpson. For a split second there, time stood still, an equaliser seemingly on the cards. But the sixth-tier side hold on! 86 min: The aforementioned Robert Plant is in the stand. He’s pictured biting his lip nervously. His heart must be going like a John Bonham solo. 85 min: ... but then a huge cheer as Bowen makes a clumsy foul to release the pressure on the hosts! 84 min: An FA Cup shock for the ages is so close now. The tension in Aggborough is palpable. For the first time this afternoon, near silence as West Ham probe. 83 min: Redmond wins a Kidderminster corner down the left. It’s swung over Areola’s head. Areola punches clear, but only for a throw deep in West Ham territory. Penny saunters over to take. No rush. You’d take your sweet time too. 82 min: Fornals plays a ball down the right channel towards Yarmolenko in the box. Yarmolenko goes down with nobody near him. An embarrassing dive. He should go in the book, but all-round opprobrium is enough. 80 min: The Kidderminster faithful are making one hell of a racket. The fixtures and fittings are rattling along. Aggborough is almost literally bouncing. What an atmosphere! What a competition the FA Cup is. 78 min: A defensive switch for Kidderminster. The forward-thinking Austin is replaced by the more circumspect Redmond. 77 min: Fornals comes on for Vlasic. 76 min: Rice lines up a shot. The ball rears up, just as he commits to the strike, and his effort nearly clears the stand behind the goal. The home crowd, already in good spirits, enjoyed that very much. 74 min: Benrahma crosses from the left. The ball bounces through a crowded box to Soucek, who leans back and lifts an aimless effort high over the bar. Not the easiest of chances, but a chance nonetheless. They’ve been scarce for West Ham. 73 min: West Ham continue to probe, and Kidderminster continue to hold their shape. 72 min: Kidderminster make their first change, swapping out Carrington for Montrose. 71 min: The first booking of the afternoon. Cameron is the recipient of the yellow card, punishment for clipping the heel of Yarmolenko. 70 min: ... so Kidderminster show what they can do by playing some possession football in West Ham’s half. It’s an impressive passage of play, and one started by Morgan-Smith brushing Dawson off the ball with absurd ease. 68 min: West Ham have had 88 percent possession in the last five minutes. But here we remain. 67 min: West Ham are seeing an awful lot of the ball, but doing very little with it. A lack of tempo and very little visible purpose. 65 min: A free kick out on the left for Kidderminster. It’s hit long. Penny tries to guide it in at the far post, but can’t get any serious purchase on his effort. Goal kick. 64 min: West Ham make their second double change of the afternoon. Noble and Johnson make way for Soucek and Cresswell. 62 min: Nothing comes of the corner, and the first sustained period of West Ham pressure is over. 61 min: One corner leads to another, and Benrahma takes a dig from the edge of the box. The ball takes a deflection and looks to be heading into the bottom left. Simpson, suddenly earning his corn, scoops out for another corner. 60 min: ... but he has now! West Ham’s press springs Bowen into the Kidderminster box down the right. He drives towards the bottom right. Simpson gets down to parry. The rebound breaks to Bowen, following up. He tries to slip home from a tight angle, but is denied by the extended leg of Preston. Corner. 58 min: Benrahma slides a pass down the left for Johnson, who earns West Ham a corner. Benrahma swings it in. Preston heads clear. Simpson still hasn’t had a serious save to make. 56 min: Hemmings slips a ball wide left for Sterling-James, who sashays infield and creams a rising shot over the bar. That wasn’t too far away, and West Ham want to watch themselves here. Another goal for the hosts, and they’ll be in a world of pain. 54 min: A Kidderminster throw down the right flank skims off Johnson’s head and out for a corner. The set piece is hung over Areola’s head. The keeper flaps again. Preston mistimes his jump and shoulders over the bar from close range. 53 min: West Ham finally cause Kidderminster some concern. Rice dribbles purposefully down the inside-left channel and into the box. He slips the ball outside to Vlasic, who crosses low and hard. Benrahma aims for goal but his shot is blocked. Much better from the side currently placed fifth in the Premier League. 51 min: Austin dribbles down the left and wedges towards the centre. The ball hits Dawson on the elbow. Kidderminster scream for a penalty but they’re never getting one for that. 50 min: It’s a scrappy start to the second half. Kidderminster will be more than happy with the way it’s going. 49 min: Vlasic is dragged back by Preston, just to the right of the Kidderminster D. The referee waves play on. Preston wasn’t the last man, but it would have been a free kick in a dangerous position. Lucky Kidderminster. 47 min: Hemmings has a speculative whack from the best part of 30 yards. It’s not a million miles away from the top left, but fades wide at the last. Kidderminster get the second half underway. No surprise that Moyes has hooked Diop, sending Dawson on in his place. Also no shock that Rice is on. He replaces Kral. Half-time entertainment. Just in case you missed it. Fifty years to the day since Hereford stunned Newcastle, another huge FA Cup shock is on. David Moyes storms off down the tunnel. A fair chance we’ll see Declan Rice sooner rather than later. 45 min: Benrahma blooters wildly over from 25 yards. This is a clueless display by the Premier League side. 44 min: This half has been played at 101 miles per hour, and Kidderminster have been the more energetic in the press. No wonder they’re leading. 42 min: Chelsea have drawn level with Plymouth at Stamford Bridge. Azpilicueta with a captain’s contribution. 41 min: A long ball down the West Ham left. Benrahma hares after it, but Simpson is quickly off his line to claim on the edge of the box. West Ham have offered nothing. 40 min: Morgan-Smith wins a corner down the right off Zouma. The set piece is hit long. Cameron rises highest at the far stick, but not high enough, the ball skimming off his head and out for a goal kick. You know what, though, 2-0 wouldn’t seriously flatter Kidderminster. 38 min: ... hilarity ensues. They’re determined to play these corners short, and ping a few passes back up the pitch. Johnson then hoicks a pass straight out of play under no pressure whatsoever. West Ham seriously need to up their game, because this shock is a serious possibility the way things are going. 37 min: Benrahma shows a rare bit of West Ham skill, dribbling cutely down the left and winning a corner. From which ... 35 min: This is turning into quite the fourth round. Middlesbrough have already knocked out Manchester United, Kidderminster are leading here, and Plymouth are winning at Chelsea! Macaulay Gillesphey with a seventh-minute header at Stamford Bridge. 33 min: A bit of space for Fredericks out on the right. He shanks a cross over the stand and into a nearby car park. The home fans enjoyed that. West Ham have been awful so far. 31 min: Sterling launches long. Diop should deal with the situation easily, but Morgan-Smith puts him under pressure and forces him to bundle the ball out for a throw. Nothing comes of it, but it’s another illustration of Diop’s extreme unease. He needs to clear his head quicksmart. 29 min: A slight suggestion of handball in the build-up to the goal, the ball pinballing after Areola and Diop failed to clear, and hitting the hanging arm of Cameron. You’d need a heart of stone, or at least one that pumps claret and blue, to rule it out. 27 min: Fredericks whips a low cross in from the right. Bajrami bashes out for a corner ... and the set piece is dealt with easily enough. West Ham haven’t seriously worried Simpson in the Kidderminster goal yet. 25 min: Diop, still out of sorts, brings down Hemmings as the Kidderminster man dribbles along the inside-right channel. Sterling-James takes the free kick, curling around the wall and sending the ball inches wide of the bottom-right corner. So close to a second! 23 min: David Moyes has a look of queasy disbelief on his face. No wonder, his team have been second best so far. 21 min: West Ham are rattled, and Diop in particular is suffering. He’s brushed off the ball with absurd ease by Morgan-Smith, who barrels down the left, then along the byline, and tries to tee up Sterling-James. Areola reads the intention and smothers. Something’s happening now all right! Diop bowls Morgan-Smith to the ground out on the left wing. Sterling-James swings the free kick into the mixer. Areola comes out and flaps, blocked out by his own man Diop. The ball drops to Penny, who calmly slams a sidefoot into the net from six yards! The shock is on! 17 min: “I‘m neither fan of both teams but a huge fan of Led Zeppelin, begins Chris Mcvand. “After finding out that Robert Plant counts Kidderminster as his second team (in the article by Ben Fisher), I am rooting for them with a whole lot of love.” Still nothing going on. Hey, hey, what can I do? 15 min: The BBC are taking a while to roll out their new logo, aren’t they. The on-screen scoreboard still has the old Gill Sans job. No, nothing else is happening. 13 min: A free kick for Kidderminster on the halfway line. Sterling-James takes. His delivery doesn’t reach the line of players on the edge of the West Ham box, the wind holding it up. It’s breezy in the midlands. 11 min: Austin teases a cross in from the left. Zouma is forced to slice clear in a panic. The hosts are giving as good as they’re getting in these early exchanges. 10 min: West Ham respond by winning their second corner out on the left. They play it short again. Bowen wins another by knocking the ball against Austin. That’s played short, too, and Yarmolenko and Benrahma nearly open Harriers up down the inside-left flank ... but run into the brick wall of Preston. 9 min: ... and here they come again, Sterling-James sent down the inside-right channel by Austin, then sending a bobbler towards Areola. The keeper all over it again. 7 min: Kidderminster bare their teeth for the first time! A loose ball played across the face of the West Ham box is met by Austin, who pearls a glorious first-time drive towards the bottom right. Areola is behind it all the way, though he briefly loses control with Morgan-Smith lurking. The keeper snaffles quickly enough. That’ll give the minnows hope! 6 min: Johnson buys the first corner of the game from Penny down the left. West Ham take it short. The ball’s pulled back for Johnson, who tries his luck from 25 yards. Nope! 4 min: Johnson crosses from the same flank. Bowen nearly meets it, but goes over in the vicinity of Preston. He glances at the ref, hoping for a penalty, but he’s never getting one. Strong defending, nothing more. 3 min: Vlasic curls one in from the left. It’s a dangerous-looking ball, but one cleared in the no-nonsense style by Preston. The home side winning their battles so far. 2 min: A scrappy start. The FA Cup at a non-league ground, you wouldn’t have it any other way. West Ham get the ball rolling. On second viewing, those sky-blue stripes aren’t quite so Coventry-vivid, to be fair. But there we are. A proper old-school FA Cup atmosphere for this one. On that subject, it’s 50 years to the day since this happened. The teams are out. Kidderminster are in their first-choice red, West Ham wear second-choice sky blue and white, all very Coventry ‘87. Granada Bingo, y’all. We’ll be off soon! David Moyes is asked by the BBC if he’s been brooding over his loss here as a Preston player in 1994. “Not really, no. But when I think back all the years I played in the cup and managed in it, you’re always liable to have shocks. That’s what the cup does, so our job is to make sure there isn’t one today. We need to play well. Obviously we’re aware of Kidderminster’s great result against Reading and we have to respect that. I always want to get to finals. It doesn’t always happen, but we want to get a good run in the cup.” Kidderminster manager Russell Penn speaks to the BBC. “It’s our cup final today. I’m so proud of the town, the club, the community, the owner and the players. Our bread and butter is the league, we really want to be promoted, but having this in the background helps. We’re going to pay them the utmost respect, I’m sure they’ll do the same to us. I’m so happy for the players, I just want them to do themselves justice.” There’s another fourth-round tie kicking off at 12.30pm, and it’s one Chelsea coach Thomas Tuchel won’t attend. He’s tested positive for Covid-19, and will miss his team’s home tie with Plymouth Argyle. It’s now a race against time to see if he can make the Club World Cup next week, with the squad flying out later tonight ahead of Wednesday’s semi-final in Abu Dhabi. “Thomas Tuchel has tested positive for Covid-19,” read a Chelsea statement. “The Chelsea head coach will now follow necessary self-isolation protocols and hopes to join up with the team in Abu Dhabi later next week.” David Moyes goes strong as three-time winners West Ham look to avoid an embarrassing result against Kidderminster of the National League North. Mark Noble, Kurt Zouma, Jarrod Bowen, Said Benrahma and Andriy Yarmolenko all start, while Declan Rice has a place on the bench at Aggborough. Kidderminster: Simpson, Penny, Cameron, Bajrami, Richards, Preston, Carrington, Hemmings, Austin, Sterling-James, Morgan-Smith. Subs: Redmond, Lowe, Montrose, Foulkes, Martin, Lissimore, White, Emery, Bastable. West Ham United: Areola, Fredericks, Zouma, Diop, Johnson, Kral, Noble, Bowen, Vlasic, Yarmolenko, Benrahma. Subs: Cresswell, Coufal, Fornals, Dawson, Soucek, Randolph, Okoflex, Rice, Alese. Referee: Jonathan Moss (County Durham). David Gold, David Sullivan and Karren Brady can be forgiven for feeling nervous as their club take on non-league Kidderminster this lunchtime. Sixth-tier Harriers may be the lowest-ranked team left in this year’s FA Cup, but West Ham’s directors have suffered at their hands before: they were running Birmingham City back in 1994, when Kidderminster shocked Blues 2-1 at St Andrews. David Moyes is also permitted a little shudder, because that year he was a member of the Preston team subsequently beaten by Harriers in the following round. Everyone else connected with West Ham can simmer down, though, as it was the Hammers who ended Kidderminster’s brave run in the fifth round. Plenty of historical resonance with this one, then. Kick off is at 12.30pm GMT, and there will be extra time and penalties if necessary. It’s on!More than 150 workers at the Jon Donaire Desserts plant in Santa Fe Springs, California, have been on strike since early November over wages, healthcare coverage and working conditions. The dispute centers on food workers, hailed as heroes early in the pandemic, who are struggling to cope with spiraling costs of living as the company that employs them posts billion-dollar revenues. Workers at the plant, which makes ice-cream cakes for companies such as Baskin-Robbins, Walmart and Safeway, are asking for a $1 an hour raise every year for three years with no cuts to their healthcare costs. Rich Products Corporation, the plant’s owner, has made two offers to the Bakery, Confectionery, Tobacco Workers and Grain Millers’ International Union, which represents the workers. One proposed a 50¢ raise over one year and 55¢ raises for the following two years. The other offered an overall wage increase of $4.10 an hour, but included significant increases to the cost of workers’ healthcare. “Right now, we’re paying around $130 a month for healthcare. They want to increase it to $480 for a single person and $780 for a family plan,” said Miguel Perez, who has worked at the Jon Donaire plant for 12 years. “The Rich Corporation is not fulfilling its obligation to take care of its employees. They had us working through the whole pandemic. Everybody showed up to work. We all met our quotas as far as production [is concerned], and now that the contract is up they’re trying to nickel-and-dime us into an unacceptable raise.” Workers have highlighted the company owners’ immense wealth and profits in their pressure to secure the raises they are on strike to receive. The chief executive and owner of Rich Products, Robert Rich Jr, has a net worth of $4.9bn. In the first year of the pandemic, Rich Products reported more than $4bn in revenue. Perez also described workplace grievances, including being informed of forced overtime with just a few minutes left at the end of a shift, often being denied permissions to take time off from work to go to a doctor’s appointment, and the treatment of a workforce that is roughly 90% women by supervisors who are mostly men. “Every week we see a woman coming out of the office crying, because she felt like she was disrespected,” added Perez. “We have a lot of that going on. Sometimes the male supervisors are cursing at them, yelling at them, or even making inappropriate gestures.” Jon Donaire denied these allegations, claiming the union has never addressed these grievances with the company. “There are unfortunately many stories with baseless claims that we’ve had to refute throughout this process – and we will continue to do so,” said a spokesperson. It also cited long tenures of employees and an internal survey of workers in March last year, where 80% of Santa Fe Springs’ employees said they would recommend Rich’s to others as a “great place to work”. Cristina Lujan has worked at the Jon Donaire plant for 19 years. Most recently she was on the cake assembly line, decorating cakes at a rate of around 13 a minute. Throughout her time at the plant Lujan said production demands have gotten higher and higher but her pay has not kept up with the increased demands on her nor with the costs of living in the Los Angeles area. “When I started, I was well above minimum wage,” said Lujan. “Now, 19 years later, I’m barely above minimum wage. Our raises have been pennies every contract.” Workers at the plant make on average less than $17 an hour, compared to workers at a Rich Products’ facility in Tennessee, who are paid on average $6 an hour more. “I think he [Robert Rich Jr] can afford to pay us the $1 more that we’re asking for,” said Lujan. “Everything is going up, gas, food, rent and we’re living paycheck to paycheck. Everybody’s tired of feeling that frustration and stress daily. Their big company model is based on family first, but the way they treat us, I don’t think that’s the way you treat family.” On 17 December, workers rejected the company’s contract offer, continuing the strike. Rich Products responded by declaring an impasse in new union contract negotiations and enacting the wage increases they proposed to workers who crossed the picket line, which the company said amounts to almost 60 workers. The company also paid workers who crossed picket lines back pay and a gain sharing bonus. The union has filed unfair labor practice charges against the company for imposing a contract on the unionized workforce that was voted down by workers, which is currently under review at the National Labor Relations Board. Several elected officials, including the Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors, 25 congressional representatives and seven US senators, have called on the Rich Corporation to bargain in good faith with the union and reach a fair contract. “Rich’s is especially concerned about what the strike has meant for striking associates who have now gone weeks without a paycheck, are not eligible for state unemployment benefits, and will soon forfeit the high-quality healthcare they told the company they wanted to retain,” said a spokesperson for Rich Products. “We are pleased many of our associates have continued to come to work since the strike began and plant production has continued. They deserve the wage increase we proposed and to retain their uninterrupted high-quality healthcare. “We welcome back all striking workers with open arms and will provide the same considerations to them.”Somehow, West Ham slithered out of this barnstorming FA Cup tie with a spot in the fifth round. After Declan Rice, who was sent on by David Moyes at half-time to bring some order to an abject performance, struck in second-half stoppage time to take the game to extra time, Jarrod Bowen prevented penalties after snaffling a winner with 13 seconds left on the clock. Moyes, hands in pockets, was unmoved. The Kidderminster manager, Russell Penn, could only pull his snood over his face, while his assistant, Jimmy O’Connor, swivelled on the touchline in disbelief. West Ham got out of jail to avoid an embarrassing exit and burst sixth-tier Kidderminster’s bubble, after Alex Penny had sparked delirium by opening the scoring. For Kidderminster, an extraordinary journey that began against Sporting Khalsa in the second qualifying round and took in a third qualifying round replay against Ware came to an agonising finish, having outlasted Arsenal, Manchester United and Newcastle. They will resume their National League North promotion push and on Tuesday face a Worcestershire Senior Cup semi-final, though those that pushed West Ham all the way will get a breather, with this their ninth game in 28 days. “I thought we’d get blown away in extra time, but we didn’t,” Penn said. “I’m gutted for the lads. They’re crawling around in the dressing room. “They were piling the pressure on, but it was just unfortunate that they scored from the last phase of the game. We should take great heart from this and hopefully use it as a catalyst to push on.” A couple of minutes before half time a punch-drunk Kidderminster fan gave the chairman, Richard Lane, who was stood behind the directors’ box taking everything in, a whopping kiss on the cheek. Seats were at a premium – tickets sold out within hours of going on sale – and after Saïd Benrahma ballooned a wayward shot into the North Stand terrace, fans smelled a historic victory. West Ham had done their homework – one of Stuart Pearce or Alan Irvine attended Kidderminster’s previous four games – but the first-half performance was laboured, disjointed and a pale imitation of the kind that has taken the visitors to fifth in the Premier League, 113 places above the hosts in the pyramid. Kidderminster instantly made their presence felt and Sam Austin forced Alphonse Areola, the on-loan Paris Saint-Germain goalkeeper, to parry an early shot after a poor clearance by Ryan Fredericks, one of eight West Ham players promoted to the starting lineup. Areola, Bowen and Kurt Zouma kept their places but aside from Michail Antonio, who landed in London on Friday after international duty with Jamaica, a full-strength West Ham squad arrived in Worcestershire. But Moyes had to dip into his rich reserves sooner than planned. Rice was influential after entering at the break and with two minutes of stoppage time to play and Kidderminster close to an almighty upset, he took matters into his own hands, driving forward from halfway to source an equaliser. He played a one-two with Pablo Fornals, another substitute, cut inside Matt Preston, who otherwise had a faultless game in the Kidderminster defence, and smashed into the roof of the net. “He is maturing as a player,” Moyes said. “Declan made a difference. He is having a bigger influence, a bigger impact. It is why I have said he is a special edition. We see him in that light.” The selfless Amari Morgan-Smith proved too sleek for Issa Diop early on and moments after Omari Sterling-James snatched the ball from a dawdling Andriy Yarmolenko on halfway, the West Ham defender, who was replaced by Craig Dawson at half-time, conceded a foul. Sterling sent in the subsequent free-kick and Areola and Diop inadvertently collided after both attempting to beat Nathan Cameron to the ball. Diop’s headed clearance dropped kindly for the right-back Penny, who side-footed into an empty net. Cue pandemonium in the stands and on the touchline. Kidderminster were understandably deflated when Rice levelled but did not roll over. Caleb Richards intervened just as it seemed Bowen would prod home but West Ham, who had a goal disallowed for offside with 110 minutes on the clock, ratcheted up the pressure and, much to Kidderminster’s pain, they still had a cruel winner left in the tank. Yarmolenko’s shot pinballed in the box and dropped at the back post, where the substitute Aaron Cresswell squared for Bowen. “It will be that one where the players say: ‘How close were we?’” Penn said. “It was a huge honour for me to be managing across from David Moyes. He said some lovely words. He said: ‘Well done, we didn’t deserve it.’”As the weeks wear on following No 10’s “partygate” scandal and the number of Conservative MPs urging Boris Johnson to go continues to climb, one person has emerged as the prime minister’s most loyal defender. Nadine Dorries, undeterred by two new calls for Johnson to resign and fresh reports that police have a photograph of the PM holding a can of Estrella at his lockdown birthday party, leapt to his defence on Saturday in a series of bizarre interviews. Among the highlights of the culture secretary’s morning airwaves blitz was an excruciatingly awkward interview with BBC Breakfast presenter Charlie Stayt, in which Dorries refused to say whether she had spoken to the prime minister recently. Speaking live from Gloucestershire, she would only reveal that she had “communicated” with Johnson. In a stilted combative exchange reminiscent of Donald Trump’s former adviser Kellyanne Conway, she reprimanded Stayt for his questioning style. Asked whether she had spoken to the prime minister recently in the past 24 hours, she said: “Why? Why are you asking me that question?” When he responded that he “would like to know”, she would only divulge that they had “communicated”. In response to a question about Johnson’s mood, she said it was “extremely positive” and revealed that “onwards is one of his favourite expressions”. When asked whether he had changed, she asked: “Changed what?” “His attitude,” said Stayt. To which Dorries responded: “To what?” On the subject of Johnson’s claims about employment numbers, she insisted that Johnson tells the truth “to the best of his knowledge” – based on advice given to him by his aides. “So did he tell the truth when he quoted that? Yes, he told the truth as it was given to him,” she said. On to BBC Radio 4’s Today where she proceeded to mix up the names of Tory MPs Martin and Matt Vickers. Asked about the 2019 intake of red wall MPs, she started talking about a “Martin Vickers”, who she said is “up in the far north of England in South Tees” and recently appeared on Channel 4 News in support of the prime minister. In fact she appeared to be talking about Matt Vickers, MP for Stockton South in the Tees Valley, who on Wednesday told the programme: “Teesside’s got a lot to be happy about.” She then moved on to Times Radio where she suggested dissenters of the prime minister were part of a remainer plot. “There are a small number of voices, whether they are people who were ardent supporters of remain, who see this as their last opportunity to reverse Brexit,” she said. Asked whether moves against Johnson were part of a “remainer plot”, she said: “That certainly is at play with a group.” Meanwhile, in an interview with Sky News, she insisted that “97%” of Tory MPs support the prime minister and that the health secretary, Sajid Javid, was “100%” behind Johnson, despite seeking to distance himself from his false claims about Keir Starmer failing to prosecute Jimmy Savile. Once again she reprimanded a journalist, telling Niall Paterson: “I’m not a random backbencher.”On a boisterous afternoon it took Chelsea 105 minutes, 39 shots and 19 corners to take the lead against Plymouth. These are the kind of numbers that suggest a pasting, fourth-round FA Cup minnows hanging on by their toenails. This was something else: a victory for Chelsea, but a day when Plymouth played neat, disciplined, counterattacking football, and really might have won. Deep into extra time Steve Schumacher’s team were spanking in shots at the Chelsea goal looking to force a shoot-out. Chelsea’s occasional problems are clear enough, a well-calibrated passing and pressing machine that seems at times to be lulling itself to sleep. But Plymouth were a great tribute to the enduring strength of the lower tiers, and huge credit to their manager, who sounds like a disciple of the Ralf Rangnick atelier, but is from Liverpool. Some perspective: Plymouth are seventh in League One, 12 points behind Rotherham. In extra time, Chelsea had Romelu Lukaku, Kai Havertz, Timo Werner and Hakim Ziyech on the pitch, a combined £280m of attacking talent, and all certainly standing quite near one another. The visitors even missed a penalty five minutes from the end, Malang Sarr bringing down Ryan Hardie only for Hardie to see his kick well saved by Kepa Arrizabalaga. “I’m emotional,” Schumacher said. “I’m just really proud of the team. They gave everything they’ve got.” The Plymouth end was a stirring sight, a sizeable portion of Devon packed into the full double-decker stand. And the Bridge was a lovely soft sunny spring-like place at kick-off, the game beginning in a mild lunchtime doze. At which point something glorious happened. With seven minutes gone Plymouth won a free-kick on the left. The ball was swung in at a tempting angle by Jordan Houghton. Macauley Gillesphey flicked the ball on into the corner, unhindered by any real show of interest from Chelsea’s centre-backs or from Arrizabalaga, who stood on his line and watched. There was unfenced joy in the green end, a startled roar that just kept on rumbling on, bodies tumbling across the aisles. It was also a lovely little snapshot in time for Houghton, who never quite made it on to this pitch as a senior Chelsea player, but who will now always have that moment in the February sunshine. Thomas Tuchel had tested positive for Covid-19 before the game, the role of angry pointing tracksuited man filled by Arno Michels. Michels was unsure whether Tuchel would be able to travel to the Club World Cup, a sub-drama that must now be untangled. But it would be hard to blame Tuchel’s absence. Chelsea were simply vague. Callum Hudson-Odoi headed on to the bar at the back post. Ten minutes before half-time Mateo Kovacic pinged a shot low and hard on to the foot of the post. Was this going to be one of those days where people talk about One of Those Days? Mason Mount found just enough space to cross from the right. In the centre, César Azpilicueta conjured a craftsman’s finish, the Lee Sharp-style wrong-foot instep flick taking the ball past Mike Cooper. Chelsea set off at a cagey sprint in the second half. There was pressure but little cutting edge. Lukaku did not particularly stand out, his touch a tittle blunt, movement unimaginative. At the other end Hardie had a sight of goal but Arrizabalaga was able to smother his finish. Cooper then made a wonderful save to parry away Mount’s shot after a fine layoff from Lukaku, who often shows his best stuff taking the ball with movement around him. Otherwise Chelsea continued to weave indistinct patterns. It is often a struggle for teams that play at this tempo, where your own command of possession becomes a problem to be untangled. At times what they really seem to need is a good version of Werner, an attacker with acceleration and the ability to work in small spaces, but also the ability to finish ruthlessly, or indeed, at all. The final whistle brought another vast cheer from the Plymouth end. But just before half-time in extra time, Chelsea found their opening. It came down the left. Havertz skated wide then pulled back a low cross. Marcos Alonso had made the run inside, and had time and space to slip the ball easily past Cooper.This might have passed you by, what with all the other news to savour/slog through/weep over, but Ken Bruce is now the most popular DJ in the UK. Yes, that Ken Bruce. The gently avuncular Radio 2 mid-morning veteran bagged the highest number of listeners in the latest Rajars (the official measure of radio audiences). Bruce’s station compadre, Zoe Ball, also did well: with 7.5 million listeners, she hosts the most popular breakfast show in the country. But that’s just a warm-up for the biggest radio show out there. Bruce’s 9.30am-12.00pm weekday programme is listened to by 8.7 million people, 1.2 million more than Ball; the largest audience on UK radio. The 71-year-old has been at the helm of his show for 34 years (apart from a two-year hiatus between 1990 and 1992), so this lurch into the limelight might seem a surprise. Bruce is used to playing second fiddle to larger personalities (the much-adored Terry Wogan, bumptious Chris Evans). But times have changed, and audiences too. The 1990s rave/indie generation have got older, cast aside their cool and remembered their love of classic pop. If they’re spooked by Radio 6 Music’s recent changes, or irritated by commercial radio’s unadventurous playlist, then the non-annoying parts of Radio 2 remain. And Bruce manages not to annoy most people. Which might sound like faint praise but isn’t. “What I like about him,” says one devoted fan, “is that he doesn’t do irritating gush. He doesn’t talk over the tracks. He respects the music, you can tell.” There are other factors. The pandemic has changed morning listening habits. The peak time for radio listening (around 8am) has become less of a peak, more of a table-top that plateaus from 8am to 10.30am. Home-schooling and a lack of commute during the first, March 2020, lockdown started this trend, and radio schedules were rejigged to reflect our indoor lives. Schedules have been back to normal since autumn 2020 but listeners’ habits haven’t completely shifted. (Bruce’s show isn’t the only mid-morning affair that’s now bigger than breakfast: on LBC, for the first time ever, James O’Brien’s 10am-1pm show narrowly beat Nick Ferrari’s breakfast show listener figures.) The pandemic also highlighted listeners’ desire for warm, comfort-radio, at which Bruce excels. His rumbly Scottish tones might have some people running for the off button (“too smooth”, “too golf club”, “the precise accent of a middle class geography teacher who’s very disappointed in your efforts this year”, according to some non-lovers), but his energy is more upbeat than you might expect, his timing crisp, and many find him soothing. More: they actively respect his presenting style. “He’s a real DJ,” says long-time fan Bob Stanley, from Saint Etienne (the band like Bruce so much that they featured him on their 2017 album Home Counties). “It’s what he’s always done. Radio 2 has had a move towards celebrities being DJs for a few years now, and they can grow into the job, but this is what Ken Bruce does and he’s really good at it.” Off air, Bruce is acknowledged as a good guy: a friend who’s written jokes for Radio 2 says he’s “very up for a laugh”, and a sound engineer who worked across Radio 2 and Radio 4 for 20 years informs that he is universally liked at the BBC. On air, Bruce is noticeably good at dealing with the public, especially during Popmaster, the hugely successful pop quiz on every weekday between 10.30 and 11am. What do you mean, you don’t know Popmaster? There are spin-off books and board games. Just type #popmaster into Twitter to see how popular it is. People stop work to play along with a cup of tea, they write down their daily scores; they have family Whatsapp groups to compare results. Some of them even enter, and play live on the show against another listener, to win a DAB radio, plus a great deal of music-nerd kudos. Many don’t do as well as they’d hope. A friend tells me, with some sadness: “My average is 33, but when I went on I only got 24. I was beaten by a very difficult tie break.” The Fall’s Paul Hanley has Popmastered (he got 21). When I tell Stanley that a mutual chum has been on Popmaster twice and won both times, he is noticeably impressed. And, you know, once you’re Popmastering, you may well start listening to the whole show, and start clocking the more-out-there-than-you-might-imagine music choices (the Kursaal Flyers, Boz Scaggs, the Babys). Join the millions who are grateful he’s still there, gently Ken-ing on. As another friend says (I never knew so many mates were Ken Bruce fans before writing this): “He’s always been there. Steady, reliable, upbeat, charming, self-deprecating and never a show-off. That consistency, especially during the pandemic, means a lot to us.” • This article was amended on 8 February 2022. Bruce has been at the helm of his show for 34 years, not 32.“If you’d told me this time last year that I wouldn’t be at Cheltenham, I’d have laughed at you,” Gordon Elliott said after winning the Irish Gold Cup. “And if you’d asked me in September if I’d have the team I have now, I’d have laughed at you as well. That’s a testament to everyone who has backed me.” On an afternoon that reflected the troughs and returning peaks of the past 12 months, Elliott had just seen Conflated, an 18-1 outsider, soothe the pain of three beaten Grade One favourites earlier in the afternoon with a six-and-a-half-length defeat of Minella Indo, last year’s Cheltenham Gold Cup winner, in the feature race. The win was particularly satisfying as the eight-year-old, who runs for Michael O’Leary’s Gigginstown Stud operation, was being steered towards a valuable handicap on Sunday’s card here until Elliott insisted that it was worth having a crack at the Dublin Racing Festival’s main event. “I wanted to find out where I was going [with him],” he said. “He’s a horse with a big engine and I said before the race that he’d either win or pull up, and thankfully, he won. “Second, second, second. I thought it was going to be one of those days. But at least they were running well, if they had all been second-last, my head would have been on the ground.” Frodon and Bryony Frost cut out the running until the third-last fence, where Davy Russell committed aboard Conflated and surged into a clear lead going around the home turn. Minella Indo’s stamina began to kick in up the straight but Russell had seized more than enough ground to keep him at bay. Janidil was third with Asterion Forlonge, Kemboy and Frodon all well beaten. Conflated’s odds for a follow-up in next month’s Cheltenham Gold Cup are now down to around 12-1, from 66-1 on Saturday morning. He benefited from an impeccably judged ride by Russell, however, and Minella Indo, who is guaranteed to appreciate the sterner test at Cheltenham, is only 6-1 to repeat his success last season. A Plus Tard, the runner-up at Cheltenham last March, heads the market at 7-2, while Galvin, another likely runner for the Elliott stable, is a 9-2 chance. Elliott’s three favourites earlier on the card were beaten by runners from the Willie Mullins stable, including Vauban, who breezed past Elliott’s Fil Dor on the run to the final flight in the Spring Juvenile Hurdle and quickened three lengths clear at the line. Vauban finished half a length behind another Elliott-trained juvenile, Pied Piper, on his hurdling debut at Leopardstown in December and the two horses are now joint-favourites for next month’s Triumph Hurdle at around 5-2. “We knew he was a serious Flat horse and we just had to teach him how to jump,” Mullins said. “I don’t know if many horses break their maiden in a Grade One, but it’s a nice achievement for him anyhow.” Blue Lord benefited from a last-fence mistake by Elliott’s Riviere D’Etel to win the Irish Arkle Novice Chase but remains joint-favourite with Edwardstone for its equivalent at the Festival, while at Sandown, Charlie Deutsch recorded the first Grade One win of his career as the impressive L’Homme Presse took the Scilly Isles Novices’ Chase.Guests at Mar-a-Lago could hear a selection of Elton John’s greatest hits this weekend – courtesy of DJ Donald Trump. Members of the club in Palm Beach, Florida received a memo on Wednesday that they will be treated to “great music” during dinner on Friday and Saturday, “with President Trump playing the role of disc jockey”. “The music will be amazing, it will be lots of fun, and will go until the late evening,” the memo said, according to a tweet from New York Times reporter Maggie Haberman. It remains unclear what music Trump has in mind for this weekend, but the former president has a known penchant for Elton John, though the singer declined to perform at his inauguration. The former president was also known for playing the Village People’s YMCA and Macho Man and Frank Sinatra’s My Way during his appearances as president. Democratic US House representative Eric Swalwell tweeted predictions of what songs will be on Trump’s playlist: Don’t You Forget About Me by Simple Minds, Dancing with Myself by Billy Idol, Back in the USSR by the Beatles and Loser by Beck. Trump might decide to blast Tiny Dancer to drown out anger from Mike Pence contradicting Trump’s claim that the election was stolen and that he and Trump could have overturned the election. “President Trump is wrong. I had no right to overturn the election,” Pence said Friday at a conference hosted by the conservative Federalist Society. In a responding statement on Friday, Trump insisted “I was right and everyone knows it,” the New York Post reported. Trump could also be warming himself up for the fundraiser he is hosting at Mar-a-Lago later this month, tickets for which are running as high as $250,000. The fundraiser is for Trump’s Make America Great Again, Again Super Pac, for candidates who support the former president’s agenda.That is it from me, Martin Belam, in London today. Our Australian team will pick up the Winter Olympics live blog baton for day two when it gets going in Beijing. There’s some good stuff coming your way tomorrow. In the curling, at 9.05am in Beijing, the US face the Czech Republic. Team GB, off the back of that defeat to Italy today, will surely feel they can and must beat China. Twenty-five minutes after that the women’s single skating short program that is part of the team event gets going in the Capital Indoor Stadium. At the same time – 9.30am in Beijing – the women’s snowboard slopestyle final starts. And then – weather conditions permitting – it is one of the signature Winter Olympic events, the men’s downhill in the Alpine skiing starts at 11am in Beijing. I will be back on the blog later tomorrow, until then, take care and stay safe. What a day – I’ve thoroughly enjoyed it. The first gold medal went to Norway’s Therese Johaug in a tough 7.5km + 7.5km Skiathlon. However, the fact that the first medal of these Games went to somebody previously convicted of doping and banned from the 2018 Winter Olympics has not gone without comment. Norway added a second gold in a gripping biathlon mixed relay, and the short track mixed relay gave China their first gold of their Games amid chaotic scenes and an incredibly tight finish. Slovenia took gold and bronze in the women’s normal hill ski jumping, with Urša Bogataj victorious. Irene Schouten continued Dutch dominance on the ice track with gold in the women’s 3,000m speed skating. And Sweden’s Walter Wallberg rounded out the medals with victory in the freestyle skiing men’s moguls. The ice hockey has finished with a 5-0 victory to the US over the team representing the Russian Olympic Committee. That leaves Group A with Canada and the US sitting in first and second place with two wins from two. ROC are third with one win and one loss. Finland and Switzerland are yet to score a victory, although because of the way the tournament is structured, all five teams in the group are guaranteed a quarter-finals spot anyway. The 2018 men’s moguls champion could only win silver this time out, as Walter Wallberg of Sweden took gold ahead of favourite Mikael Kingsbury of Canada. They’ve done their news conference now. Wallberg, 21, said “I knew I did a great run but I knew Mikael did a good run as well, I wasn’t sure it would be the best run. I was super happy when I saw the scores.” The Canadian congratulated Wallberg, saying “He deserves it, I told him welcome to the club.” Japan’s Ikuma Horishima, 24, made me feel like someone needed to put an arm around him. The bronze medallist told reporters “I gave it my all,” adding that he had felt he would not deserve to continue competing in moguls unless he got on the podium. “My real dream is the gold so I’m going to keep working towards that,” he said. Punches thrown! “It’s all character building” quips the commentator on Eurosport. There’s a long conflab between the officials in this US-ROC ice hockey match, and the end result is that Maria Pechnikova gets a two minute penalty for boarding, and Abbey Murphy gets two minutes for roughing, having decided being shoved into the wall warranted a smack in the face for someone once she’d got up. We are just counting down the minutes until the US deliver this victory in the ice hockey. The result isn’t in doubt, the question is just how many they will score against the Russians. In the meantime, if you haven’t already, why not sign up for our Winter Olympics daily briefing email? I try and make it as useful as possible in helping you plan what to look out for the following day, as well as keeping you up to date with the results. As I suspected might happen, the US are beginning to turn possession and chances into goals against the team representing the Russian Olympic Committee. There are ten minutes to go in the final period, and the US have now extended their lead to 5-0. Jesse Compher scored the fourth, Alex Carpenter the fifth. The Russian response has been to take off keeper Maria Sorokina and give her a rest. She’s been replaced by Daria Gredzen. So far this game has done little to convince me that having a group of five teams where every team is guaranteed to progress is going to produce scintillating competitive ice hockey. Farrell Treacy was one of several people who had a disappointing day for Team GB today in Beijing. He was eliminated from the men’s short track 1,000m heats after finishing fourth. In an interview with the BBC, he has now explained that he didn’t fade because of fatigue, but because he was confused about where he was in the race. He told them: I swear I heard a bell and I went to the line a lap early, which is obviously excruciating in the position I was in. Big mistake and I guess something you don’t want to be doing at an Olympic Games. It is 3-0 for the US in the ice hockey. They’ve totally dominated this Russian team without converting their chances. Grace Zumwinkle scored with an assist from Dani Cameranesi. There are sixteen minutes left, and you wonder if the Russian resolve may begin to fall away and allow the US to deliver a scoreline that reflects how one-sided it has been. The third period is underway in the women’s ice hockey match-up between the athletes from the Russian Olympic Committee and the US. It remains 2-0 to the US. The Russians just had a power-play that spanned across either side of the break, but they could not take advantage of it. You’d have been disappointed if this match hadn’t produced any scenes like this, though. There are a few quotes that have come out of the mixed zone on the newswires from the luge competitors. In pole position going into the second day, Germany’s Johannes Ludwig told reporters: “I will see tomorrow. I think it would be another big point of my career, but it’s not happened yet. That’s why we’ll talk tomorrow about this, OK?” Ludwig is this season’s World Cup champion. Italy’s Dominik Fischnaller is third overnight, and he said to the media: “I’ve never been in this position after the first day. I’m excited about that, to be honest. We’ll go back to the village, have dinner, tomorrow morning we’ll prepare the sled again — and then it’s go time.” The Fischnaller family are having a mixed experience in Beijing. Kevin Fischnaller — Dominik Fischnaller’s cousin — found out on Thursday that his Olympics were over because of a positive Covid test. The US have had 36 shots on goal to the Russian team’s six in the women’s ice hockey match going on at the moment, and yet the buzzer has just gone for the end of the second period and the lead remains only 2-0 in favour of the US. A notable achievement today, Arianna Fontana became the only short track speed skater, female or male, to win nine Olympic medals when she took silver with Italy in that manic mixed team relay that was won by the hosts earlier. Her medal haul includes gold in the 500m short track at the 2018 Winter Olympics. You want the details of the medal table, don’t you? We’ve got an incredible lovely and interactive one here, but I can save you a click right now and tell you that Norway are top with two golds. Slovenia’s gold and bronze in the women’s ski jumping places them second. China, the Netherlands and Sweden all finish the day with one gold apiece and are joint third. The US women’s ice hockey team have just added a second goal to go 2-0 up against the Russian team – Hilary Knight with the goal and Savannah Harmon adding an assist to her earlier goal. I need to catch you up with the luge as well. The men’s singles have had two runs today, and going into the overnight break it is Germany’s Johannes Ludwig in the lead. Put he is being pushed by Austria’s Wolfgang Kindl, who is just 0.039 seconds behind him. I bet you can read his tactics like a book etc etc. Dominik Fischnaller of Italy and Felix Loch of Germany are in third and fourth, just over 0.3 seconds off the pace. Chris Mazdzer and Tucker West of the US are lying in ninth and 11th respectively. Team GB’s Rupert Staudinger is in 24th. They go again tomorrow, and then the top twenty do a fourth run to determine the final positions. Ok, so here we are. The US v ROC in the women’s ice hockey preliminary matches is the only event left currently going on. The US lead 1-0 with 12 minutes to go in the second period. It is all US, but they have struggled to make a breakthrough. Earlier in Group A Canada hounded Finland 11-1. In Group B, where qualification actually matters, today’s games were a 6-2 win for Japan over Denmark, and a 3-1 victory for the Czech Republic over Sweden. That leaves Japan, the Czech Republic and China at one, two and three in the group, with Sweden and Denmark, neither of which have won a game yet, in the elimination spots. It is confirmed! A first gold for China. Italy took silver, with Hungary in bronze. It was a huge mess of thrills and spills. In the end China were judged to have won it by 0.016 seconds! The mixed team relay in the speedskating just happened, and as I had hoped, it was absolutely delightful chaos. There were people falling all over the place, but I believe China have just won their first gold medal. But we have to wait for the official result, it was very, very close, and is under review. If you are feeling anxious about where that leaves Team GB in terms of reaching the curling semi-finals, their next match is an eminently winnable tie against hosts China. That is at a somewhat unsociable 1.05am UK time tonight. Get your Ovaltine ready. After that, there next game would appear to be a very crucial one against a Norway pairing who will still harbour hopes they can sneak into the semi-finals. I’ll be covering that tomorrow on the live blog from noon UK time. It has ended up a 7-5 victory for Italy in the curling mixed doubles against the British pair leaving the Italians unbeated and six for six at the top of the table. There are final results in the other two preliminary matches that were still going on too. Norway beat China 9-6, and after being closely tied for half of the match, eventually Canada got the better of the US 7-2. Where does that leave the round robin standings, I hear you ask. Good question. I make the top six this. Remember the top four pairings progress to the semi-final stage. 🇮🇹 Italy Won 6 - Lost 0 🇸🇪 Sweden 5 - 1 🇨🇦 Canada 4 - 2 🇬🇧 Great Britain 4 - 2 🇳🇴 Norway 3 - 3 🇺🇸 US 3 - 3 The first period has ended in the ice hockey, and the US still lead the Russian athletes by 1-0, courtesy of that goal from Savannah Harmon. I must say one of the things I do enjoy about both the Summer and Winter Games is the brilliant photography that comes out of them. Paul Bellsham over on our picture desk has been running his eye over the best images coming out of Beijing today, and has put together this gallery for your enjoyment. The seventh end has just finished between Italy and GB in the curling with a judge taking approximately 1,057 minutes trying to measure which was the closest of two stones. It is a tense match but the fiasco seemed to spark a little bit of laughter between the two teams. The end result is that they will go into the final end with Italy holding a potentially decisive 7-4 lead. It is going to be a tough ask for Jen Dodds and Bruce Mouat to haul that back. The trial in Greece of activists who protested against Beijing holding the Winter Olympics has been postponed amid accusations that proceedings were delayed to avoid embarrassing China on the eve of the Games. The highly anticipated hearing had been due to take place on Thursday in the town of Pyrgos, with human rights lawyers travelling from the UK and Athens to attend. The activists, who included a Briton, an American and a Tibetan-Canadian, were arrested when they briefly disrupted the Olympic flame lighting ceremony in October. “Our pleas to the court for the case to be heard fell on deaf ears,” said Michael Polak at the legal aid group Justice Abroad, who had flown in from London on behalf of the defendants. “They pushed it into the long grass so as not to have to deliver a decision before the Beijing Olympics.” Prior to rescheduling the trial for 1 December 2022, the three-member court’s presiding judge, Vassiliki Reppa, had instead focused on cases concerning boundary infringements and other minor disputes. “We made an express plea to bring the case forward, as it was towards the end of the listed hearings, but the bench strongly refused to do so,” said Antonio Bachouros, a local lawyer also defending the activists. “They could have prioritised the case, given its sensitivity and the seriousness of the accusations, but chose not to.” Two very quick updates: Switzerland have thrashed the Czech Republic in a “Stop! Stop! He’s already dead!” fashion 11-3 in the curling, and the US have just opened the scoring against the Russians in the ice hockey. It is 1-0 there with seven minutes left in the first period. Savannah Harmon got the goal. That Italy-GB match in the curling is very delicately poised at 4-4 as they are going into the 7th and (possibly) penultimate end. The women’s ice hockey match between the US and the Russian Olympic Committee match has got underway. It is currently still 0-0 but the US have a power-play. Now, personal opinion, I can’t really get engaged with these Group A matches knowing that all five teams are guaranteed a quarter-final spot. These just seem like glorified friendlies. Surely it would have been better to have two groups of five and the top four from each group qualify? You’d still guarantee that all the big names would be going through, but there would be a massive incentive for the weaker teams in the group to beat each other and minimise how many they conceded? Having said that, given how bad I am at standing upright on ice skates, and how bad I am at trying to hit fast moving objects with a stick, let alone do both at the same time, maybe I should just keep my ice hockey thoughts to myself. This was one of the less savoury elements of the Opening Ceremony last night. A Dutch reporter in the middle of a live broadcast was dragged away by a Chinese security official. Footage from Dutch public broadcaster NOS showed several security officials surround Sjoerd den Daas before one of them forcefully grabbed him as he stood not far away from the Bird’s Nest stadium in the Chinese capital. “Unfortunately, this is increasingly the daily reality for journalists in China,” the Dutch outlet later tweeted, adding that Den Daas “is fine and could fortunately finish his story a few minutes later”. Germany’s Johannes Ludwig was leading the luge after the first run in the men’s singles. He is now leading the luge after his second run. There’s still about another 25 men yet to hurtle down the ice. You want to know the latest scores in the curling, right? Italy are edging out Great Britain 3-2, the US and Canada still can’t be separated at 2-2, and Norway are beating China 4-1. Switzerland, meanwhile, are absolutely grinding the Czech Republic into the ice and I feel like I need to break out the old vidiprinter stylings. They lead 9 (NINE) - 0. The matches are about halfway through now. A dominant final run from pre-tournament favourite Mikael Kingsbury of Canada looked to have secured him his second consecutive Olympic gold medal, but Walter Wallberg of Sweden had qualified first and made the last run of the final, and did enough to pip him to the post. Ikuma Horishima of Japan took bronze. It was Wallberg’s second Olympics. The other final positions were Benjamin Cavet (France) in fourth, with Nick Page of the US finishing fifth, and Australia’s Cooper Woods in sixth. Roman Repilov of the Russian Olympic Committee has just got the second run of the men’s single luge underway. He was around half-a-second behind the leader and finished in eighth place. He seemed to make a couple of mistakes early in the track and has finished a second behind the fastest time from the first run. Some quotes here via Reuters from Johannes Thingnes Boe, who anchored that final leg for Norway in the mixed Biathlon relay earlier. Boe has been isolated from his team as a suspected close contact of a positive Covid case, but the time spent alone doesn’t seem to have dampened his apparent enthusiasm for himself. He told reporters in the mixed zone: I knew it was going to end up this way, and I have been prepared for this. Since I came here on Monday I’ve seen what to do and my preparation for the last week, I already did it in my head a hundred times. I maintained my third place after the last shooting and I gained nine seconds quite fast, and I would have killed myself if I went in front in that wind. My feeling is that to anchor Norway to gold, it doesn’t get any bigger than that. Urša Bogataj has claimed Slovenia’s first medal of the Games with victory on the women’s normal hill ski jumping. Silver has gone to Germany’s Katharina Althaus, with bronze being taken by Slovenia’s Nika Križnar. The men’s moguls second run has just finished. That has whittled the field down to the six people who will ski again for the medals later on. Sweden’s Walter Wallberg, Japan’s Ikuma Horishima, France’s Benjamin Cavet, Australia’s Cooper Woods and Nick Page of the US will join the favourite Mikael Kingsbury of Canada in the final six. Japan’s Kousuke Sugimoto promising second run was scuppered by him breaking a pole on the way down. What a time for an equipment failure. Australia’s Brodie Summers finished tenth of the twelve. After two ends in the curling, Jen Dodds and Bruce Mouat of Team GB have pulled it back to 1-1 against Italy’s Stefania Constantini and Amos Mosaner. Elsewhere the US and Canada are tied at 1-1, Norway are 2-1 ahead of hosts China, and the Swiss pair are giving the Czech Republic a 4-0 drubbing at the moment. Any hope of the controversies that have dogged the Beijing Winter Games fading into a feelgood blur of medals once the torch was lit was quickly swept aside on Saturday as the first gold of these Olympics went to a convicted doper. Therese Johaug, the decorated Norwegian cross-country skier who was barred from competing at the 2018 Pyeongchang Winter Olympics while serving an 18-month suspension for a positive drugs test she blamed on tainted lip balm, obliterated the field to win the 7.5km+7.5km skiathlon on a windblown afternoon in the tiny village of Taizicheng in the mountains roughly 120km northwest of Beijing. The Norwegian was forced out of the 2018 Olympics due a lengthy suspension after testing positive for the anabolic steroid clostebol, which she claimed was the result of a lip ointment purchased by team doctor Fredrik Bendiksen on short notice to treat sunburn during high-altitude training in Italy. Her explanation was deemed implausible by skiing’s international governing body – not least because the cream in question included a doping warning label on the box – which appealed the 13-month suspension initially handed down by Norwegian anti-doping authorities. The court of arbitration for sport subsequently tacked on five months to the punishment, acknowledging Johaug’s “otherwise clean anti-doping record” but citing her negligence in missing a clear warning label and ruling one of the sport’s biggest stars out of Pyeongchang. Irma Makhinia of the Russian Olympic Committee has just gone into the lead in the women’s normal hill ski jump. It is all go at the moment. The delayed final run in the women’s normal hill ski jumping is underway. The men are just about to start the moguls in the freestyle sking – Australia’s Brodie Summers has just started. And Italy have just gone 1-0 up against Team GB after the first end of their curling showdown. In the Luge, Team GB’s Rupert Staudinger has just had his run. He finished in 21st place, 1.668 sec off the pace. On his helmet he was bearing the message “RIP AJ” as a tribute to his friend, the former British luger AJ Rosen. He died from cancer in December. The Georgian Saba Kumaritashvili has also made his first run, ending up 3.148 behind leader Johannes Ludwig. He is competing at Beijing in the event which cost his cousin, Nodar, his life at the 2010 Vancouver Games. Bryan Armen Graham wrote this great piece about him the other day. Hi, Martin Belam here, the last leg of our live blog relay team today. I’ve been watching from London since the early hours, and I’ve thoroughly enjoyed it so far today. In particular the ending of that biathlon relay was something to behold. There should be three more gold medals before the day is out. Here’s the daily briefing I wrote earlier. The men’s moguls final is under way, and the top 30 are preparing for their second runs in the women’s normal hill ski jumping. Coming up: curling aplenty, with Great Britain v Italy and USA v Canada, short-track finals and USA v Not Russia in the women’s ice hockey. With that, time to hand you over to Martin Belam for the rest of the day one action. The luge continues at speed – I’ve just been watching Alexander Ferlazzo flying down the ice. He hails from Townsville, Queensland – not exactly a winter sports hotspot. He’s in 17th place; Germany’s Johannes Ludwig is the current leader on a first run that’s seen plenty of skids and spills. Martin Belam will be taking over this blog shortly, having already posted his peerless daily briefing – and it’s not even lunchtime. Ski jumping: Katharina Althaus, silver medallist in Pyeongchang, is last to go – and takes the lead with a 121.1 score. The German’s jump was 3m shorter than Bogataj, but she got extra style points to lead after the first run. Bogataj is second, her Slovenian compatriot Nika Kriznar is third. The top 30 all progress to the final run, which will begin shortly. Bad news for Niall Treacy, who tries to find a way past the leading pair – South Korea’s Park Jang-hyuk and USA’s Andrew Heo – but loses his footing just before the final turn. His brother Farrell doesn’t fare any better, struggling to get in position to challenge the leaders and coming home in fourth. Sara Takanashi took the lead with a fine 108.7 effort in the ski jumping, but has been overtaken by three Slovenians, with Ursa Bogataj the new leader with a 118.0 score. In short-track speed skating, there was bitter disappointment for Team GB’s Kathryn Thompson in the 500m heats as she crashed out early. Next up, it’s the men’s 1,000m heats with Niall Treacy among the first skaters up. His brother, Farrell, goes in heat two. Speaking of terrifying sports, it’s time for the luge, where competitors fly down an ice-lined chute on a tiny sled, hitting speeds of 80mph plus. As my dad would always ask: how do you find out you’re good at it? Anyway, the first run of the men’s competition is under way. There’ll be four runs in total, with the winner crowned on Sunday. Back to the ski jumping, arguably the most terrifying of all sports. Sweden’s Frida Westman delays her plunge down the hill as her goggles have steamed up. For a minute she looks like going Full Corrigan, but resets and posts an 80.9m jump. She’s in fifth place, with ROC’s Irina Avvakumova the current leader, but the big players - including Germany’s Katharina Althaus and Japan’s Sara Takanashi - are still to take their first run. “Any idea why the Dutch are so smashing at the old speed skating?” asks Andrew Norton. “Seems a bit odd really.” It’s an interesting question, and one without a single answer – although tradition, facilities and private investment all play a part. Andy Bull’s read from 2018 is worth your time: More on Shaun White’s announcement that he will retire after the Beijing Games: A brief interlude ... The main event going on right now is in ski jumping – the women’s individual normal hill final. There are a fair few spectators watching on in the Zhangjiakou Zone, 140 miles northwest of Beijing. The temperature at the popular ski resort is currently ranging between zero and -14 Celsius, with harsh winds making life tough for many competitors. “It sucks,” said US snowboarder Jamie Anderson. “It’s hard to keep your core temperature warm, and then doing tricks feels a little bit more intimidating. You’re just, like, a little bit stiff. But we can do it.” A couple of women’s ice hockey results from Pool B: Japan have beaten Denmark 6-2, and Czech Republic edged out Sweden 3-1. That group, which also includes the hosts, are playing for three quarter-final spots. Over in Pool A, the top five teams in the world are jostling for the best seeding in the knockouts. Earlier, Canada routed Finland 11-1; later on, the USA face ROC, with Vladimir Putin reportedly due to attend. Shaun White, the three-time Olympic gold medallist and one of snowboarding’s biggest names, has said he will retire from the sport after the Beijing Games. “I think this will be my last competition too, which is pretty special,” the 35-year-old told a news conference. White had already revealed this Olympics, his fifth, would be his last. White, who won halfpipe golds at the 2006, 2010 and 2018 Games, said knee and back issues had played a part and that his decision came during a quiet moment on a chairlift. “I was watching ... the sun go down and it just hit me,” he said. “It was very sad and a surreal moment but really joyous as well,” said White. The men’s moguls qualifiers are in full swing – this is the knee-shaking event where riders barrel down an uneven slope, throwing in flips and tricks on ramps on their way down. Canada’s Mikaël Kingsbury is the man to beat, having won gold in 2014 and 2018. He topped the first qualification run; we’re currently on the second, with 10 more places available. GB’s Will Feneley finished in 17th and misses out. Norway won the game’s first gold a couple of hours ago, but Therese Johaug’s win is likely to spark controversy. The cross-country skier missed the 2018 Games due to an 18-month doping ban after testing positive for the banned anabolic steroid clostebol. Johaug argued that she had unintentionally taken the steroid having used a lotion that had been approved by the team to treat sunburned lips. Her initial 13-month suspension was extended by Cas following an appeal from the International Ski Federation. Take a look at this excellent gallery of pictures and posters from the very first Winter Olympics, held in Chamonix back in 1924: Germany: isolation facilities ‘unacceptable’ The German multiple Olympic champion Eric Frenzel’s isolation room at the Beijing Winter Games is “unacceptable”, Germany’s team chief Dirk Schimmelpfennig said on Saturday, demanding immediate improvement. Frenzel, a Nordic combined skier who has won three Olympic golds, tested positive for Covid-19 along with team mate Terence Weber. Both have been isolated since Friday. The conditions do not meet the standards of the athlete and the team, Schimmelpfennig told reporters, with cleanliness, the quality of food and WiFi a problem. It’s another gold for Norway, as they win the mixed relay biathlon event! Despite picking up three penalty loops, they won with a dramatic surge to the line from Johannes Thingnes Boe. France earn silver, the ROC bronze. Hello, everyone – Niall here taking over from Jonathan. The next medals will be won in the mixed biathlon relay, and there’s ice hockey, freestyle skiing, ski jumping and short track speed skating all coming up. You can drop me a line by email or tweet @niallmcveigh. Dutchwoman Irene Schouten is chasing four gold medals at these Games and claimed her first in the 3000 metres, beating a 20 year old Olympic record. She beat Italy’s Francesca Lollobrigida, who went out hard but was overwhelmed in the final metres. 3000m Speed Skating – Women’s Canada’s Isobel Weidemann has broken the four-minute mark to guarantee herself a medal. The two big guns are still to go however and they’re up now. Biathlon – Mixed Relay As we hand over to the men, the French narrowly lead the Italians, but the Americans have come from the clouds to be in medal contention. Norway has thrown this away with poor shooting. It’s meant an extra 500m of skiing penalties. Biathlon – Mixed Relay We’re onto the shooting range on leg 2 and the Norwegians were well ahead, but their competitor had a stinker with the rifle, earning a hefty penalty and handing the Italians the lead. Its rotten rifle conditions out there. Just harking back to the Women’s Skiathlon, it would remiss of me not to mention that the winner recently served an 18-month doping ban. Johaug argued unsuccessfully that the she had taken the steroid to treat her sunburnt lips. Biathlon – Mixed Relay We’re off in the teams event. Yet another lung buster is on the cards here. It’s windy and freezing - rotten conditions for anyone on the shooting range. There’s 20 countries competing, but the gold medal is expected to be fought between the Norwegians and French. “A lovely concept” The IOC’s Mark Adams has described the decision to use Uyghur cross country skier Dinigeer Yilamujiag to light the Olympic flame as “a lovely concept”. Human rights groups beg to differ, describing it as “the most politically motivated move.” China continues to deny allegations of genocide and the establishment of forced labour camps in the Xinjiang region. Women’s 3000m Speed Skating The Dutch have a mortgage on this event. They swept the podium in 2018 and indeed have won 15 of the 26 gold medals in speed skating at the past two Games. The smart money today is on Irene Schouten, the reigning world champion. She’ll be on the ice shortly. And it’s the first gold of the Olympics to Therese Johaug in the women’s Skiathlon. It was a total rout. She’s won three world titles but this is her first individual Olympic gold. Most competitors are collapsing across the line, giving you some indication of what a brutal event it is. Women’s Skiathlon The commentator says this event is 50 per cent nutrition, 40 per cent athletic ability and ten per cent mind games. Some extraordinary weighting towards nutrition there! But there’s no doubt it would be a calorie burner. A shout out to Australia’s Jess Yeaton, who’s currently in 42nd spot. Everyone who competes in this deserves some sort of medal. Women’s Skiathlon Norway’s Johaug is romping this in. Give her the medal now. Five athletes are battling it out for silver and bronze, but the leader is in another race. Women’s Skiathlon We’re past halfway mark and into the freestyle section of the race. To the uninitiated (me), things have sped up considerably. Our leader is Therase Johaug of Norway. Not surprisingly, she’s also an outstanding runner, with a best time of 32 mins for the 10,000. She won a gold medal in a team’s event in 2010, but this would be her first individual gold. USA v Russia It’s not quite the Miracle on Ice, or even Rocky 4, but with the world on tenterhooks right now, the Russia-USA clash in the women’s ice hockey should have some added intrigue. The Russian President is expected to attend. His region’s on the brink, but he’s handy on the rink… On the menu This is the first of six gold medals up for grabs today, with the women’s 3000m speed skating and mixed biathlon kicking off shortly. The women’s ski jump and men’s freestyle moguls will also be decided. Cross Country Skiathlon We’ve already had some falls, steep climbs and I can only assume, a lot of lactic acid. This 15km event combines classical and freestyle skiing, with the competitors switching techniques at the halfway point. I’m already exhausted watching them. Cross Country Skiathlon It’s almost gun time in this gruelling, intriguing event. It’s minus 12 degrees Celsius, which doesn’t even bear thinking about for an Australian. “Perfect conditions for cross country skiing”, according to the commentators. Curling I think I have perforated eardrums from some of the exaltations – it’s a very vocal sport, and they certainly mic them up. Italy just blew the Aussies away with a three-point end, and now lead 7-3. Meanwhile, Great Britain have romped away to an 8-3 win over the Czechs – a cakewalk. Cross Country Skiing – Women’s We’re just 15 away from the start of the women’s cross country. The Swedes Frida Karlsson Charlotte Kalla are the hot pops, along with Russia’s Natalia Nepryaeva and Norway’s Therese Johaug. These are some of the best endurance athletes in the world, and the sheer state of the competitors at the finish gives some indication as to what a lung buster it is. Curling updates Australia trail Italy 2-4 while Great Britain are well in control of the Czech Republic, up 6-2. Ice Hockey A right royal shoeing in the women’s ice hockey match between Canada and Finland, with Canada walloping them 11-1. Sarah Nurse and Brianne Jenner both scored hat-tricks for the winners. Curling Meanwhile, the Great Britain mixed doubles team are making easy work of the Czech Republic, while the United States are in a tight tussle with China. Curling The Aussies are down 1-3 against the unbeaten Italians and nearly square things up but over-curled, jammed things up, and split the points – leaving things delicately poised at 2-3. I think I vaguely got the lingo right there. Aussie Jakara Anthony Goes Top The Victorian unleashes a scintillating run to go top in qualifying for the Women’s Moguls. She even pipped the peerless Frenchwoman Perrine Laffont, a former gold medallist. Commentary, rather curiously, is being provided by former cricketer Dirk Nannes. Women’s Moguls I already feel like I’ve ruptured about 6 ACLs watching this. It’s a brutal caper and the conditions look nasty. America’s Olivia Giaccio shot on to the early lead but 17-year-old Kumi Yamamiku just rocketed into first place with a blazing run. “Great absorption,” said the commentator, and The Guardian concurs wholeheartedly. Aussie Britteny Cox is currently fifth. Curling Things haven’t gone the way of Australia’s curlers thus far. It not exactly a sport the occupies centre stage in the public consciousness, but it’s attracting its usual cohort of the curious and the bewildered. The Aussies were well beaten by the husband and wife pair of Norwegians, but they’ve gone down by a solitary point in four other games, so they’re not far off the mark. They take on the Italian pair shortly. Kiwi Qualifies in top spot Young New Zealander Zoi Sadaowski-Synnott was the standout in the women’s Slowslope Snowboard qualifiers, with a top score of 86.75. The course is designed with Great Wall motifs, but proved the blustery conditions wrought havoc. Reigning double gold medallist Jamie Anderson struggled by her lofty standards, qualifying fifth. “I felt really pissed after my last run,” she said. The remarkable talents of Nathan Chen, the three time world champion and hottest of favourites in the men’s figure skating. a shoutout from Richard Woods, an expat living in China... “Thanks for the coverage. I’m strapped in. I was really hoping to get to a day or two of the games, as I live only a short train journey away from Beijing, but work and the Covid-inspired rules about inter-provincial travel have put paid to that. Lackaday. Ah well - bring on the tea-trays, yard brushes and Jamaican bobsleighers!” Aussies in Action For our Australian readers, there’s several other locals in action on my watch, including Seve De Campo in the Cross Country skiathon and Dean Hewitt and Tahli Gill in the Mixed Doubles Curling. Several hours ago, they met their match against the Norwegians, who were bronze medallists four years ago, but back up again against Italy shortly. The Opening Ceremony is done. It’s cold. The Bird’s Nest has been lit up. Political tensions are high. An Uyghur cross country skier lit the cauldron. With over 100,000 of his troops marshalling on the Ukraine border, Vladimir Putin, not a man to be trifled with, is in town. Beijing has become the first city to host both a summer and winter Olympics. The slogan of the 2022 Games is “together for a shared future”. Incidentally, that’s also the slogan of this Guardian live blog. It’s being presented, at least for this first shift, from Melbourne, Australia, not a city renowned for its snow sports, but an Olympic city nonetheless. Today we have curling, snowboarding, speed skating, cross country skiing and biathlon, among others. Strap yourselves in for the next five hours, as I endeavour to demonstrate a modicum of knowledge about the various sports on offer.A lot has changed since the devastating 1980s Aids crisis depicted in the Channel 4 TV show It’s a Sin – but the stigma attached to the illness remains, says Deborah Waterhouse. As chief executive of ViiV Healthcare, a GlaxoSmithKline-controlled joint venture that develops HIV drugs, she leads one of the largest commercial developers of Aids treatments in the world. “I remember in 1987 GSK brought the first medicine out for HIV and at that point the life expectancy for someone living with HIV was 18 months,” she tells the Observer, speaking via video link from her study lined with novels, travel and music books in her home in Richmond, west London. “Today if you become HIV-positive, your life expectancy is the same as for somebody not living with HIV. While science has created amazing treatments, stigma has not evolved, and this is a battle we’ve got to fight. It’s a highly stigmatised disease. We know that health systems don’t always treat people living with HIV in the way they should.” Waterhouse has led ViiV, one of GSK’s most successful businesses, for almost five years. It made £4.9bn sales in 2020 but only employs 1,400 people, compared with GSK’s 94,000. This week GSK will unveil its 2021 results, which are expected to show further strong sales for the HIV venture. Its dolutegravir tablets are taken by 18 million people, half of all those living with HIV. * * * CV Age 54 Family Married with two children. Education Hamstead Hall comprehensive school, Birmingham; English literature and economic history at Liverpool University. Last holiday Somerset Best advice she’s been given “Having a global perspective is incredibly valuable, so live and work in as many places around the world as possible.” Biggest career mistake “Not realising for many years that there is no way to juggle career, being a mum, daughter, friend and a wife perfectly. Banish guilt and ask yourself: did I do the best I could today?” Word/phrase she overuses “Can someone unpack the dishwasher please?” How she relaxes “Spending time with family and friends, travelling, reading and walking with my dogs in Richmond Park.” * * * According to the World Health Organization, 1.5 million more people were infected with HIV in 2020, and nearly half of them died, despite a commitment to end Aids by 2030. In December, ViiV got the green light from the US health regulator for Apretude (cabotegravir), which is injected once every two months, as the world’s first prevention treatment for people who are at increased risk of acquiring HIV sexually . The injections replace daily pills, allowing those affected to forget about the disease for a while. However, these drugs need to be kept in the fridge, which can be a challenge in countries like Malawi and South Africa. The world’s first treatment for HIV and Aids, Zidovudine, was developed in the 1980s by Marty St Clair, a virologist at GSK’s predecessor company Burroughs Wellcome, and her colleagues. When the drug was launched, Waterhouse, the daughter of a butcher who grew up on a council estate in Birmingham, could not have dreamed of being at the forefront of developing HIV drugs one day. She was studying English literature and economic history at Liverpool University. After graduating, she went into the car industry and became a marketing trainee at Jaguar Land Rover in the Midlands. In 1996, she was headhunted by Glaxo Wellcome (which merged with SmithKline Beecham to become GlaxoSmithKline in 2000). She went on to work in GSK’s research &amp; development arm for four years; moved to Melbourne to become general manager for Australia and New Zealand; went back to the UK to head central and Eastern Europe, looking after 22 countries; then spent three years in Philadelphia, where she ran the US vaccines business and its primary care division. In April 2017, she assumed her current position as head of the HIV business, and joined GSK’s corporate executive team three years later. “I was always interested in science but it was not the thing that I chose to study,” says Waterhouse. “I worked in R&amp;D for a few years, early pipeline analytics and target medicine profiles and that was the thing that really did it for me: the promise of a medicine and how you could develop it, how you could imagine the impact on human health.” * * * We talk against the background of GSK’s battle with the aggressive activist shareholder Elliott Management, a New York hedge fund that emerged on the shareholder register last spring. It has clamoured for change, including demands for GSK’s chief executive, Emma Walmsley, to reapply for her job, as the company prepares for the spinoff and stock market flotation of its consumer health arm this summer. Waterhouse strongly backs Walmsley (who appointed her to the top job at ViiV) as the right person to lead GSK after the split. “She has built an amazing team and the future for GSK is really bright. She’s a fantastic leader.” Her own focus is on developing HIV drugs and contributing to GSK’s ambitious £33bn revenue target for 2031. ViiV is working on long-acting treatments that can be self-injected at home, while a potential HIV “cure” is set to be tested on volunteers this year. The cure ViiV is working on would flush the virus out of every reservoir in the body it is hiding in and kill any remaining virus cells, leaving people in remission so they could go from one to three years without medication. What is striking about ViiV is that seven of 10 on the executive team are female. Waterhouse hopes more women will rise through the ranks, noting that more girls are choosing Stem subjects, even though those are still male-dominated. “We need to be much more inspiring and encouraging. It’s obvious to people now that Stem subjects and technology/artificial intelligence are areas of the future.” Chip Lyons, chief executive of the Washington-based non-profit group Elizabeth Glaser Paediatric Aids foundation (EGPAF), has worked closely with Waterhouse on providing effective HIV treatments for children who are born with the virus, especially in sub-Saharan Africa. He describes her as a “problem-solver”. In his first meetings with her as part of a Vatican-hosted consultation on paediatric HIV in 2017, he was struck by “how carefully she listened”. “Not only was she listening but she was also texting feverishly with her team: ‘Here’s what I’m thinking – can we do this?’” Lyons says she and her company never wavered from their commitment to tackle HIV in children, which is often neglected. ViiV makes a version of dolutegravir for children, including a dispersible single tablet that tastes like strawberries. As to when the HIV epidemic will end, Waterhouse says her team “talk about this a lot”. She is predicting a significant reduction in new infections this decade. However, South Africa faces by far the biggest HIV epidemic, and Covid-19 has led to a drop in testing for HIV, diagnoses and treatment in many countries. “The HIV epidemic probably won’t end until the late 2040s but it’s on the horizon,” says Waterhouse. “As a passionate believer in science I truly believe we will find an ultimate cure but it’s going to take another few decades before we get there.”The Scottish parliament has been commendably busy issuing pardons for some of the thousands of women convicted and killed during the Scottish witch trials of the 16th to 18th centuries. Scotland pursued the trials with especial vigour compared with other European countries, sentencing women (and some men) to death on charges of spell-casting, shape-shifting and fornication with Satan. Some were herbalists and healers, others mere beggars. Alongside the accounts of writer Mairi Kidd comes this tribute to the persecuted from a pair of accomplished Scottish musicians, harpist Rachel Newton (of the Shee and Spell Songs among others) and fiddler Lauren MacColl (of Salt House and chamber folk quartet Rant). It’s an appropriately haunting outing, with Newton’s spare, percussive harp complemented by MacColl’s fuller violin. The mood is largely sombre but not gloomy; the lives of the individual women in each song given dignity, with spoken word commentaries, in English and Gaelic, whispered into the mix. The effect is spectral (spooky if you like). Recorded on the island of Bernera, the album’s lightness also reflects the mists and moods of the Hebridean landscape. There are some upbeat touches for the fictional witches of Robert Burns in Tam O’Shanter, and for the legendary malevolent Gaelic being the Eachlair Ùrlar.Two decades ago, the late and much-lamented David Bowie said something that was eerily prophetic. “Music itself,” he observed, “is going to become like running water or electricity.” His point was that in 2002 we were still carrying our music in little bottles called iPods, just as Victorian travellers in India carried bottles of drinking water because you couldn’t rely on their being a safe and sanitary public supply. Spool forward 20 years and Spotify, the Swedish audio streaming and media services provider founded in 2006 by Daniel Ek and Martin Lorentzon, is, in Bowie’s terms, the global music authority, providing sanitised recorded music everywhere, on demand. At the moment, it has something like 406 million active monthly users, of whom more than 180 million pay for its “premium” (advertising-free) service. Given its dominance in the distribution of music, Spotify has inevitably been at the centre of controversies about the royalties musicians get paid for having their work streamed on the platform. In 2009, for example, it was reported that Lady Gaga’s hit song Poker Face had been streamed 1m times on Spotify, for which she received the princely royalty of $167! In May 2015, Spotify, seeing that Apple and Amazon were getting into the music streaming business, decided that it was also going to diversify into podcasts. And in May 2020 the company persuaded the popular American comedian Joe Rogan to move his podcast, The Joe Rogan Experience, exclusively to Spotify in return for a reported $100m. In January this year, an episode of the Rogan show prompted an open letter signed by 270 health care professionals calling on Spotify to develop a counter-misinformation policy on the platform. The complainants especially objected to an episode that had featured Robert W Malone, a medical researcher whom Twitter had permanently suspended from its platform, citing “repeated violations of our Covid-19 misinformation policy”, together with a comment Rogan made where he stated that he believed that young, healthy people do not need a Covid-19 vaccine. At this point, Spotify experienced a sudden collision between its interests in music and podcasting. The musical superstar Neil Young gave the company an ultimatum: it could have his music or Joe Rogan’s podcast but not both. “I am doing this,” he wrote, “because Spotify is spreading fake information about vaccines, potentially causing death to those who believe the disinformation being spread by them.” Shortly afterwards, Joni Mitchell announced that she was taking the same line. Faced with these ultimatums, why did Spotify do? You only have to ask the question to know the answer. I mean to say, a hundred million bucks is a lot of money, even in the debased currency of the tech industry. And in his attempt to “manage” the controversy, Spotify’s co-founder Ek consulted the Facebook playbook. He vowed to provide “greater transparency” on the company’s content rules. And, of course, he wanted to support free speech – “while balancing it with the safety of our users”. And, just like Facebook, Spotify would henceforth be labelling content with warnings and directing users to a Covid-19 information hub with inputs from scientists and health experts. Etc, etc. There are, however, a couple of problems with this fatuous virtue-signalling. The first is what philosophers would call a category mistake – “assigning to something a quality or action which can only properly be assigned to things of another category”. Spotify is not Facebook. Whatever you might say about the latter, one thing it does not do is pay its users for what they post on its platform. Ek, on the other hand, has paid Joe Rogan $100m to broadcast from Spotify’s platform. Which makes him, I would say, a publisher and therefore someone not entitled to the legal protections enjoyed by Facebook, Twitter et al in the US. And on top of that, there is Ek’s naivety in thinking that labelling content about contentious matters is a way of doing good. From what we have learned so far about combating mis- and disinformation, labelling is as likely to boost bad stuff as it is to correct errors. So while Spotify may have succeeded in taming – or suborning – the mighty music industry, when it comes to handling political extremism and conspiracy theorists it’s clearly out of its depth. What I’ve been reading Not over yet Covid-19: Endemic Doesn’t Mean Harmless is the title of a sobering article in Nature by Aris Katzourakis. A good antidote to complacency about Omicron. Your number’s up There’s a terrific blog post for 1 February by Cory Doctorow on his Pluralistic site, about the glossy accountancy and posh legal firms that enable money laundering by oligarchs and crooks. Coded message The transcript at metacpc.org of a fascinating (and intermittently baffling) conversation between Yanis Varoufakis and Evgeny Morozov about “crypto, the left and techno-feudalism” is larded with flashes of inspiration.I live by myself in a good place, the best sort of place a woman like me could imagine. In fact, it’s all I did imagine for years on end. I rent rather than own it, but that’s no hardship. I’ve never felt any particular angst to own property, which is just as well since I live in London, a place where I could no sooner get a mortgage than a giraffe. Owning a home has always felt more like a burden, like an end to things, to me, than it has felt like comfort. I did always dream, though, of renting somewhere beautiful and living alone there – and now I do. On the days I spend here without anyone else, I wake up at 8.30 and feed my cat. I watch her eat her disgusting, stinky food with satisfaction, glad I’m able to keep another creature beyond myself alive. I make coffee and wander about the flat a bit, wiping surfaces, washing tomato-laden pots. I go for a walk or to the gym, and then I work. I write. I send emails. I complain or speculate about everything I’m doing constantly to my friends. For lunch I blitz the vegetables in the fridge into a soup, or else walk down the road to the pub for a sandwich, and come back and work some more. I gaze adoringly at the cat. It becomes evening and I might drink a glass of wine, sometimes a bottle. I cook dinner and eat it in 13 minutes while watching MasterChef. I read for an hour. I work a bit more. Sometimes I watch a film. This is the life I have designed for myself, the life I never thought I would be so lucky as to have. Then it is time to sleep. In my comfortable bed I read more and turn out the light and within 15 minutes I hear a jolt, a metallic clank outside in the garden. I reassure myself it’s just an animal. I try to sleep again. I drift off. Then there is the apparently unmistakable noise of the back door being jostled. I fly upward in my bed like the girl in The Exorcist, thrust into the air what feels like 2ft from pure fright, and once there and awake I keep completely still. Now, finally, it is happening. The comeuppance for my too-blessed life, for my choice to live alone. Something terrible is taking place. Another soft click from the direction of the front door. Now my entire body is flooded with adrenaline and my mouth arid. I try to recall through my panic the things I have done to mitigate the chances of an attack: the locks all double bolted, the keys taken out and placed far away so that if a person smashed through the glass they couldn’t easily open them. When I was terribly afraid one night I took a small sharp knife and hid it in a secret place accessible from where I sit in my bed. I can take it out without making much noise. There is another creak from the hallway, and I silently retrieve the blade from its hiding place and hold it in one hand and my phone in the other. I sit there like this, rigid with conviction and terror, for more than an hour. No thoughts pass through my head in this time apart from keen listening for the next noise and what direction it comes from, strategising my escape. Can I be sure they are coming from the area I think they are, or could they be coming from both sides? Is it wise to lock myself in a toilet? Am I strong and small enough to break through that window if necessary? Eventually, I accept that I am too frightened to move to check whether someone is outside my bedroom door one way or the other, and that the elapsed time means that it is unlikely they are there. I put the knife back in its place and turn on the two lamps on either side of my bed, and a podcast so that it might sound to somebody outside that there are several people in this room. I lie back down and practise some breathing exercises to try to sleep. It’s now perhaps 4am and I have lost half of my allotted rest. I am useless and angry when I wake up, aware of the absurdity of my fear and that I have allowed it, by indulging, to ruin my day. This happens two, three, sometimes four times a month. Twice as many times as that I am woken in the middle of the night with dreams that somebody is entering my window or sitting on my bed, terrors which are both more and less intense because they are unconscious, but which mean just the same that my sleep is robbed and fragmented, my body feeling as if it has been through a battle when it wakes in the morning. I have always been what could kindly be described as “nervy”. I panic inordinately, reacting with huge exaggeration to ordinary aural surprises. Sirens, shouts, my boyfriend gasping, “Oh my God!” when he looks at his phone (Spurs were down one nil). Ghost trains, even the most comically amateur, were not something I could tolerate as a child. When I hear a fox rustling in the garden or see a flash outside in the dark – the light of my own bathroom – the momentary fright I get is so ludicrously powerful, and so physically so, that the rest of the night spirals. But why? Why am I like this, so susceptible and easily overwhelmed? Do I truly believe it’s likely that a prowling man is going to break in through my window to hurt me? I read voraciously about Ted Bundy as an adolescent, the first of the iconic American monsters to catch my attention. I picked up Ann Rule’s pulpy book, The Stranger Beside Me, at a school jumble sale and pored over it with appalled titillation. Sometimes he approached his victims in daylight and in public places, car parks and beaches, but his first few were women asleep in their beds – women in basement apartments like mine. I spent the subsequent 15 years consuming true crime with unattractive compulsion. There was Unbelievable in 2019, the Netflix show based on the true story of a serial rapist who broke into apartments and attacked his victims as they slept. He lectured one woman smugly about the inadequate safety measures which had left her open to his predation. The show sparked conversation among women about their terror of solitude, the exhausting knowledge of their own perpetual vulnerability. All my life I have loved to walk alone at night. As a teenager making my first clumsy forays into pubs and partying, the walk home with my Discman was often the part I prized most. The processing and the narrativising were better than the experiences themselves. I take an admittedly thick and wrongheaded pride in the fact I feel no fear about doing this, that I don’t let tragic stories – about women attacked in circumstances like those I willingly embrace – change my behaviour. I like to think I have mostly refused to let the potential evil of the world hamper my freedom. This makes the sporadic paralysing fear which overcomes me in the safety of my own bed all the more humiliating and ridiculous. Message boards and articles describe women who keep muddy men’s boots outside their doors to intimidate intruders, who sleep with hammers under their pillows, who tell nobody that they live alone and put male names on their delivery orders. They have intricate set-ups involving bells strung up to alert them if the window is jarred. I thought I was a different sort of person to this, one able to operate within reason, according to the actual likelihood of harm rather than intangible bogeyman, but it turns out I am not. Does my submersion in true crime shows and books, in the extraordinary and rare stories of famous sadistic crimes, mean I believe they are more likely to happen to me than they are? Or is it that the knowledge of such things ever happening warps us; that they could take place even once in the history of humankind, that it is possible for a person to enjoy another’s pain to this degree? Maybe that knowledge stretches the mind to encompass more oblique danger than it can accommodate; more than logic can successfully deny. Beyond the literal, material sadistic intruders I fear when I am in my spirals, there is something bigger and more difficult to define. They suggest a mass of malevolence and ill fortune of which they constitute only one small part. In my waking life I do not believe that someone is going to break into my home as I sleep and commit acts of violence against me. In the moment, something else is taking place. It’s the feeling of all future disaster encroaching in the indifferent calm of the dark, my thoughts unfettered in the pre-dawn hours turning invariably to death. In our irony-exhausted culture it feels almost laughable to say it plainly, but I’ll say it all the same: night is when I really burrow down into the knowledge that everyone I know is going to die. Sometimes I consider them one by one, every person I love and the different ways they might go, which circumstance I could learn to bear, which ones would drive me mad. It’s a lonely and ultimately inconsolable despair to find oneself wading through in the wee hours. Perhaps it’s easier to focus on an errant creak, the possibility of intrusion. Perhaps, too, this is why the feeling of my boyfriend in bed beside me is such an efficient remedy. Not because he can fight off monsters any better than I can, no offence to his prowess, but because it is easier to disbelieve the truth of death when I can hold on to some other creature who is living and beautiful and strong, someone so bright and apparently infinite that it would surely be impossible for them to ever die. I have become worse rather than better since beginning this relationship. When I was always alone I rarely reached such high pitches of fear. I rarely noted my solitude at all; there was no other way to live. Now that there is one, now that nights alone are mostly optional, I struggle. I say goodbye to him on a Sunday evening, dread filling my chest, and I know that if I asked, then he would stay or I would go with him, and I have to forge agreements with myself not to do so. I battle as I always have done between the force of my need for others and the force of my disgust towards dependence. I suspect I will have to grapple with those competing interests for the rest of my life. I can’t accept that I need another person to do something as basic and necessary as sleep. It would be too dangerous to concede such total reliance. Instead, I push through on the nights I am alone and afraid. When sleep evades me totally I wait until dawn comes, slip on my headphones and walk out into the streets. There, no matter how early it is, I see that life exists, cyclists and bedraggled revellers and the train station coffee shop setting up. I listen to music or to a podcast about something amazing, something that happened in a place I’ve never been to but could travel to one day if I really wanted to. I am glad that wandering outside is where I feel safest and happiest, because here I’m reminded of how much I love the world and the people in it and everything I don’t know about them, and that whatever fear I feel on my own is only a kind of proof of how strong that feeling is. On these mornings I am filled with the sure knowledge of the ongoingness of things and how miraculous that really is, and that knowledge is just as real, or even more so, as the knowledge of endings which comes in the dark. Acts of Desperation, by Megan Nolan, is published by Vintage at £8.99. Buy a copy for £8.09 at guardianbookshop.comThe financial market collapse at the start of 2020 was, on the face of it, a disaster for the world’s pension funds. The value of stocks and some bonds worth trillions of pounds plummeted as the extent and depth of the global recession caused by Covid lockdowns became clear. The UK’s biggest private pension scheme, the Universities Superannuation Scheme (USS), was no different: the custodian of the retirement savings of 470,000 university and college workers lost billions of pounds. At its latest valuation, actuaries came up with an alarming conclusion: the assets of USS were only worth £67bn, leaving a huge deficit of £18bn compared to the liabilities it has promised to pay out in the future. Yet the recovery was almost as extraordinary as the decline. Central banks pumped money into the economy, and tech companies in the US recorded astonishing gains. That helped USS assets back to more than £90bn at the end of January. That recovery – and the controversial question of how the fund accounts for it – has put USS at the centre of a row that could result in university staff occupying picket lines across the country. The scheme will also be at the centre of a legal battle this month, with academics asking a court for permission to sue directors for not performing their duties. USS members come from more than 330 institutions, including the universities of Oxford, Cambridge, Manchester and Birmingham. Among them are some of the country’s best economists – and they are putting their knowledge to use in the tussle with the trustees. All of which adds to the challenges faced by USS and its chief executive Bill Galvin. “Clearly it’s regrettable that employers and unions are finding it difficult to agree the way forward right now,” Galvin told the Observer, sitting in the USS offices next door to the Bank of England in the City of London, where the meeting rooms are all named after universities. The situation has been “pretty unavoidable” for the fund, he said, caught between regulatory requirements to cover the technical deficit and the subsequent increase in the value of those assets, which lowers the expectations for future returns. The employers and the trustees argue that they have no choice but to address the deficit by raising pension contributions for academics (many of whom are not particularly well paid), even at a time when the UK is grappling with a cost of living crisis. At the same time, the benefits members receive in retirement will also be cut. The University and College Union, which represents the staff, has put forward new proposals under which universities would contribute more and not cut retirement benefits, with the threat of strikes at 68 universities if talks fail. Hanging over it all is an important philosophical question on the approach to risk taken by pension funds. Ewan McGaughey, a reader in law at King’s College London, is among the claimants taking USS to court on 28 February to try to overturn a ruling that they do not have standing to sue. He argues that USS is making “absolutely indefensible assumptions” on its future returns. The academics’ case cites a USS technical paper that shows a 0% real return once inflation is taken into account. USS said it could not comment on ongoing legal proceedings. Professor Raghavendra Rau of the Cambridge Judge Business School argued that there is no precedent since at least 1900 – covering “two world wars, the great depression and the 1970s oil shock” – for such pessimism. Martin Wolf, the economic commentator at the Financial Times, has likened the USS approach to preparing for nuclear war (an observation that provoked weary laughs in USS’s offices). Yet it is not simply a case of academics on one side and the USS managers on the other. In a paper published in September, David Miles, professor of economics at Imperial College London and a former Bank of England monetary policymaker, and James Sefton, also an Imperial economics professor, argued that the risk of USS having insufficient funds to pay promised pensions was between 20% and 40%. Simon Pilcher, chief executive of USS Investment Management, is in charge of choosing the actual investments. “Sadly, one can’t project the past into the future,” he said. “Today, we think it is reasonable to expect lower returns going forward than we’ve experienced in the past, because it’s those higher returns that have driven us to these high prices.” USS’s view was that “we’re not obviously in a materially better position today”, but they were trying to be “prudent, rather than recklessly prudent”, Pilcher added – although the deficit had “shrunk” by an undisclosed amount. Galvin argues that the scheme has little choice because the Pensions Regulator (TPR) is “already slightly outside of its comfort zone” on what it will allow. “We certainly have taken the Pensions Regulator to a level where it believes that we’re taking as much risk as they believe we should,” said Galvin. “They believe, indeed, that we should be charging even slightly more, 1% to 2% more” for the employees’ pension contributions than is being proposed. The row reflects a deeper shift in who bears the risk of retirement income across the British economy. The classic pension model pools employees’ savings, paying out a defined benefit for as long as that person lives. However, rising life expectancy has made it harder for pensions to cover longer retirements, so many employers have moved to “defined contribution” pensions, which only give the benefit of whatever has been paid in (plus returns from the investments). That has shifted the risk to workers. USS is a hybrid, but will move further towards the defined contribution end if the employers and managers get their way. Galvin acknowledged it was “less generous”, but argued that “there is still a substantial amount of defined benefit”. Indeed, the 200,000 active USS members account for more than a fifth of the fewer than 1 million people in the UK who are still able to pay into private defined benefit schemes. Pensions are always deeply concerned with existential matters: the more people who die early, the easier it is to meet their obligations. The climate crisis has added another dimension to this concern for the people managing the money. Now fund managers must weigh the probabilities of mass planet-wide death in a climate catastrophe, too. On this issue USS is also facing serious pressure from its highly educated members – a membership that happens to include some of the world’s leading experts on climate science. A campaign group, Divest USS, has pushed for the scheme to sell its shares in fossil fuel companies for several years. USS has tried to assuage academics’ concerns on the environment, including in a decision last month to “tilt” equities worth £5bn away from the worst polluters, cutting emissions of that part (albeit a relatively small one) of its portfolio by 30%. It has a formal target of net zero emissions from its portfolio companies by 2050 or sooner if possible. Yet Pilcher is clear that USS will not “exclude its way to net zero”, even as major counterparts such as Dutch pension fund ABP or Harvard University have done so. That suggests USS could continue to hold investments in oil companies such as BP and Shell for years to come, despite warnings from respected authorities that fossil fuel extraction needs to stop now. “Long-term capital such as ourselves needs to facilitate the change and the enormous investment that’s required for us as a country and as a globe to get to net zero,” Pilcher said. However, he argued that it would also be the “best investment strategy for our members” to “oversee the transition of businesses for the financial benefit of our members” – a nod to the uncomfortable fact that some fossil fuel businesses are likely to continue to offer financial returns for years. That argument could be tested in court. McGaughey, the claimant, said USS was “ignoring the members, ignoring the science, ignoring what is financial orthodoxy now”, that fossil fuel firms are likely to underperform broader markets. Even if USS can settle the row over the pension deficit in the next few months, those questions could dog the scheme for decades to come. The plunge into private equity One striking aspect of the Universities Superannuation Scheme’s investment approach is its enthusiastic embrace of the racy world of private equity investment. USS has direct ownership stakes in big infrastructure companies such as Heathrow Airport, the Moto motorway service stations, and Thames Water, the utility covering much of south-east England. This puts the scheme in an interesting position. While most pensions are invested in stocks and shares, USS is one of relatively few British pension managers putting the savings of low- and middle-income earners directly into private equity-style deals. Huge sections of the UK’s everyday economy, from Boots to Butlin’s, are now in private hands. Since the start of the pandemic, 1,200 companies worth more than £90bn have been acquired in private equity deals, in a shift which has seen big names such as the supermarket chain Morrisons depart the London Stock Exchange. Often, the dividends and profits of these businesses are shared only among those wealthy enough to afford the high upfront cost of investing in private equity funds. USS goes some way to redressing that imbalance. At the latest count, 28% of its assets were in private markets – including property, private equity and private fixed-income – across its vast portfolio. That includes £6.2bn of direct private equity investments (at March 2021 values) and direct loans to companies, including some from its £500m L1 Renewables arm, as well as investments in standard private equity funds run by giant firms such as TPG and CVC. Simon Pilcher, USS’s investment boss, said that he expected the proportion of private market assets to rise, potentially offering the scheme better returns. He also argues that pension funds such as USS make better owners than many private equity investors, who often extract value before selling companies on after about five years. Pension funds could, in theory, be willing to stick around for decades. Thames Water is a good example of where USS can be different, Pilcher believes. Previous owner Macquarie, the Australian investment bank, was condemned by critics during its period of ownership for allegedly aggressive value extraction, but USS is willing to make investments that will pay off slowly. Its representatives on Thames Water’s board successfully argued against paying a dividend in favour of making investments in its network or repairing leaks, Pilcher said. Spending to prevent universally reviled practices such as dumping sewage in rivers would eventually lead to better financial returns, he added. “We think of that as responsible capitalism,” he said. “We are the natural owners of an asset like that for the long term.” JJ • This article was amended on 8 February 2022. An earlier version referred to “the fewer than 1 million people in the UK who are still able to pay into defined benefit schemes”. We meant to say private defined benefit schemes.Quite a few people thought Ireland would beat champions Wales. They were wrong. Ireland absolutely obliterated them. But even that is not quite right. What makes this win so impressive was the dexterity of it, the effortless command of fingers and angles, which made us almost not notice the physicality of which they have long been purveyors. If 29-7 does not sound quite an obliteration, the truth is that 50 points would have not flattered the Irish. Four tries, though, three of them scored in the third quarter, represent a full house of points, so “job done”, that old catchphrase of champions, applies here regardless. If Ireland were not favourites for the title, they could not have done much more for their prospects than dismantle the champions like this. Wales are used to being underrated despite a record this century better than anyone’s, but they are without a host of points of reference. It showed. They looked lost by the end. They were not the only ones at the start. This is a familiar Ireland team, all the more so given 11 of them play for the same province, but here they launched a new star from the west. Even connoisseurs of rugby outside Galway would be forgiven for needing to read up about Mack Hansen this week. The Aussie-born son of an Irish mother pitched up a few months ago to honour his new contract with Connacht, and here he became a fully fledged Ireland international. A minute in, he was away down the left as if he had played with this crack outfit for years. Ireland could not quite finish his chip and chase, but they scored from the line-out anyway. The try was scored by Bundee Aki, who finished after a perfect cut-out pass by, well, this bloke Hansen again, but the blur of hands and bristling muscles in the build-up were multiple. Ireland have long favoured what is known as the Sexton loop, Johnny loving the licence to lurk behind the front line and pick his moment, but now any number of players are given licence to spring each other through gaps. Tadhg Furlong, for example, is a tighthead prop. At one point he put Sexton through a gap with the deftness of a man half his size. It is difficult to overstate the absurdity of the mere idea of a tighthead doing things like that last century. Do not go thinking he was shirking his other duties either. The man scrummaged and bulldozed as much as ever. But let us not pick on Furlong. Ireland, all of them, were a blur of moving parts. If Josh Adams had hoped for a loosener for his first match in that most demanding of roles in the outside centre, he was not to be obliged. Wales, though, rolled with the punches, their light but oh-so-hard back row to the fore, just enough to spike Ireland’s guns at the point of execution on more than a few occasions. Such is Wales’s list of absentees, damage limitation was a respectable ambition against Ireland in this mood. Sexton scuffed his first two penalties at goal but landed a third. Rarely has a fly-half booted the ball off for half-time with more enthusiasm than Dan Biggar did. A 10-0 deficit felt a steal. That impression only deepened after the break. A good team makes their dominance tell where it counts. Turns out Ireland are a good team. Again, they came out of the blocks at high speed; again they scored early, but this time thrice. The first two were finished by Andrew Conway. His finish of the first was remarkable, an outstretched arm somehow reaching the line, the second formulaic, but the approach play to both was considered and bewitching, featuring virtually everyone. There was Furlong as the pivot, twice in the build-up to Conway’s second. Conway might have had a third-quarter hat-trick, but the imperious Garry Ringrose chose to go himself, this time after some improvisational counterattacking featuring the loosehead prop, Andrew Porter, and winger Hansen. Ireland were painfully dominant - and now, 29-0 up on the hour, every stat attested to that reality. Easier to eulogise Ireland; not so easy to find anything positive for Wales.Taine Basham’s growing reputation was sort of enhanced in adversity. His intercept try with five minutes to go was the ugliest try of the day, but reward the flanker was well worth. Adams had his moment in attack in the first half, albeit down the wing, but his yellow card for a weird body check on Sexton helped those bewitching runners score Ireland’s third. No, this was Ireland’s day, a marker laid down every bit as persuasive as their victory over the All Blacks in November. Now they go to Paris, home of the official favourites. They also beat the All Blacks in the autumn. Should be good.That’s it for today. Michael Aylwin was at the Aviva Stadium and we’ll leave you with his match report. New Wales captain Dan Biggar speaks: “We didn’t get much right. Credit to Ireland, they played really well, played the conditions well, strangled us, physically dominated us and they were good value for their win today. “It’ll be tough watching back on Monday because the big thing we’d focused on all week was physicality and matching that from Ireland and we didn’t quite get it right if we’re honest.” As for all the top names Wales had missing, Biggar added: “Obviously that’s an issue but the physicality was what we were missing today, physicality and discipline. Even if we’d had experienced players, sometimes we’ve come here and come on the back foot as well so a pretty disappointing afternoon. We know that we haven’t got long to get it right ahead of a massive game (v Scotland) next week in Cardiff. If we’ve got any aspirations of keeping hold of this trophy then it’s a must win next week.” Thanks Luke. Let’s start with some reaction from victorious Ireland captain Johnny Sexton. He’s asked if that was a great result. “Big time, against the reigning champions, to come away with five points, I would have snapped your hand off at the start of the game. “When I looked out of the window this morning we knew it wasn’t going to be pretty. Thankfully, the rain stayed away for the most part but the wind played its part in both halves really. We knew if we could get a good foothold in the game in the first half playing into the elements, that second half we’d have the breeze behind us and we could use it to our advantage. “It’s never going to be perfect in your first game like it was today, we’ve got lots to improve on. We will pick apart the performance like we always have but it’s a big thing to be doing it off the back of a win. Last year, first game, you know the Grand Slam’s gone, the Triple Crown’s gone, everything’s gone in one game and you’re up against it to win the championship. So we’ve got everything to play for and that’s where you want to be in this competition. “We know there’s a massive test (v France) ahead next week. To go to Paris and get a result is incredibly, incredibly tough and we’ve going to have to be at our very best to get it.” That’s it from me. I’ll hand you over to my colleague David Tindall for some reaction from Dublin ... and you can join me for Scotland v England right here: Ireland take a lineout with the clock in the red ... they work through a few more phases and into the Wales 22. More desperate defending to do for Pivac’s men. Hansen makes a dart on the left, knocks on, and it’s over. A crushing win for Ireland, a scintillating display of running rugby, with plenty of forward grunt into the bargain. Their distribution and their ruck speed was so, so impressive and an injury hit Wales simply could not compete today. 80 min: A positive for Wales to cling to? They won the final quarter. Unless Ireland score on this visit to the Wales 22 ... 78 min: Mack Hansen deservedly wins player of the match on dayboo, as the Australians would say. He ripped into his international career for Ireland and no mistake. His sensational first-minute break led to the opening try and set the tone for Andy Farrell’s men. 77 min: “Feeling sick as a parrot - Welsh woman sitting in Bristol watching Wales as they struggle chaotically in Dublin today,” emails Joanne. “So difficult to watch disarray, despair and a fair bit of distress on the field ... Dry February just about to go out the window.” Whoops! Ireland look to move the ball out of their 22. Beirne tries an offload having been tackled, but Basham is alert, grabs the ball and storms under the posts. Sheedy converts. 74 min: Wales are still to trouble the scorers. This is a sobering afternoon for the champions. Everything’s clicked for Ireland, though, and they are looking increasingly confident in this high-tempo style. It’s 29-0 to Ireland. 72 min: Keenan tries a 50-22 kick from deep but it rolls out beyond the in-goal area. How far will Ireland turn the screw, and how far can they benefit their points differential before the day it out? 70 min: Baird, Healy and Murray come on for Ireland. The Irish have a scrum ... Wales are under pressure yet again. Wales grab the ball back and Biggar kicks for touch. The captain shakes his head ruefully and then leaves the field. 66 min: The important issue for Ireland, beyond this tournament of course, is figuring out how to prevent their peak coming the year before the World Cup. 65 min: “As a fervent Wales supporter I have to say - this is an appalling display,” emails Iwan Thomas. It’s not great, is it? But we did fear for Wales before today, factoring in Ireland’s red-hot form and Pivac’s injury woes. All things considered it’s still been a bit of a shambles. Adams struggled in defence and outside centre and blotted his copybook further with a needless yellow card. 64 min: The evergreen Sexton goes off, Joey Carbery comes on. Another fine day for the Ireland No 10, but of course, he has to thank a superb effort from his pack to get the team moving on the front foot. 63 min: Sheehan, Hume and Bealham are on for Ireland. Lake, Moriarty, Watkin, Gareth Davies and Gareth Thomas on for Wales. 61 min: I’m currently trying to make sense of the replacements on the Six Nations website but they have a Wales replacement, Lake, coming on for Ireland’s O’Mahony which I’m pretty sure is wrong ... Another rampaging run off a turnover for Ireland. Hansen does well to feed Aki, Aki in turn passes to Ringrose and he romps over the line, leaving a number of Welsh tacklers in his wake. This is turning into a shambles for Wales. They competed well before the break but it’s falling apart now. 56 min: Liam Williams knocks on with a sniff of a chance for Wales. He shakes his head. Wales are a man down and on the back foot more than ever before now ... again, wave after wave of quicksilver Irish attacking comes crashing down into their 22 ... Wales cannot deal with the speed of passing and movement. Ireland run through the vacant 13 channel and are there are plenty of bodies on hand eager for another try ... Gibson-Park floats a pass to Conway, lurking on the right wing, and he has a straightforward task to touch it down for his second five-pointer of the afternoon. Sexton rakes a wonderful low kick, starting it left of the posts and letting the wind take it back and through. Lovely stuff from Ireland all round. It was a penalty for Wales. Now it’s a penalty for Ireland, and 10 minutes on the naughty step for Adams. It’s the correct decision. He ignored the ball and slammed his shoulder and body into the Ireland fly-half. A couple of inches higher and it was a red. 51 min: The TMO is still looking at it. The score is 17-0 to Ireland. 50 min: A bouncing ball – a grubber kick by the Wales No 9 Williams. Sexton and Adams both go for it ... Adams puts his shoulder in and smashes Sexton to the floor. He might be in trouble ... That was naughty by Adams in my opinion. 49 min: Wales win a turnover in midfield when Sexton loses the ball in contact. Adams makes a dart on the left, but Wales simply cannot get any momentum. They are getting munched at the breakdown, the Irish are all over them when they have possession, and they can’t get numbers to support tackled players. 48 min: A forward pass by Rees-Zammit to Williams on the Welsh right. “He knows that’s got to go backwards,” says Shane Williams on commentary. You’d certainly hope so. It was a wayward pass for Conway, or rather it was well short, but he had the space to move forward and grab it and then sprint for the corner ... his initial attempt to touch down is fractionally short, but he edges the ball forward a couple of inches and makes it. Sexton’s kick is good, just, bouncing off the post and in. It’s 17-0 and this is shaping up to be painful for Wales now. I think this is a try but the referee says ‘on field no try’. Conway is in at the right-hand corner after a smart break by Sexton down the middle, playing penalty advantage. They are checking it ... the TMO gives it. 42 min: Ireland’s maul is pulled down illegally. Another lineout for Wales to defend right on their line. 41 min: Ireland begin the second half as they began the first, with ball in hand, trying to punch holes in the Welsh defensive line. They work through a few phases, win a penalty, and Sexton kicks for the corner early doors after the break. Here we go. Much as expected Ireland have been in the ascendancy. But a 10-point lead is arguably a meagre return considering how dominant they’ve been. Wales are under pressure, and it is hard to see a way back, but they are not out of it completely. Wales have attempted 110 tackles, Ireland 63, but perhaps tellingly, Ireland have missed seven and Wales have missed nine. 39 min: Hansen is in space on the left wing for Ireland, as he was in the first minute, but a pass slips through his fingers and it’s a lineout for Wales. There is a slow-mo shot of Furlong smashing through a couple of Welsh tacklers with the ball in hand. “100 per cent Wexford beef,” says Gordon D’Arcy on co-commentary. 38 min: Josh Adams seems to be struggling when it comes to defending his 13 channel. And Wales have plenty of defending to do. 37 min: Ireland crack the Welsh scrum on halfway and win a penalty. Sexton kicks for the corner. 34 min: Ireland throw some lovely shapes in midfield again, working their way into the Welsh half. A marvellous round-the-corner one-handed offload by Keenan to Van Der Flier has the green shirts rampaging down the left. But Wales turn it over, and Rees-Zammit is fed by Williams. The Gloucester wing nails a kick way down into the Ireland 22 and takes the pressure off – for now. Wales are on the back foot, and then some, but they are competing impressively and Ireland will feel they should be further ahead. 32 min: Wales have made 68 tackles so far according to the stats on the Six Nations website ... Ireland 47. However, Wales enjoy a little more possession now, but again Ireland rush up in defence and shut them down. It’s hard to see a way back for Wales if Ireland can maintain this kind of intensity and fluency in attack. 30 min: Wales make a bit more progress off their ball at a scrum. They work their way into the 22 but then strong, strong work by Conan for Ireland at the breakdown and he wins a penalty for his team and relieves pressure on the defence. 28 min: Wales get a lucky break from a high ball by Biggar. A lovely sniping, turning run by the scrum-half Williams and a fine offload almost gets Rees-Zammit away on the Welsh right wing. 25 min: Ireland have a scrum near halfway. Before packing down the Wales front row already look like they’ve taken a beating. But after the scrum Wales win the ball back in comical fashion when an awful pass by Gibson-Park bounces off Aki’s shin, and storm down their left wing with a run by McNicholl following a fine pass by Josh Adams. Ireland manage to arrest Welsh progress, though. 21 min: Wales, for the first time, ask a few questions with the ball in hand after McNicholl and Jenkins link nicely on the left wing around halfway. A lovely kick of for the corner by Biggar ... Ireland lose their lineout and Wales are smashing into contact around the hosts’ 22. But Ireland win a scrum put-in. Pivac and his henchmen are pictured looking suitably ashen-faced in the stands. That was field position for the first time but they’ve lost the momentum now. An easier kick, and no mistake from the Leinster man this time. 18 min: Wave after wave of Ireland attacking. They come again down the right with Sexton before working the ball over the opposite side of the field. Runners everywhere. Gibson-Park tries a little grubber but Rees-Zammit does well again in defence. It was penalty advantage, though, and Sexton will kick again. 17 min: Conway races on to a high ball for Ireland and catches impressively. Gibson-Park then puts a challenging box kick down the middle, round the back ... Rees-Zammit has to contend with a horrible bounce with Hansen bearing down on him, but manages to gather and dot down in goal. 13 min: Another penalty comes for Ireland, and Sexton misses again ... he smiles and throws his hands up, to demonstrate the strength of the wind that has steered both those kicks from left to right and away from the posts. Ireland could *almost* be virtually out of sight already at 13-0. As it is, it’s 7-0. It’s going to be a tough day at the office for Wales but they’ve been here before. 12 min: Ringrose darts through a hole in midfield. Sexton then finds Van der Flier, charging on a good line, in the next phase of play. Ireland’s speed at the breakdown is causing all sorts of bother. Adams, playing in an unfamiliar position at No 13, looks rattled. 9 min: Sexton, uncharacteristically, misses the penalty kick as it fades out to the right of the posts. Wales could have been double-figures down already ... they’ll take it. 8 min: Ship steadied for Wales. Liam Williams claims a garryowen just outside the 22. But hang on a second. Wainright then coughs up a penalty in a central position, with Andrew Porter quickly competing at the breakdown and trying to rip the ball away, and the referee penalising the Welsh. 6 min: Wales fluff up a lineout just inside the Ireland half. There’s a knock on, and it’s a scrum, Irish ball, Gibson-Park with ball in hand. Mack Hansen has had an immediate impact, safe to say. Ireland are all over Wales in their 22 following that sprint down the wing by the Connacht man. From the resulting lineout, Ireland spin it right, then Sexton finds Hansen, passing back the other way and stretching the overworked Welsh defence further. Aki is in tonnes of space on the left wing and romps over. Sexton adds the extras with a superb kick from out on the left touchline. Easy as that. 2 min: A lucky break for Mack Hansen from an attempted grubber in behind the Wales defence, that flicks up nicely into his hands. He’s away, off down the left wing, but Wales manage to scramble and hold him up. The crowd roars! 1 min: A knock on from the kick off by McNicholl and a scrum to start in the Ireland half. Biggar, the Wales captain, kicks off. The 2022 Six Nations has begun. It’s not cold in Dublin – around 9C – but heavy rain is in the air and strong winds too. A big storm system is moving across the UK over the weekend and is going to have a say in both of today’s matches ... Mack Hansen, of Connacht, makes his debut on the wing for Ireland today. Ireland’s Call is ringing around the Aviva Stadium as I write. The atmosphere sounds absolutely cracking. Can the hosts – and the favourites – deliver? A message against racism and discrimination is warmly applauded by the crowd in Dublin. And now the Welsh anthem, which is always a stirring affair. While Ireland are favourites, you look at that Welsh team and have to say they are not half bad ... this could be closer than many expect. The Wales wing Louis Rees-Zammit was pictured having his right ankle strapped a few moments ago. All appears to be well, however. And here come the teams! It’s on! Ireland fan John McEnerney fancies a home win but not by much ... “What a great start to the 6N this is,” writes Stephen Holliday. “I don’t think anyone can confidently predict the way today’s games are going to go, let alone an overall winner of the tournament.” Andy Farrell speaks to ITV: “The aim is to keep improving game on game but obviously Wales will have something to say about that. For the lads that’s sat in the changing room now, it’s about ourselves, you know? It’s about us bringing the best out of each other … It should be great, we’re so grateful to have the crowd back, we felt the connection in November and hopefully can build on that and take them with us.” Wayne Pivac has a chat: “It’s been work as usual with the group we have got, and they’ve trained really really well. Really looking forward to getting out there and obviously we’re going to have to make a big start.” Pivac on Josh Adams playing at No 13: “Some would see it that way [as a risk]. But behind the scenes he’s been working at 13 for us for some time. We’ve tried to do it before, and then injury at the last minute has prevented it … hopefully he can make a difference. With George North not there, he brings pace, as George does, both in attack and defence. He’s a very strong player and hopefully we can get the ball into his hands today.” Sexton v Biggar. Good buddies since doing a Lions tour together. Steven Pye writes about a boozy post-Calcutta Cup night out for both sets of players in 1988: Leinster, heavily represented in Ireland’s matchday squad today with 11 out of 23 players, have scored 153 points in the previous two Champions Cup matches: 89 against Montpellier and 64 against Bath. Interestingly, though, Sexton spoke of needing to get to know Jamison Gibson-Park again in camp with Ireland, as he’s not been starting at No 9 for Leinster. And Wales’s defence will be considerably more organised than either Montpellier and Bath ... Excited? Nervous? What are your expectations for the tournament? You can email me or tweet. Get in touch. We’ve been here before, haven’t we? A year out from a World Cup and on the eve of a Six Nations Championship, Ireland look capable of beating any side they face. Andy Farrell’s relentless commitment to keeping the ball in play saw them average more passes - 187.4 - and more rucks in possession – 113.1 – per game than any other team competing in the Six Nations or Rugby Championship last year. Commanding wins against England and New Zealand proved they can marry flair with fortitude. There’s a late tweak to the Welsh bench, Ben Carter coming in for Seb Davies. As if Pivac didn’t already have enough injuries to contend with. Who’s going to win the Six Nations? Predictions from our team of rugby writers: The Ireland lock, Iain Henderson, misses out despite training this week. Tadhg Furlong and James Ryan both make the team having been in the same boat as Henderson and resuming training on Tuesday. For Wales the injury list includes Alun Wyn Jones, Taulupe Faletau, Josh Navidi, Justin Tipuric, Ken Owens, Leigh Halfpenny, George North ... Josh Adams, notably, starts at outside centre, which would suggest Pivac is certainly hoping to play a bit of rugby. Ireland: Keenan, Conway, Ringrose, Aki, Hansen, Sexton, Gibson-Park, Porter, Kelleher, Furlong, Beirne, Ryan, Doris, Van der Flier, Conan. Replacements: Sheehan, Healy, Bealham, Baird, O’Mahony, Murray, Carbery, Hume. Wales: L. Williams, McNicholl, Adams, Tompkins, Rees-Zammit, Biggar, T. Williams, Jones, Elias, Francis, Rowlands, Beard, Jenkins, Basham, Wainwright. Replacements: Lake, Thomas, Lewis, Carter, Moriarty, G. Davies, Sheedy, Watkin. Referee: Jaco Peyper (SA) No one fancied Wales last year. They won the title, of course, and came within seconds of collecting a Grand Slam in Paris. No one fancies Wales this year either, and although they may be reigning champions, Wayne Pivac’s side do appear to be right up against it in Dublin this afternoon. The injury list is worryingly long, the Welsh regions’ form is a concern and Covid-19 retains the power to disrupt. But the curtain-raising encounter in this year’s Six Nations remains a two-horse race and one in which the stand-in captain, Dan Biggar, does not intend to take a backward step. Andy Farrell’s Ireland? They are fit and firing, coming off the back of a tremendous autumn campaign when the All Blacks were buried with a high-tempo, all-action style that reflects increasingly well on the work of the attack coach, Mike Catt. The Irish look strong in every position and have a clear collective idea of what they are trying to achieve via the prompting of 36-year-old Johnny Sexton. Farrell has emphatically silenced the doubters of earlier in his tenure, and Ireland seem set fair for next year’s World Cup. But first things first. The target for each team in the tournament is a tone-setting victory and a first step towards Six Nations glory. Ireland are rightly confident but will get nothing for free. Team news, pre-match reading and more coming up. Kick-off: 2.15pmBeaches littered with plastic bottles and wrappers. Marine turtles, their stomachs filled with fragments of plastic. Plastic fishing nets dumped at sea where they can throttle unsuspecting animals. And far out in the Pacific Ocean, an expanse of water more than twice the size of France littered with plastic waste weighing at least 79,000 tonnes. The plastic pollution problem is distressingly familiar, but many organisations are working to reduce it. Alongside familiar solutions such as recycling, a surprising ally has emerged: micro-organisms. A handful of microbes have evolved the ability to “eat” certain plastics, breaking them down into their component molecules. These tiny organisms could soon play a key role in reducing plastic waste and building a greener economy. The scale of the problem As a species, we make an enormous amount of plastic. In 2020, the most recent year for which we have data, 367m tonnes were produced globally, according to trade association Plastics Europe. This represented a slight decline compared with 2019, when 368m tonnes were made, but that was probably because of the Covid-19 pandemic: production had previously increased almost every year since the 1950s. A 2017 study estimated that 8.3bn tonnes of plastic had been made in total. A huge fraction of this goes to waste. In 2016 the world generated 242m tonnes of plastic waste, according to the World Bank. Despite the popular image, only a small fraction of this ends up in the ocean – but the seas may still be absorbing more than 10m tonnes of plastic every year. As well as the dangers of the plastics themselves, they contain a lot of additives that leach out into the water. “Over time we really don’t know what effects these have,” says Tiffany M Ramos of Roskilde University in Denmark. Much of the rest ends up in landfills. That does not sound so bad, but a lot of it is single-use plastic, which is inherently wasteful. Making plastic requires extracting fossil fuels such as oil from the ground, with all the pollution risks that entails. Plastic manufacturing also releases greenhouse gases that contribute to global warming. A 2021 report found that the US plastics industry alone releases 232m tonnes of greenhouse gases every year, the equivalent of 116 coal-fired power plants. The solution is not to stop using plastics altogether, because they are incredibly useful. For example, plastic bottles are far lighter than glass ones, so transporting them requires less energy and releases a smaller amount of greenhouse gases. But we do need a revolution in how we handle plastics, and this is where the micro-organisms come in. On the scrapheap In 2016 researchers led by microbiologist Kohei Oda of the Kyoto Institute of Technology in Japan reported a surprise discovery. Oda’s team visited a recycling site that focused on items made of polyethylene terephthalate (PET), a clear plastic that is used to make clothing fibres and drinks bottles. Like all plastics, PET is a material made up of long string-like molecules. These are assembled from smaller molecules strung together into chains. The chemical bonds in PET chains are strong, so it is long-lasting – exactly what you do not want in a single-use plastic. Oda’s team took samples of sediment and wastewater that were contaminated with PET, and screened them for micro-organisms that could grow on the plastic. It found a new strain of bacterium, called Ideonella sakaiensis 201-F6. This microbe could grow on pieces of PET. Not only that: Oda’s team reported that the bacterium could use PET as its main source of nutrients, degrading the PET in the process. The key to this ability was a pair of enzymes made by the bacteria. Enzymes are complex molecules that can speed up chemical reactions. They are crucial to life: our digestive system relies on enzymes to break down the complex chemicals in food into simpler ones that our bodies can absorb and use. For example, our saliva contains an enzyme called amylase that breaks up the long molecules of starch found in foods such as bread. Ideonella sakaiensis 201-F6 produces two unique enzymes. The first is a PETase that breaks the long PET molecules down into smaller molecules called MHET. A second enzyme called MHETase then goes to work, producing ethylene glycol and terephthalic acid. These two chemicals are the building blocks of PET, so Ideonella sakaiensis 201-F6 can completely reverse the manufacturing process that made PET. Plastic eaters The finding made headlines around the world, but it was not the first example of an organism that could degrade plastics. Reports of plastic-munching microbes date back to at least the early 1990s. The earliest examples were arguably less remarkable, because they could only eat plastics that were chemically flimsy or biodegradable. But by the 2000s researchers had found enzymes that could tackle tougher plastics. A prominent researcher in this area has been Wolfgang Zimmermann of Leipzig University in Germany. His team studied enzymes called cutinases, which it obtained from bacteria such as Thermobifida cellulosilytica, and which could also break down PET. Lars Blank of Aachen University in Germany first heard about this in 2012. He set about creating a consortium of researchers to study plastic-eating enzymes. This became the P4SB project, which ran from 2015 to 2019. Blank has since set up a project called MIX-UP, which sees European and Chinese researchers cooperating. By the mid-2010s plenty of plastic-degrading enzymes were known. The potential was clear to Gabriella Caruso of the Institute for Coastal Marine Environment in Messina, Italy, who wrote in a 2015 review that “microbial degradation of plastic is a promising eco-friendly strategy which represents a great opportunity to manage waste plastic materials with no adverse impacts”. So why did Ideonella sakaiensis 201-F6 cause such a stir? “The difference with the 2016 paper was this micro-organism could use the plastic as its sole energy and food source,” says John McGeehan of the University of Portsmouth. “That’s actually quite surprising and it kind of shows evolutionary pressure in action. If you’re the first bacterium in that rubbish pile that suddenly has a taste for plastic, then you’ve got an unlimited food source.” Put another way, the earlier enzymes had not evolved for plastics. They evolved to break down tough chain molecules found in living things, and their ability to degrade plastic was a side-effect. In contrast, the enzymes in Ideonella sakaiensis 201-F6 were specialised. Blank has a different interpretation, arguing that the Ideonella sakaiensis 201-F6 enzymes are not especially good because they only degrade PET slowly. “Wolfgang Zimmermann had far better enzymes at that point,” he says. But the excitement the paper created had a huge impact. “Suddenly the media and also the academic literature really cranked up and a lot of interest came in.” Better and better enzymes Two years later McGeehan and his colleagues took things further. They produced a three-dimensional structure of the Ideonella sakaiensis 201-F6 PETase, shedding light on how it worked. Hoping to understand how it evolved, they tweaked the structure. To their surprise, this made the enzyme more efficient at degrading PET. Clearly, it was possible to improve the enzyme. McGeehan now wants to take that further, modifying the PETase and other such enzymes so that they can be used on an industrial scale to break down plastics that would otherwise linger in the environment. “We’ve got a big £6m grant from the government,” he says, and they have started a specialist institute called the Centre for Enzyme Innovation. This is now bearing fruit. In 2020 McGeehan’s team reported that it had linked the PETase and MHETase enzymes together. This “super-enzyme” could eat PET about six times faster than the two enzymes working separately. Other groups such as Blank’s MIX-UP have produced modified enzymes of their own. Meanwhile there is evidence that microbes all around the world are evolving similar abilities. A study published in October 2021 looked at microbial DNA from a range of habitats. In areas with high levels of plastic pollution, the researchers found that the microbes were more likely to have enzymes with plastic-degrading tendencies. In line with this, a 2020 study identified a soil bacterium that can feed on some of the components of polyurethane, which releases toxic chemicals when it breaks down. The question now becomes: how significant a role can these enzymes really play in reducing plastic pollution? The circular economy So far, most of the activity has been in universities, but some groups are attempting to commercialise the technology. The University of Portsmouth has set up Revolution Plastics, which aims to forge links between academics and industry. “We’ve already advertised a joint PhD project with Coca-Cola,” says McGeehan. He is also part of an international research team called BOTTLE, which is negotiating with large companies. The most advanced project is run by Carbios, a French biotechnology company. In September 2021 it opened a pilot plant in Clermont-Ferrand, where it will test a system for recycling PET. Carbios’s system uses an enzyme that was first identified in compost, which they modified so that it worked faster and could operate at high temperatures where PET is softer. The advantage of these enzymes is that they break down the plastic at the molecular level, so it is possible to recreate the highest-quality plastic. In contrast, other forms of recycling cause a slow decline in quality, until eventually the plastic cannot be recycled again and gets landfilled or incinerated. Enzymatic recycling, in theory at least, is truly circular. “That’s what we call a closed-loop recycling system,” says Ramos. “You recycle something, but then you’re able to make something new of the same quality out of that.” To date, only a tiny percentage of plastics are being recycled in this way, but the enzymes could change that – “Which would be great.” McGeehan says: “I think in the next five years we’re going to be seeing demonstration plants all over the place.” Still, there are limits to the enzymes’ usefulness. “It will never be a one-size-fits-all type of solution,” says Ramos, and we should not count on the enzymes to mop up all our plastic waste. Some plastics are even tougher than PET. Blank points out that the enzymes work best if the plastic has been softened by heating. That means releasing the enzymes into the environment would not do much good: they only really work in temperature-controlled reactors. So the solution to plastic in the sea remains the same as before: we have to stop releasing it in the first place. Nevertheless, it seems likely that plastic-eating enzymes will have a role to play as societies move towards a circular economy in which everything is recycled as much as possible. In a study published in July 2021, McGeehan and his colleagues estimated how much enzymatic recycling of PET will cost. They calculate that it could compete on cost with standard manufacturing methods, which use fossil fuels as feedstock. The key is to be savvy about where we use the enzymes, says Blank. Some plastics can be mechanically recycled, a technology that is improving rapidly, so they probably are not the best targets. Instead, he says, researchers should go for plastics that cannot be recycled any other way – particularly if they can become substances that are otherwise expensive to make. Ultimately, the enzymes have to be part of a revolution in the entire way we make and use plastics, says Ramos. Better methods of recycling are useful, she adds, but they are only part of the solution. It is also important for plastic products to be designed in such a way that they can easily be reused and recycled. That might mean avoiding designs that use several kinds of plastic, or fuse plastic with other materials, as these are very difficult to recycle. As with all our environmental problems, there is no silver enzyme. These chemical machines can help us recycle plastic better, but we will always need to pick up our litter.The Trojan Horse Affair | Serial Productions/New York Times Fake Psychic | BBC Sounds I, An Actor, a Podcast | Acast The last time most of us heard a podcast series from reporter Brian Reed, he was working his diffident, determined way around the life of Alabama horologist John B McLemore for the fantastic, award-winning S-Town. Now he’s back, alongside rookie journalist Hamza Syed, unpicking … the education of children in Birmingham schools. That’s Birmingham, UK, by the way. Syed is from there. An ex-doctor turned investigative reporter, in 2018 he approached Reed with an idea. Syed’s very first investigation: The Trojan Horse Affair. For those who don’t remember, here’s a recap. In 2014, the then education secretary Michael Gove commissioned a report from a counter-terrorism expert into a few Birmingham schools with majority Muslim pupils. He wanted to know whether the heads and governors were “radicalising” the pupils by introducing extreme Islamic ideas. As a result of the report, teachers and governors were sacked and previously outstanding schools were taken into special measures. Citizenship lessons were inserted into the national curriculum, and the still controversial inform-on-a-potential-terrorist Prevent programme was created. The whole affair had huge ramifications, especially for young Muslims. The trigger for the whole hoo-ha was an anonymous letter, sent to Birmingham council, which detailed the supposed methods that the supposed radicalisers were using for “Operation Trojan Horse”. Step one: get on to the governors’ board – that sort of thing. Though it seemed to be well informed, many people now assume that the letter was bogus. Syed had one question: who wrote it? A simple question. Always the best way to start a journalistic journey. And surely Serial Productions, the non plus ultra of podcast brands, will deliver a revelatory, gripping listen. Well yes, sort of. Here are the positives. Novice Syed – emotional, funny, articulate – is an immensely charismatic presenter and brilliant on what the Trojan Horse affair has meant to Muslims who want to succeed in the UK without disavowing their cultural backgrounds. Reed, great as usual, balances precise, truthful reporting with personal, funny asides. Plus, the pair do appear to discover who wrote the letter and why. Their pursuit of truth leads them to local government, to national government, back to schools and, eventually, to Australia (Serial clearly has a bigger budget than most podcasts). But. This series is loooong, about eight hours over eight episodes. It’s also frustrating. Perhaps this isn’t a surprise. Anyone who has tried to deal with local councils, even in just a “why is this bill so high and what is it for?” capacity, knows how hard it is to pin down anyone to accept responsibility for anything. So to discover, say, who was in a particular meeting, and what was said, takes endless hours and mammoth patience. With this story, the shutters come down very swiftly from anyone official and, despite freedom-of-information requests, many stay down. The final episode involves a dentist, Achmad Da Costa, who, for various reasons, also wants the Trojan Horse to be properly exposed. Da Costa has several words of wisdom, including “on the side of truth is time”. Perhaps he’s right, though whether the truth will bring consequences is quite another thing. The British establishment has a habit of mischaracterising those it deems to be outsiders, whether Irish Catholics, working-class football supporters, the Windrush generation or Muslim youth. It also has a habit of suppressing its own past misdemeanours, as all those communities know. Often, it takes years for the truth to be revealed, and even longer for any consequences. I hope that something concrete will come from this dogged podcast, but I won’t be holding my breath. Another podcast that lands with the weight of its maker’s previous success is Fake Psychic. From journalist Vicky Baker, who made Fake Heiress, about Anna Delvey, this new series is funny, both ha ha and peculiar. It’s a detailed retelling of another fraudster’s life: that of M Lamar Keene, a US psychic who wrote a book about how he and other mediums used to trick their audiences. As it’s a BBC podcast, there are drama inserts (I wonder when this awful trend will stop?), but these are saved by the fabulously outre performance of Edward Hogg as Lamar. The problem with Fake Psychic is that it’s quite interesting but not madly. A four-parter, rather than a six-parter. Still, it’s frothy enough, and there’s weirdness here too. Did you know that even today, the US has several spiritualist camps, like spooky Butlin’s, where the public pay and psychics commune with their dead relatives? Such camps are regarded as religious! And more silliness from good old Nigel Planer, who has revisited Nicholas Craig, the exquisitely observed pompous old thesp of his book I, An Actor. His new show, I, An Actor, a Podcast, is yet more harrumphing about other actors’ careers, plus ego-driven daftery, and I am enjoying it greatly.Despite all the carnage, leaks and resignation letters currently oozing out of No 10, Rishi Sunak somehow remains clean. Not popular exactly – not even that nice, given the soaring energy bills to come in the spring. Yet he’s still starchily authoritative, like a pharmacist. In the last two years, I’ve hoarded my Rishi rations (the pandemic self-employment grants the government gave qualifying freelancers) and pondered his lean, debt-assassin appeal. Every time I see him on TV I say out loud: “Rishi! You’re such a good boy! Yes – a GOOD BOY!” I convince myself he doesn’t want to be PM. I think he wants to be chancellor for ever. He literally just wants to do maths homework, all day, every day. He married a billionaire because she’s into maths too – like, numbers with lots of zeros at the end – and maths is the glue that holds a relationship together. He will never cheat on you or, if he does, it’ll be with a very hi-tech calculator. No, what am I talking about? Rishi can do complex arithmetic in his head. At the risk of leaning into racial stereotypes, he is literally every boy I was at school with: clever, clean-cut, ambitious, on-message, well brought up, serious and nice. He also reminds me of every global one-percenter who ever messaged my rich, clever, petite, exotic, beautiful alpha friend Maya on Hinge: “Hi, I work in global cyber security, just spent three weeks talking corporate responsibility at a retreat in Mexico, really great conversations, looking good Maya, love the photos, let’s connect and find some synergy.” Piling on the agony There’s been a huge rise in online agony aunts and advice columns during the pandemic, with the ace novelist Marian Keyes launching a new one this month with Tara Flynn called Now You’re Asking via podcast with the BBC. You can never have too much advice and I’ll add Marian’s to my current big fave, Philippa Perry’s column in the Observer. The classics of course were the American columnists E Jean Carroll and Irma Kurtz, who will always be the best, while my saltier formative Gen X voices of guidance were the brilliant Karen Krizanovich in Sky magazine in the 90s and the Mrs Mills etiquette column in the Times. I was recently invited to audition as a potential agony aunt. I pitched the idea of Aunt Agony, the best kind of aunt being a spinster who has no nieces or nephews, serves her tea hot and her praise lukewarm, works a nice line in funky earrings and jazzy tops, delivers realtalk with a hint of menace and whose every answer, to every question, is: “He’s trash, they’re all trash, it’s nothing to do with you, drop it and run like hell.” Fun is no human right I’m appalled that there’s a new bestseller out called The Power of Fun, along with a whole movement based on the idea of a “funtervention”. Yes, like an intervention for an addict: an unpleasant and humiliating sudden ambush by your nearest and dearest, who confront you with your misery addiction. Can we please drop the idea that happiness is a human right? Why do we have to enjoy ourselves all the time doing banal activities such as taking deep breaths and doing things for other people? We’re two-thirds of the way into a pandemic and we’re supposed to be trying to be happy? We should all just praise the gods that we’re not dead. There’s nothing wrong with feeling miserable if you are indeed living in miserable times. Life is pain. Let’s just all watch Netflix until the world ends.Oil giants BP and Shell are on course to make a combined profit of almost £40bn this year from the rocketing price of petrol and gas, fuelling calls for a windfall tax on energy firms to ease the cost of living crisis. Before BP’s annual results this week, anti-poverty campaigners described the profits of oil producers as “obscene” and demanded the government take action to tax their surplus cash to support poorer families hit by rising energy bills. MPs and unions said a large proportion of the industry’s profits were an unjustified windfall and the government should move quickly to impose a tax before the companies distribute them to shareholders. Ed Miliband, the shadow climate change minister, said the oil and gas industry’s “booming” profits meant it was legitimate to impose a surcharge that would prevent millions of families from suffering hardship. A windfall tax is supported by the Tory MP and former energy minister Chris Skidmore, who called it “the right way to go”, and the TUC, which said it was needed to prevent the growth of food banks and the prospect of fuel poverty for millions of people. BP, which extracts oil in the North Sea, Alaska and the Gulf of Mexico, is this week expected to announce annual pre-tax profits in 2021 of more than £12bn, before signalling that it is on course to make a £15.5bn profit in 2022. Last week Shell reported annual profits of £14.3bn, which analysts believe will grow to £23.6bn by the end of its financial year in June. A report for the left-of-centre thinktank Common Wealth found that Shell and BP have channelled £147bn to shareholders via dividends and share buybacks over the past decade, with rival North Sea producers and the big six energy suppliers contributing another £47bn. Last week the government announced a package of measures to offset rising energy bills, saying it would give all council taxpayers in England with band A to D homes a £150 rebate. It also said it would provide a £200 loan in October to be repaid in instalments over the next two years. The move followed a decision by the energy regulator Ofgem to increase the annual energy price cap by £693 to almost £2,000 a year, to allow suppliers to pass on the rising cost of gas and electricity. Oil and gas prices have surged since the global economy began to recover from the pandemic. Strong demand in Asia for gas and the row between Vladimir Putin and European leaders of the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline have heightened fears of a global gas shortage. A cold winter in 2020 also depleted supplies, leaving stocks low as temperatures dropped in the northern hemisphere in 2021. Gas prices increased ninefold from a year earlier in the run-up to Christmas and remain five times higher than the level in January 2020. Oil prices have jumped from below $40 a barrel in the first lockdown to more than $80 a barrel. Several oil industry analysts have forecast oil prices continuing to rise above $100 a barrel this year, pushing oil company profits even higher. BP is expected to use its stronger cashflows to hand a larger dividend to shareholders and buyback shares to improve its value on the stock market. Shell’s chief executive, Ben van Beurden, said in response to calls for a windfall tax: “I’m not convinced that windfall taxes, popular though as they seem, will help us with supply, nor is it going to help us with demand.” Shell said it was in dialogue with the British government to find ways to alleviate the energy crisis. Rishi Sunak rejected calls for a windfall tax last week, saying it would deny the sector the funds it needs in the switch to low-carbon sources of energy. The chancellor also said oil firms already contribute to the exchequer by paying a higher rate of corporation tax. Danni Hewson, a financial analyst at the stockbroker AJ Bell, said investments by BP and Shell in green technologies was “tiny” and only added to calls for them to face a higher tax rate. “It’s hard not to paint big energy companies as villains when they and their shareholders are profiting from the rising prices that are making life miserable for many hardworking people.” “Both businesses have made huge pledges but the proportion of spend they apportion to green projects is still woefully tiny. Such a gesture would take the sting out of their current good fortune, while benefiting both shareholders and the general public.” Tessa Khan, an international climate change and human rights lawyer and founder of campaign group Uplift, said it was “obscene” Shell’s shareholders were getting rich at a time when people face “real hardship”. “In 2020, not only did Shell not pay any tax in the UK, the only country in which it operates where it didn’t, Shell picked up nearly £100m from taxpayers in rebates. Yet, even now, the chancellor is refusing to step in and try and claw some back with a windfall tax.”Africa Cup of Nations duty meant Riyad Mahrez was last sighted in Manchester City colours on New Year’s Day, when he scored for a fourth consecutive game. On Saturday, he extended the run, via two finishes in a second-half display that sparkled and allowed City to kill off Fulham. Pep Guardiola was impressed with the Algerian. His first goal came from the spot. “He has a mentality to score and a special quality,” City’s manager said. “Always he has a feeling like he might score. We struggled a lot in the past years with penalties and now it is a guarantee. Last season we were at Borussia Dortmund, 1-0 down, and he scored a penalty. This season 1-0 against Arsenal, the same: he has the personality to say give me the ball; I am going to score.” Before the break this was an invigorating clash between Guardiola’s team, who top the Premier League, and Marco Silva’s Championship leaders. The latter scored first and, though trailing at half-time, they were barely behind in the possession percentages, in what had been a controlled display of passing familiar to their hosts. Silva said: “I was really pleased to see the way we played the first half - we started the game like we planned – strong, showing we are here to match them and do our best.” This is what City do on a serial basis: start like hares whose speed dizzies and overruns the opponent. Yet, as Silva stated, this was Fulham’s trick via an opener that exposed the vulnerability of Guardiola’s side to the counter. Harry Wilson launched a raid along Fulham’s right that took him in behind and with no defender nearby he could stroke the ball over for Fabio Carvalho to enjoy a tap-in with Kyle Walker and John Stones marooned on either side of the midfielder. Cut to a nonplussed Guardiola slumped in his seat. Then, cut back to the play as City equalised instantly. This had an air of pinball about it, as Phil Foden’s glide into Fulham’s area was followed by Jack Grealish, João Cancelo and Mahrez all taking touches as possession ricocheted around before Ilkay Gündogan forced home. A frantic opening brought a third goal in eight minutes when Kevin De Bruyne lifted in a corner from the left and Stones out-jumped Tim Ream to head home. If this was order as might be expected restored, Silva’s unit did not fall into the role of upstarts reminded of their place. Instead they played keep-ball, Ream, Joe Bryan, Nathaniel Chalobah and Tosin Adarabioyo all involved in one sequence as the west London side sought to construct from the back. The Cottagers’ composure was reflected in the possession count as the half hour passed. City were ahead, 52.4% to 47.6%: a small margin considering their status as ball-retention experts supreme. Fulham’s passing could be as quick as their hosts’: Chalobah, Carvalho and Aleksandar Mitrovic combined in a rat-a-tat move that ended in Mitrovic taking aim. The centre-forward missed but the visitors’ potency had Guardiola prowling the technical area. His team were in a contest, though the head still said that City might pull away. When Grealish, who switched with Foden from No 9 to wide left, danced into the area and let fly, before Cancelo also took aim, a long 45 minutes began for Fulham. Grealish’s twinkle-toes next claimed a penalty, his surge towards Paulo Gazzaniga’s goal too dangerous for Bryan to resist a challenge that scythed him down. Mahrez smacked the spot-kick in and City were in cruise-mode. Home smiles shortly widened further when De Bruyne, in classic scheming fashion, raced on to a loose Harrison Reed pass, looked up and squared to Mahrez, whose finish made it 4-1. The Algerian was taken off a dozen minutes from the end, Guardiola greeting him with a warm hug. He deserved this – and the breather – as did City to progress to the fifth round.Ghislaine Maxwell’s legal arguments involving the juror who might not have disclosed childhood sexual abuse during jury selection should be public, prosecutors said in a letter Friday. “The government respectfully submits that the defendant has not justified her sealing request and, accordingly, the defense motion and its exhibits should be publicly docketed,” they told Manhattan federal court judge Alison Nathan. A jury on 29 December found Maxwell guilty of sex trafficking and related counts for facilitating the late financier Jeffrey Epstein’s sexual abuse of minor girls, some as young as 14. Epstein, himself a convicted sex offender, was apprehended in July 2019 for sex trafficking teen girls; he killed himself in a Manhattan jail cell about one month later, while awaiting trial. Days after Maxwell was convicted, Juror 50, later identified as Scotty David, gave interviews where he publicly claimed to have been sexually abused as a child. David reportedly stated that he told other panelists about this abuse – helping them see things from a victim’s point of view. David’s statements about prior abuse spurred questions because potential jurors completed questionnaires as part of the selection process – which directly enquired about sexual abuse. One of these questions was: “Have you or a friend or family member ever been the victim of sexual harassment, sexual abuse, or sexual assault?” David reportedly maintained that he did not recall the question on abuse but stated he had answered every question honestly. Following David’s interviews, the prosecution asked Nathan to investigate his statements; Maxwell’s lawyers quickly requested a hearing and new trial. Maxwell’s team filed detailed arguments for a new trial under seal. They even filed their argument for sealing under wraps, but Nathan said on 26 January that it must be filed publicly. Maxwell’s lawyers did so on 1 February, saying that unsealing these detailed arguments “will provide a roadmap of the defense’s examination of Juror 50 and will allow him to plan out and tailor his responses, or even potentially spoliate evidence,” giving him an “improper preview” of their position. They also said that Maxwell “does not seek to seal the motion indefinitely” and “seeks only a temporary sealing to protect the integrity of any fact-finding process ordered by the court”. Prosecutors said Maxwell’s concerns about an “improper preview” were unfounded, contending that her arguments contain “some of the relevant case law and information about statements reportedly made by Juror 50 in the news media”. Maxwell’s lawyers could always redact sensitive material, they also noted. “There can be no need to hide from public view a discussion of public materials,” prosecutors said.Hartlepool’s big day out may have ended in defeat but this was an occasion those who made the journey to south London will never forget. An inspired performance from Michael Olise, who set up Marc Guéhi’s opening goal before coming up with a brilliant solo effort of his own proved enough to end the resistance of Graeme Lee’s brave side as their attempt to reach the fifth round of the FA Cup for the first time fell short. Despite a convincing display from the hosts, it was the 5,000 visiting supporters whose voices could be heard at the final whistle. “After the game the atmosphere was amazing,” said Lee. “The players and the fans needed that moment.” The presence of Olise and Eberechi Eze in the Palace starting line-up would be enough to give any team a headache, and Hartlepool’s five-man defence must have known they were in for a long afternoon when the former glided past David Ferguson in the third minute before being brought down. Olise, the hero of Palace’s win over Millwall in the last round, picked himself up to deliver a pinpoint cross that Guéhi gleefully turned past Ben Killip. Conceding such an early goal was never likely to spoil the party in the away end. Having been close to extinction in 2017 after being relegated to the National League, reaching this stage of the competition has capped a fairytale few months after they beat Torquay in the playoffs last June. A flowing move almost straight after conceding that ended with right-back Jamie Sterry finding left-back Ferguson at the far post was an indication that Hartlepool were certainly not here to make up the numbers after dumping out Championship side Blackpool in the previous round. After his error against Millwall, Jack Butland looked relieved to see the ball spin behind the post when it slipped out of his hands. Despite Hartlepool’s win over Palace in the third round when the two sides met in 1993, the hosts offered to subsidise coach travel for nearly 5,000 supporters who packed out the away end with their blue and white flags. Having paid £12.50 for the 277-mile trip from the north-east, there seemed to have been plenty left over for refreshments as they roared their team forward. One passage of play involving a series of passes along the defensive line prompted an outbreak of Olés, although attempting to keep possession proved to be their downfall for Palace’s second goal. Joel Ward was quick to react to Killip’s goal kick and Conor Gallagher’s pass still gave Olise plenty to do. After taking out Timi Odusina with a sublime first touch, the 20-year-old arrowed his finish into the corner for his fourth goal since joining from Reading in the summer. Palace have reached the fifth round once since losing the final to Manchester United in dramatic circumstances in 2016, and look well equipped for another decent run this time around. They could have made certain of their progress early in the second half had one of Olise, Jean-Philippe Mateta or Jeffrey Schlupp found the net early in the second half, with Killip also responsible for keeping his side in it. An emergency in the away end that required medical staff from both clubs to sprint across the pitch caused a short delay as a supporter received treatment. Thankfully, the players were able to resume around six minutes later. Hartlepool responded by creating their first opportunity for some time, only for Butland to deny Luke Molyneux. Had Sterry’s effort that whistled just past the Palace goalkeeper’s post with seven minutes still to play been on target, there could even have been a grandstand finish. Tayo Adaramola was also inches away from scoring seconds after coming on for his debut on a day that he too will always remember.For many students and alumni of historically Black colleges and universities, the wave of bomb threats on the campuses feel like history repeating itself. “I was caught off-guard because we’re in 2022 and still facing the same problems as our grandparents and their grandparents,” said Marian Turner, an international studies major at Spelman College in Atlanta, referring to a time before the gains of the civil rights movement of the 1960s. “It just really brings to light everything that’s happening, because we’re actually experiencing it.” Turner remembers checking her email two hours before a 9 am class on Tuesday , the day Spelman and a dozen other historically black colleges, or HBCUs, received bomb threats, the second such wave targeting the schools in a month. It would have been her first day of in-person classes since the Omicron variant delayed a return to campus. She was glad campus was empty at the time of the threat, but still felt outrage, fear and even defiance. So she decided to go on campus, but ended up leaving to avoid putting herself in danger. Instead, she attended class virtually. The threats at dozens of the nation’s 100 HBCUs – colleges that have produced a who’s who of leaders, promoted a sense of purpose, and provided a sanctuary from racism and discrimination in higher education – have shaken Black communities across the country. The institutions have played a powerful role, dating back to the end of slavery and Reconstruction, and are viewed by many as a symbol of Black achievement and cultural pride. The FBI is investigating the hoax bomb threats as racially motivated hate crimes. No explosive devices have been found on the campuses, but the threats have forced the cancellation of thousands of classes and spurred campus lockdowns. Six juveniles have been identified as persons of interest in the investigation, according to NBC News. “It’s just another day of seeing us get disrespected. As Black students, or just Black people in general, we continue to try to break barriers and find our voices in society,” Turner said. “We’re already a minority, but it’s like we take a step forward and these people who are against us bring us back. I shouldn’t have to live in fear when I’m just going to get an education.” HBCUs have a long legacy of educating some of the nation’s most prominent Black Americans, from the Rev Martin Luther King, a graduate of Morehouse College in Atlanta, to vice-president Kamala Harris, a graduate of Howard University in Washington. The UNCF, an education organization that supports HBCUs, states that the colleges make up only 3% of US colleges but produce more than 20% of all Black graduates, demonstrating their importance in both higher education and American society. “These schools are remarkable for their resilience, fortitude and dedication to community, and serve a mission of inclusion and opportunity,” said Damon Hewitt, president and executive director of the Lawyers’ Committee for Civil Rights Under Law, in a statement. Millicent Springs-Campbell is a graduate of Howard who lives in Atlanta. She visited her alma mater two months ago with her daughter, who was recently accepted to the university. She said initially she felt anxiety for students and faculty because Howard’s school grounds are not gated. That quickly turned to anger. “I think it was targeted to threaten the actual legacy of HBCUs,” Springs-Campbell said. “I liken it to when Black churches are threatened. It’s more than just a threat to the physical buildings, but what they stand for.” Despite the threats, she still wants her daughter to attend Howard, if she chooses. “I wouldn’t want one cowardly act by whoever is behind it to persuade her decision in going to the best institution for her.” Howard and Spelman enjoy more notoriety than many other HBCUs due to high-profile alumni and their location in major US cities. But other schools that normally fly under the national radar were also threatened. Rahman Johnson teaches mass communications at Edward Waters University, a HBCU in Jacksonville, Florida, with just over 1,000 students. Johnson received his bachelor’s degree from there, as did his late grandmother. He’s also a doctoral candidate at Jackson State University in Jackson, Mississippi, which also received a bomb threat. He took the dual intimidation personally. “It felt like a gut punch,” Johnson said. “I felt as though I was back living in the time of my grandmother. And while I don’t have the hindrances of her being a Black girl growing up in the south at that time, I felt that we’re in it again.” Johnson said he got a call before 5am alerting him to the threats, but wanted to keep his habit of working out, so he prepared to visit the gym, purposely wearing an Edward Waters University tank top. He said he felt a tinge of worry, but the desire to be an example of courage for his students led him to keep the shirt on. “If someone happened to see me, I did not want my students to even think that I would shrink, or that we should shrink. I am part of the fabric of America, and we cannot allow bigotry or hate from those who don’t understand us or have the intelligence to articulate how they feel, to push us into a corner.” The Rev Janette Wilson, the national executive director of Push for Excellence, founded by the Rev Jesse Jackson, says she sees the bomb threats as part of a “storm of hatred” sweeping the country – a continued reaction to progress made since the civil rights movement. “When you look at the states where the bomb threats occurred, these are southern states, where the states’ rights agenda is being pushed at the highest level, where the criminal justice system hasn’t come into the 20th century,” said Wilson. “There’s a desire to create a level of fear on those campuses and discourage students from attending HBCUs, where most of our Black doctors, lawyers, engineers, computer scientists and business people graduated, and even our outstanding athletes historically attended.” PUSH provides scholarships to students attending HBCUs. She believes the threats seek to create fear and discourage Black students from organizing and mobilizing their voting power. “If these students on these campuses decide to register and vote where they attend school, they will change the character and culture of state legislatures that deny them reductions of student loan debt, changes in tuition and access to the ballot in those states. We will change the south, and therefore, change America,” she said. Johnson agrees, adding that the threats have only made his commitment to his students, and being part of the HBCU legacy, stronger. “I hope my generation has done the work to empower them, to let them know they’re supported,” he said.It is a dangerous game reading into first impressions under any Everton manager, particularly one thrown into a fight for Premier League survival, but Goodison Park was a place transformed under Frank Lampard. The new Everton manager enjoyed a dream start and the biggest win of any managerial debut in the club’s history as Brentford were brushed aside in the FA Cup fourth round. The first chants of “Super Frank, super Frankie Lampard” reverberated around the old stadium in the 65th minute, shortly after Mason Holgate had restored Everton’s two-goal lead against Thomas Frank’s team. Yerry Mina, Richarlison and Andros Townsend were also on the scoresheet in a performance of intensity, character and enterprise that had Goodison embracing Lampard and his intentions long before the final whistle. Brentford only fleetingly threatened to upset the script and were ultimately overrun. “Today was really special, something I will never forget,” Lampard said. “There is a lot of work ahead of us but I can’t help but get caught up in the emotion of today. I can only thank the fans for their support of me from the moment I walked out of the tunnel and their support of the team throughout the game.” A banner was draped over the front of the upper Gwladys Street End before kick off that read “Best of luck Frank”. Another, featuring Howard Kendall, the trophies won during his reign and “Nothing but the best, our motto is our standard” provided a little reminder of what is expected of any Everton manager. Premier League survival, however, is the immediate priority for the club’s sixth permanent manager in under six years. “I need to calm things down now and work towards the league games we have coming up but today was important,” Lampard said. “I wanted us to have more possession and support each other better in possession. We are an Everton team and we must also be aggressive, and that was the base today.” It was a competitive, physical contest from the outset with both sides struggling to create clear-cut opportunities, although the improvement in Everton’s desire for the ball and willingness to take the game to Brentford was immediate. Incisive runs from Demarai Gray and Anthony Gordon were a prominent feature of the hosts’ display. Lampard suffered an early setback when Ben Godfrey, who started on the left of a back three, pulled up with a serious looking hamstring injury. His replacement, Mina, made his mark in emphatic style 17 minutes later. Everton’s initial threat came from distance with Gordon curling a left-footed shot just over David Raya’s crossbar and André Gomes’s 25-yard drive forcing the goalkeeper to tip over. Raya was making his first appearance since sustaining a knee injury against Leicester in October. It was also four months since Everton last scored a game’s opening goal. That sorry statistic was rectified from the corner that resulted from Gomes’s effort. Gray delivered an inswinger with pace and Mina, despite nearly having his shirt pulled off his back, planted an unstoppable header past Raya for the first goal of the Lampard era. New signings Dele Alli and Donny van de Beek were introduced to the home crowd during the half-time interval. The two midfielders are ineligible for the FA Cup but will be in contention for Tuesday’s critical Premier League visit to Newcastle. Everton should arrive at St James’ Park with confidence renewed. Richarlison gave Lampard’s new team the comfort of a two-goal lead within minutes of the restart. Played in behind Pontus Jansson by a perfectly weighted chip from Allan, the Brazil international beat the advancing Raya with a composed finish under pressure. Brentford reacted well. Ivan Toney instigated a feud with Jordan Pickford all afternoon but was on the receiving end when felled by the England goalkeeper as he raced on to Christian Nørgaard’s pass into the Everton area. Michael Oliver pointed to the spot and, as in Brentford’s 1-0 win over Rafael Benítez’s sorry team in November, Toney confidently beat Pickford with a cool penalty. At other points this season Everton and their uncertain defence may have folded under pressure. Not this time. Holgate restored the hosts’ two-goal cushion when glancing in at close range after Mina had headed on another dangerous corner from Gray. The corner arrived after Gordon dispossessed Mads Bech Sørensen to create a chance out of nothing for Gomes. Just the kind of spirit and tenacity that Lampard craves, and had been lacking under Benítez. In stoppage time Townsend sealed an impressive victory with a low finish after a neat move involving fellow substitutes Cenk Tosun and Alex Iwobi. Goodison felt a different place.And that’s it from me. Thanks for your company and your correspondence, especially to the reader I’d better not name who wrote this around 3.15pm. “Lampard at Everton shows that owners and decision makers know nothing about soccer. Pathetic... Lampard has no clue about managing.” I take that as a sign that none of us, to paraphrase William Golding, have much of a clue about anything. See you later for Spurs-Brighton, kicking off at 8. That’s a big relief for Southampton. They’ll have to bounce back from a draining 124 minutes as they face two tough away games in the next week: at Spurs on Wednesday and Man United on Saturday lunchtime. So Southampton survive a scare and Coventry go home empty-handed. “Hate to be Mr Negative here,” says Espen Bommen, “but for all the heroics of the lower and non league teams today, and the magic of the cup, the biggest shock of the day is that one PL team beat another PL team. [Norwich winning at Wolves.] I’m afraid that shows the gap between top and bottom.” Maybe! But didn’t Kidderminster do well? Meanwhile, here’s the match report of the day: Andy Hunter at Goodison Park to see Frank Lampard’s thumping start. And now Coventry have missed a good chance. Will they get another? There’s one minute left... It’s a goal from Kyle Walker-Peters! It’s an assist for Broja! It’s good management by Hasenhuttl! And it’s the third last-gasp heartbreak today for an underdog that had taken the lead. Along with the magic, there’s a fair amount of cruelty in the Cup. Everton’s goals have just been on the Beeb. Mina’s was simple, a fine corner by Demarai Gray, poorly defended. Holgate’s was a gift, a misplaced back-header from a Brentford defender that Holgate couldn’t avoid. In between those two, Richarlison raced onto a through ball from Allan and then slowed things down again with a lovely cushioned lob. And the best of the lot was the last, from Andros Townsend, whipped in at the near post from 12 yards after some lovely interplay on the right. Along the way, Everton conceded one, a cool penalty from Ivan Toney, but the big picture on the football pages tomorrow will surely be Frank Lampard punching the air. The game at St Mary’s reaches the 105-minute mark, and as yet there’s not much happening in extra time. The brightest spark has been Armando Broja, the Chelsea loanee who is on for Theo Walcott and looking as if he’s taken those strictures from Ralph Hasenhuttl to heart. More from our Scottish correspondent. “Disappointingly,” says Simon McMahon, “Dundee United were unable to break down a St Johnstone side who played most of the second half with 10 men. It finished goalless in Perth. It’s not all bad news, however, as Ross County came from behind to beat Dundee 2-1 at Dens. And Livingston’s 2-1 win against Aberdeen puts United into the top six.” Team of the day so far: Norwich, who went to Molineux and won – not many clubs do that. Team of the day from a lower division: Peterborough, who upset the odds against QPR to go into the fifth round for the first time since 1986. Manager of the day: Frank Lampard, who led Everton to a 4-1 romp against a team above them in the league, Brentford. A fine cup run comes to an end as Palace see off Hartlepool, but the 5,000 fans who made a long, long trip to London today are still singing. An even huger result for Norwich. A huge result for the Posh. A barnstorming start for Frank Lampard. An efficient win for Stoke, stage-managed by Tyrese Campbell with two assists. The Yorkshire derby finishes with Huddersfield fans dreaming of 1922 all over again. Fulham go down, but at least they didn’t concede six like Leicester, or seven like Leeds. Yes, it’s another half-hour at St Mary’s. Well we have a late goal... and it’s Andros Townsend, scoring a cracker and placing the cherry on the top of Frank Lampard’s cake. We need a few late goals. Come on Fulham, you’ve got three up your sleeve, haven’t you? There’s about ten minutes to go, allowing for a bit of added time, and as it stands the only match heading for extra time is Southampton-Coventry (1-1). A good spot from Rich Jolly, who makes a habit of this. “Richarlison,” he notes on Twitter, “has scored in his first game for Everton under Marco Silva, Duncan Ferguson, Rafa Benitez &amp; Frank Lampard.” “Lovely start for Frank,” says Mary Waltz. “A plea from an Everton fan suffering from football PTSD. He has a two-year contract. When the first losing streak occurs, which it will, please no Fire Frank campaigns, at least for two years.” So you’re saying that a manager’s contract should mean what it says? Radical. Ricky-Jade Jones doubles Peterborough’s lead. The FA Cup is fulfilling one of its essential functions – giving hope and a bit of glory to clubs in the relegation zone. A goal for Jacob Brown and a second assist for Tyrese Campbell, son of Kevin. Cricket latest: James Rew, England’s new star, falls for an agonising but admirable 95 in the U19 World Cup final against India. The collapse instantly resumes as England subside from 184 for seven to 189 all out, but Rew and James Sales (34 not out) have given them a sliver of hope. A blunder in the Brentford defence gives Mason Holgate a chance he can’t miss. And Frank Lampard has a two-goal cushion. Stuart Armstrong drags Southampton level with a screamer from 25 yards. Assist by Adam Armstrong. No details yet, but good to hear. Mahrez gets his second and surely sees to it that not even Fulham can turn this one round. To be fair to them, though, the assist, by Kevin De Bruyne again, came from a counter-attack. According to Sky, that is. The fan is receiving attention in the stand, and we still hope they’re OK. Game on! Ivan Toney scores a pen against Everton for the second time this season. A goal at the wrong end! Riyad Mahrez puts a pen away as the gods of sport refuse to play ball. One of the players is receiving medical attention. I do hope he’s OK. New-manager bounce! Time for a breather, so I’m going to leave you with a factoid. “Ilkay Gundogan,” says Statman Dave on Twitter, “has been directly involved in 5 goals in the FA Cup since 2020. No Manchester City player has more: 3 goals 2 assists.” Another email! This one is from a Norwich supporter. “Thanks for the goal Tim!” says Rod Wooden. My pleasure... let’s try it again. Your turn next, Fulham! All round the country the fans troop out of their seats, hoping the tills in the bars are working. We have at least one goal everywhere and no draws. Top of the class so far: Coventry. Man City 2-1 Fulham Peterborough 1-0 QPR Southampton 0-1 Coventry Stoke 1-0 Wigan Wolves 0-1 Norwich Everton 1-0 Brentford Palace 2-0 Hartlepool Huddersfield 1-0 Barnsley Right on cue! Kenny McLean gives Norwich fans one of their best moments of a tough season. In search of some action, I turn to the cricket – the Under-19 World Cup final. England, facing India, collapsed in textbook fashion, to 61 for six, but now they’re 158 for seven, with James Rew making 81 not out. We haven’t had a goal anywhere for a full eight minutes. Come on Norwich, it’s your turn next. That injury has a silver lining! Yerry Mina, on as a sub for Ben Godfrey, scores with a header from a corner. The Lampard era is off and running. So nearly a third of the way through normal time, only two of our eight games are goalless. And they’re both all-Prem affairs: Everton-Brentford and Wolves-Norwich. More good news for the underdogs! Albeit from lower down the same division. Joe Ward gives Posh the lead. The dream is dying for Hartlepool as Michael Olise doubles Palace’s lead. Another shock lead! Viktor Gyökeres gives Coventry, from the Championship, the lead at St Mary’s. Huddersfield take the lead through Duane Holmes. They’ve been in such good form lately, it could be 1922 all over again. Josh Maja gives Stoke the lead against the 2013 winners. A blow for Frank Lampard – not a goal, but Ben Godfrey is going off with an injury, to be replaced by Yerry Mina. This game isn’t hanging around. Kevin De Bruyne crosses and John Stones scores with a header that is attracting rave reviews. You have to feel for Fabio Carvalho. Noooo!!! Just like in the Chelsea and West Ham games, David allows Goliath to get a goal back. And this time it’s only taken a minute. The first goal of the 3pm kick-offs wasn’t Carvalho – it was Marc Guehi, rather less thrillingly unless you’re a Palace fan. The magic of the Cup. We are all Fulham fans now. An email! It’s a little off-topic, but in a good way. “Afternoon Tim,” says Simon McMahon. “No jam, just bread and butter league action in Scotland today. Big game at the foot of the SPL as Ross County travel to rock bottom Dundee looking to open up an eight point gap over the Dens Park side. Dundee United make the short journey to Perth to face St. Johnstone, who sit second bottom on goal difference. Wins for United and Ross County will see a bit of daylight open up between everyone else and the bottom two. It could even be the day when they officially become ‘detached’ at the foot of the table. The other games today are Hibs v St. Mirren and Livingston v Aberdeen.” Thanks! Our eight 3pm games have kicked off. West Ham have squeezed through to the fifth round... and Chelsea join them. They’ve done it again! A tap-in for Jarrod Bowen, an absolute heartbreaker for Kidderminster. And finally, Stoke entertain Wigan. Stoke: Bursik; Allen, Tymon, Harwood-Bellis; Wilmot, Thompson, Maja, Wright-Phillips, Moore; Campbell, Powell. Wigan: Jones; Power, Watts, Kerr, Bennett; Rea, Bayliss; Edwards, McGrath, Massey; Magennis. Meanwhile, on the south coast ... It’s Theo Walcott! Southampton: Caballero; Valery, Lyanco, Stephens; Livramento, Diallo, Ward-Prowse, Small; Walcott, Long, Armstrong. Coventry: Moore; Hyam, Rose, Salter; Eccles, Hamer, Sheaf, Bidwell; O’Hare, Gyökeres, Maatsen. In the East Midlands, only 18 places separate these two. It’s shaping up as the battle of the back threes. Peterborough Benda; Kent, Edwards, Beevers; Ward, Fuchs, Norbum, Mumba; Poku; Clarke-Harris, Marriott. QPR: Marshall; Dunne, Dickie, Sanderson; Odubajo, Johansen, Amos, Wallace; Chair; Dykes, Austin. At Kidderminster, West Ham have just had a goal disallowed! But I’ll press on with the team news. This is a tasty tie, with 71 places between the two clubs. Crystal Palace: Butland; Ward, Kelly, Guéhi, Mitchell; Gallagher, Milivojevic, Schlupp; Olise, Mateta, Eze. Hartlepool: Killip; Sterry, Liddle, Byme, Odusina, Ferguson; Morris, Crawford, Shelton, Molyneux; Bogle. Here’s a game that can’t be ruined by the big boys. Though Huddersfield did win the Cup a hundred years ago. Huddersfield: Blackman; Ávila, Pearson, Sarr, Ruffels; Holmes, Eiting, Russell; Thomas, Rhodes, Koroma. Barnsley: Walton; Williams, Andersen, Halme, Kitching; Palmer, Gomes, Bassi; Marsh, Leya, Styles. Noooo!!! Marcos Alonso spoils the fun with a right-foot shot after a pass from Kai Havertz. And VAR refuses to come to Plymouth’s rescue. Chelsea are still being held by Plymouth after 100 minutes. Whoever is managing Chelsea in Thomas Tuchel’s absence with Covid could do with pulling a rabbit from a hat. So they send on Saul Niguez for Mason Mount... hmmm. Brentford team to play at Everton: Raya; Ajer, Jansson, Sørensen; Roerslev, Jensen, Nørgaard, Janelt, Henry; Canós, Toney. Subs: Fernández, Lössl, Dasilva, Ghoddos, Onyeka, Baptiste, Stevens, Oyegoke, Young-Coombes. So it’s extra time for West Ham at Kidderminster. And for Plymouth at Chelsea: both games are 1-1. It was a solo run into the box from Rice, a shimmy and a slam into the top of the net. And a shining example of a top player taking charge and getting his team out of a tight corner. Are you watching, Man United? Declan Rice does the trick! And breaks a few hearts. Fulham team to play Man City: unlike some people, they believe in having a striker. Gazzaniga, Williams, Adarabioyo, Ream, Bryan, Chalobah, Reed, Wilson, Carvalho, Kebano, Mitrovic. Subs: Rodak, Hector, Cairney, Knockaert, Cavaleiro, Muniz, Seri, Onomah, Mawson. Oh, and Plymouth are drawing 1-1 at Chelsea. As most teams do these days. In bigger news, Kidderminster Harriers are 1-0 up against West Ham, with five minutes of normal time to go. You can follow that game here with Scott Murray. Frank Lampard has named his first Everton XI. He seems to be keeping his new broom close to his chest. Everton v Brentford: Pickford, Mykolenko, Coleman, Keane, Holgate, Godfrey, Allan, Gomes, Gordon, Gray, Richarlison. Subs: Begovic, Branthwaite, Gbamin, Iwobi, Kenny, Mina, Patterson, Tosun, Townsend. Man City team v Fulham: Steffen, Walker, Stones, Ake, Cancelo, Fernandinho (capt), De Bruyne, Gundogan, Mahrez, Foden, Grealish. Subs: Ederson, Dias, Sterling, Zinchenko, Laporte, Rodrigo, Bernardo, Delap, McAtee. Afternoon everyone and welcome to all the games the TV executives didn’t fancy fun of the fourth round. It’s the FA Cup, the only form of levelling up that actually means anything. We’ve got the league leaders against the Championship leaders! We’ve got a Yorkshire derby! We’ve got Frank Lampard’s first attempt at sorting out the shambles formerly known as Everton! And all this on the 50th anniversary of one of the great upsets. “Happy Ronnie Radford day,” said a tweet this morning from Richard Whitehead, whose book The Cup comes out next month and looks like a winner. Radford it was who scored the screamer that brought non-league Hereford level with the mighty Newcastle in a replay on 5 February 1972. The clip is worth watching in full not just for Radford’s moment of magic, but for the swamp he had to play on, the vast expanse of Malcolm Macdonald’s sideburns, and the discovery that John Motson was young once. We have eight games kicking off at 3pm, so I’ll be back very soon.The business secretary, Kwasi Kwarteng, reportedly blocked the appointment of a leading academic to run a £200m economic research body because he was allegedly considered too leftwing. Jonathan Michie, the president of Oxford University’s Kellogg College and a professor of innovation and knowledge exchange, was selected by an independent selection panel to be executive chair of the government-funded Economic and Social Research Council (ESRC), reports the Financial Times. But last month Michie, who was awarded an OBE for services to education this year, was reportedly vetoed by Kwarteng, who has restarted the selection process, infuriating academics who fear the body becoming politicised, according to the newspaper. The Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy (BEIS) said none of the candidates were “deemed suitable”. A BEIS spokesperson said: “While the initial recruitment campaign returned a strong field of candidates, none were ultimately deemed suitable. Another campaign will start shortly with a view to attracting a wider range of candidates.” Boris Johnson’s government has been accused of stoking culture wars, attacking so-called “woke” culture and attempting to stifle debate at cultural institutions. A Kwarteng ally told the FT that the business secretary feared that Michie, who has connections to the circle of former Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn, had previously been a member of the Communist party. Another reportedly said the business secretary was concerned about ESRC impartiality under Michie’s leadership and “what sort of research” it would finance. Michie did not immediately respond to the Guardian’s request for comment. A person who knows him told the FT that Michie did not belong to any political party. Another reportedly said he did not hold extreme political views and has a history of being strictly non-political in academic roles over 30 years. In 1989 Michie wrote a book, Beyond the Casino Economy, with Seumas Milne, an old university friend and Corbyn’s former head of communications. The ESRC receives more than £200m a year of government funding for academic research in the social sciences. A spokesperson for the ESRC declined to comment, saying appointments are dealt with by BEIS. But they confirmed that the council has been led by an interim executive chair, Alison Park, since January last year.Two steps forward, one step back. That has been the pattern for Great Britain’s mixed doubles curlers so far at these Olympic Games. But despite a 7-5 loss to Italyon Saturday, Bruce Mouat and Jen Dodds believe they can make a medal push – with the help of the “super powers” in Mouat’s Team GB cap. Mouat decided to start wearing the cap in matches after mixed performances in the opening three games, and he believes his form is now coming to the boil as a result. “It’s a wee bit of a superstition,” he said. “I didn’t play very well in the first three games and I was quite disappointed, so I put the hat on and it has got super powers, apparently. “Potentially I play better with it on. Maybe it’s a vanity thing, my hair is all over the place. It just covers up a bad-hair day and people don’t worry about my hair, so I don’t worry about it.” Mouat said the idea of wearing a hat had first occurred to him in the Champions Cup final in the grand slam bubble last year. “The commentators were slagging me off for having quiffs and stuff in my hair,” he said. “The next day we were playing and I put a hat on, and someone made a Twitter account with it. I just kept it going and I think there are more Twitter followers on that than my own account now.” But while Mouat and Dodds are playing better, they know that one false step could end their dream of a mixed curling medal. After the Italy defeat they stand fourth, with four wins and two losses in their round-robin games. Two wins from their remaining three against China, Norway and the United States will surely be enough to make it to the semi-finals. “We’re pretty happy with how we’re doing,” he said. “It looks like a lot of teams are beating each other. The ideal situation is that we win all three of our remaining games and then we’re on seven, which would be nice. Six is the goal, though, and two wins out of the next three would be amazing.” Elsewhere, there were a series of disappointing British performances on the first day of the Games, including from Katie Ormerod in the snowboard slopestyle. Four years ago in Pyeongchang, Ormerod broke her heel in a fall that required seven operations. This time, in temperatures of -20C, she froze in the women’s slopestyle qualification, finishing 19th to miss out on the final. But the 24-year-old remained upbeat after two disappointing runs of 47.38 and 44.01, mainly because it meant so much to her to become an Olympian. “I stood at the top before my first run when I was about to drop in and I was like: ‘Wow, this is my moment, I’ve become an Olympian, finally’,” she said. “It was a really special moment and just to land that first run and get down, I’ve never felt a feeling like that. It was pure joy, and I’m so proud of myself for everything I’ve gone through, to finally get there again.” There was no joy either in the short track speed skating as Kathryn Thomson crashed within 15 seconds in the women’s 500m, Niall Treacy had a spill in the men’s 1000m, and his brother Farrell finished last after he thought he heard the bell and attempted a sprint finish a lap too early. Farrell revealed that he overcame “crazy anxiety” to reach the starting line in Beijing after testing positive for coronavirus in mid-January. “I got Covid before I came, and with the protocols in China, it was looking very unlikely that I was even going to be here,” said the 26-year-old, who made his Olympic Games debut in Pyeongchang in 2018. “Ten days of isolation is not fantastic when you’ve got the Games coming up, and I only came out here on Tuesday. Even before then I was having Covid tests every day to try to get negatives.” Rupert Staudinger sits 24th after the first two luge runs in the men’s singles, but he was able to make headlines for different reasons by wearing a special helmet in tribute to his former team-mate and three-times Olympian AJ Rosen, who died of cancer in December. “He played a huge part in my career and I decided that it’s a little thing to keep his memory alive,” said Staudinger, whose helmet said “rest in peace AJ”. “He was such a great guy. I’m a little bit speechless because it’s ever so sad that he’s not here any more. I had to get special permission to have the message on the helmet; it had to go through the IOC. But that wasn’t a problem.”Louise Welsh’s intensely atmospheric debut novel, The Cutting Room, won prizes and plaudits when it was published in 2002. Its protagonist is Rilke, a gay auctioneer and accidental sleuth who stumbles upon a disturbing cache of photographs. Now, 20 years later, comes an equally compelling sequel, The Second Cut, in which Rilke must navigate Grindr, queerwashing and Covid restrictions, as well as murky goings-on in a crumbling mansion and the sudden death of an old friend. Welsh, who was born in 1965, is a professor of creative writing and former antiquarian bookseller. Like Rilke, she lives in Glasgow with her partner, the writer Zoë Strachan. Why did you wait so long to write a sequel? You have to have the right story, and I guess I didn’t really feel I had anything to add. The Cutting Room changed my life, so I didn’t want to do something rubbish. What made you feel differently? I think enough has changed now. I wrote that first book with hysterical laughter and a lot of anger during the campaign to defeat clause 28. Now we’ve had equal marriage for a long time, hate laws... A lot has changed in the world of auctions too. Also, something nice happened: the Saltire first book award did a best-winner-of-30-years prize [the Most Inspiring Saltire First Book award], and the public voted for The Cutting Room. It was just another little shove. How was it to re-encounter Rilke? It was really good fun. I didn’t go back and read the previous book – you don’t want to ventriloquise something you did earlier – but we share some memories, Rilke and I, about the history of this city. Another pleasure was that I got permission to think about the fabric of stuff, because Rilke is an auctioneer [both novels involve him being called to do a house clearance]. When he picks something up, he knows where it came from, and there’s detective work in that. Do you and Rilke share any characteristics? He’s tall, he’s thin, he’s male – my opposite in terms of physicality. And I think he’s better than me: he sees something wrong and goes and fixes it. We do share a sense of humour. Did you plot much before you started writing? It was like driving with the lights off – you have scenes in mind but there’s a lot of instinct. I knew I wanted to start off with the two Bobbys’ wedding [Rilke’s friends have the same name]. People still have ideas that queer lives are a bit transitory; they confuse it with just being completely sexual – chance would be a fine thing! And so I wanted that image of a relationship that’s enduring, because Rilke won’t have that. To an extent, the genre demands that; if he settles down, it’s a different book. Does being described as a crime writer make you feel boxed-in? It’s a hugely broad church so I’m happy. Along with love stories and ghost stories, crime writing is an essential of life. Love, fear, justice – it’s always been there. I guess the fact that at times it’s been a denigrated genre means that the person on the street is empowered to pick it up, and that makes it a great political tool. Each writer decides their own ethics too, so my books don’t have that many murders in them, and they tend not to have the naked, tortured, female body. Do you worry about the impact of images like that? It’s not my favourite image. At the same time we know that women are being murdered, so how do we represent the world if we don’t represent this torture, which we know some people enjoy and find energising for some reason? I think Denise Mina is really good at engaging with misogynistic aspects of society. You can feel the political commitment and yet she’s expressing it within a story that people will want to read. It’s good advocacy work. How integral is Scottishness to your writing? Identity is funny because you don’t go to your desk thinking, Here I am, a lesbian Scottish novelist, writing at the start of the 21st century… But I do inhabit that landscape and it’s the language that I draw on. You’ve a wall of books behind you (we are on Zoom). How do you organise them? It’s very willy-nilly, like a reflection of my brain. You can’t find anything. We’re moving to the apartment downstairs and so maybe we’ll crack it this time. As an ex-bookseller, are you good at packing books? The thing is you get distracted, because you think, I remember reading that. Luckily, I’ve got a very strong friend who’s going to help. I won’t be able to watch because he runs with the boxes and I catastrophise – I can see accidents everywhere. What was the last really great book you read? I really liked Pat Barker’s The Women of Troy. The things it tells you about war and consistency of the way in which women in particular are treated – she’s an incredible writer. I also thought Ai Weiwei’s 1,000 Years of Joys and Sorrows was great. Has any of your childhood reading stuck with you? All the Robert Louis Stevenson – I think because it was read to me. I used to take out of the library a series of Alfred Hitchcock ghost stories with very lurid covers, and I still remember some of those. That’s possibly why I write the kind of things that I do. What do I associate reading with? Adventure, getting frightened or sad – an emotional response, all that stuff that makes the blood run faster. What’s the last book you put down without finishing? I haven’t finished One Thousand and One Nights yet. I started it because I was interested in the story of The Three Apples, which is about a woman whose body is dismembered, so it’s a really early iteration of that image we were talking about. Do you have a favourite literary hero? I love Sarah Waters’s books, and her female characters – she always has someone who is heroic and admirable and flawed enough for you to like. I’ve also been thinking about Rebecca recently – which I don’t think is the best book in the world, but who wouldn’t want a friend like Mrs Danvers? She’s so very loyal and passionate. • The Second Cut by Louise Welsh is published by Canongate (£14.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyJohnny Sexton spoke of the relief his Ireland team felt at claiming maximum points from their first game of the Six Nations. Having lost the first two games of their campaign last year, Ireland opened with a resounding 29-7 win over the champions Wales in Dublin. “I would have snapped your hand off at the start of the game,” said the Ireland captain. “Big time, against the reigning champions, to come away with five points. “When I looked out of the window this morning I knew it wasn’t going to be pretty. Thankfully, the rain stayed away for the most part, but the wind played its part in both halves really. “We knew if we could get a good foothold in the game in the first half playing into the elements, that second half we’d have the breeze behind us and we could use it to our advantage.” Last season, Ireland opened with defeat in Cardiff, a match that launched Wales’s successful championship. A week later, they lost at home to France, where they travel next. “I can’t tell you how demoralising the first game was last year,” said Sexton. “The triple crown was gone, the grand slam gone. You’re up against it to win the championship. That’s what we’re pleased about most. “We feel there’s plenty of stuff to brush up on next week. France away is arguably one of the biggest tests in world rugby. We need to be at our very best and we need to learn some lessons from today, even in victory. We did that over November, and hopefully we can continue in that vein.” After the low of that second defeat, Ireland ended up third in the table and embarked upon a winning run that now stands at nine and includes the scalps of England and New Zealand. “There’s always been confidence in the group, even when times were low in the first two games last year,” said Sexton. “We weren’t too far away and thankfully we’ve turned things around results-wise.” For Wales, there were few positives. Josh Adams was shown yellow a few minutes into the second half, but Wales were 17-0 down at that point – and another try down when he returned. Wayne Pivac was philosophical. “We made 100-odd tackles in the first half,” he said. “When you are defending for long periods like that, it makes it very difficult when we do get our hands on the ball. “It is certainly a game we will go away and improve on very quickly.. We always look at performance; you can look at the result. After that many tackles, a bit of fatigue does set in. It happens to any side. “The boys came back very strongly in that last quarter of the game and kept fighting towards the end, which is what we want.” Wales were not awarded a penalty until the 54th minute. “There was a lot of assistant referee interjection from one side of the field. He saw it a certain way and we might disagree with some of those calls, in particular the scrum. They see it the way they do and we have to go with those decisions at the time.”You can tell there’s a World Cup on next year: Ireland are hitting their peak. Still, this was an ominous statement of intent by Andy Farrell’s side at a blustery and bellicose Aviva Stadium: standards set, gauntlets thrown down. The trip to Paris already feels like the potential crux of this tournament, which feels like a faintly ridiculous statement to make after 80 minutes of play. But for Ireland and their long-agonising supporters, it may just be time to start believing the hype. It was a measure of Ireland’s dominance that a normally edgy crowd had begun to relax well before the end. Ten minutes from time the Mexican waves were already swooping around the stadium and a little air had drained from the place. At which point, as if to chide Ireland for their contentment, Taine Basham promptly pilfered a late try after a rare moment of slackness from Tadhg Beirne. Still, the magnificent Beirne had more than earned his little late siesta, and in a way so had Ireland. Certainly you might argue that the scoreline flattered the losers, not the victors. Ireland could have put the game to bed within 20 minutes, but even without the points their supremacy deserved, the way they made Wales suffer during that opening quarter would tell later on. It was a great day for Bundee Aki and Garry Ringrose at centre, for Ronan Kelleher and Tadhg Furlong in the front row, for Andrew Conway and his two tries, for Jack Conan who won a crucial breakdown penalty late in the first half just as Wales were threatening to strike back. Indeed, pretty much the only Irishman who was not enjoying himself was Rob Baloucoune: left out in favour of Mack Hansen, and now forced to watch the debutant rip up the defending Six Nations champions. Doubtless the talented Baloucoune will get a chance to add to his two Ireland caps before long. But here it was Hansen who seized his chance and seized the moment, earning the man-of-the-match award (probably out of sentiment as much as anything else) and almost certainly an extended run in the side. He made 94 metres, more than anyone else, two clean breaks and the sumptuous assist for Aki’s early try. But more important than the raw numbers was the spirit of enterprise, the sense of invention, an approach in ideal harmony with Farrell-ball and its preference for scruffy, virtuoso creativity. Farrell likes his wings to play “untidy”, to come in off the flank and start directing unstructured play in more central areas. Hansen fits this brief perfectly: according to Andy Friend, Hansen’s coach at Connacht, his preferred position is at full-back or fly-half. Now it was Hansen flinging the ball from midfield to Aki plunging over in the corner: a kind of Total Farrell. Like all the best debuts, it owed itself to a tiny stroke of fortune. It came with barely a minute on the clock. Deep in his own territory, Jonny Sexton tried a little bunt-kick to try to get Ireland going. Only it bounced off Josh Adams, making his first start at centre for Wales. In that moment, perhaps, the entire fate of the game might have turned. The ricochet could have gone anywhere. It could have bounced up into Adams’s hands, from which he might have had an easy score and doubtless a much easier afternoon. Instead, it looped to Hansen, whose first act in senior international rugby was thus to sprint 60 yards up the wing and bring the crowd to their feet. Would Ireland still have won? Yes, probably. But it was instructive and perhaps a little poignant to see how wildly the fates of Hansen and Adams – the two big selection calls for this game – would diverge from that moment on. Hansen set up the early score, was at the heart of Ireland’s attacking engine, helped to create Conway’s crucial third try by selling Dan Biggar an empty pair of arms and taking him out of the game. Meanwhile, Adams would find himself badly exposed for Ireland’s second try, gave away a soft penalty in the build-up to the third and was then put in the sin bin for a brainless shoulder charge on Sexton. You can always tell a well-oiled team from how smoothly it accommodates newcomers or players in new roles. In this respect Ireland look brilliantly drilled: aggressive in defence and maverick in attack, a team where everyone knows their role and new players can hit the ground running, but still has room for growth. For Wales, it is not yet the time for introspection and obsequies. Lose to Scotland next week, however, and the vultures may just start to circle.Lord Michael Grade has admitted that he has “kept his hat in the ring” for the position of Ofcom chair, after having had “second thoughts” about applying. “I became suspicious of the process, until I realised Sue Gray was back in charge of the appointment after her ‘partygate’ exertions,” the former head of the BBC, 78, said, in an interview in the Telegraph. “I was fully reassured and am now happy to keep my hat in the ring.” The process to fill the senior position at the media regulator has been marred by a series of delays since it began two years ago. After an initial round of interviews failed to produce a suitable candidate, renewed efforts to fill the position are now under way again. The former Daily Mail editor Paul Dacre withdrew his application despite reportedly being Boris Johnson’s preferred candidate, claiming the civil service had influenced the process to his disadvantage because of his right-of-centre “convictions”. Grade also criticised the BBC’s tone in its coverage of certain political events as “too aggressive” and “gleeful and disrespectful”. The Conservative peer, who was appointed by David Cameron in 2010 and has also held top jobs at Channel 4 and ITV, said the corporation was right to hold the government to account and that he was “not questioning [the BBC’s] news values” or objectivity, but stressed that he felt its “macho culture” was “unnecessary”. He told the Daily Telegraph: “They’re right to hold the prime minister to account. I have no problem with that. “But there seems to be a sense at the BBC that if you ask difficult questions politely, your colleagues are going to say: ‘You let him or her off the hook’. “It’s a macho culture. It’s unnecessary, and I don’t like it.”It’s been called a “flawed” project by the productivity commission. It still has no business case or environmental approval and it’s already doubled in cost before construction can begin. But this week the deputy prime minister, Barnaby Joyce, announced the Dungowan dam near Tamworth was “moving ahead”. Together with the New South Wales water minister, Kevin Anderson, Joyce travelled to the old dam to announce the project – one of the biggest water infrastructure projects in the last two decades – again. “Today we’re here at the site of the existing Dungowan dam to announce real progress on this important piece of water infrastructure,” Joyce said. “I’ve never stopped fighting for this project, and this is a big step towards securing water security for Tamworth for years to come.” Anderson said, “Since I have taken up the responsibility of minister for lands and water, I have been pushing hard to get this project moving, to get shovels in the ground, and I believe significant progress has been made in regard to the new Dungowan Dam.” The “progress”, announced in a National party media release rather than a government one, is that a final business case “has been lodged with Infrastructure NSW and Infrastructure Australia”, and that it would be considered by the NSW government in the next month. There is also a shortlist of two contractors, even though the project is yet to clear environmental hurdles and remains only part-funded. However, the much-awaited business case, which will help Tamworth residents and farmers understand what this new dam might mean for the cost of water, will not be made public. A spokesperson for the NSW department of primary industries later clarified that the business case will not be made public “because it includes cabinet and commercially sensitive information.” “It is common practice for the NSW government not to publicly release entire final business cases as they include commercial in confidence information. However, the EIS (environmental impact statement, which contains elements of the final business case) will be publicly exhibited before the end of 2022,” the spokesperson said. The project is one of a suite of contentious dam projects that have been pushed by the NSW Nationals and which the federal government has agreed to fund 50-50. Two of these – Mole Creek dam and Wyangala dam are now on the backburner – after massive cost blowouts. Dungowan dam, however has survived despite documents obtained during a NSW upper house inquiry showing it too has almost doubled in cost from $484m to $870m by November 2020 and that further budget allocations would be needed from both NSW and the federal government to cover the new hefty price tag. The project has strong National party support and even scored a brief visit from the prime minister, Scott Morrison, during the 2019 federal election campaign. For some of the decision makers, the project is very close to home. The dam is located in Joyce’s federal seat of New England and Anderson’s state seat of Tamworth. The chairman of Infrastructure Australia, which comes under Joyce’s portfolio, and who will consider the adequacy of the business case for the project, is former Tamworth mayor, Col Murray. The project to build a new dam downstream from the old Dungowan dam and a new pipeline to the water treatment works was originally proposed because of fears the growing town of Tamworth will run short of water. The town has an allocation from Dungowan, but the lion’s share of water from the dam is used for irrigation and farming. Critics, including the federal government’s productivity commission argue that Tamworth’s future needs could be met by spending just $10m on buying back water entitlements from irrigators. In a scathing assessment in its paper on national water policy, released in 2021, the commission said the proposed dam was a “costly way” to deliver more water to Tamworth. It said the government had failed to consider non-dam options to boost water supply to the area in the original feasibility study, such as water buybacks or investment in water efficiency. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “Unless governments recover the cost of major water infrastructure from users, funding major water infrastructure for the benefit of primary industries would amount to subsidising a commercial operation,” the report warns. The commission estimated authorities will get just $11m a year back on their investment which is now likely to be closer to $1bn. The Dungowan project was originally being run by WaterNSW, which, as a state-owned enterprise, has a mandate to deliver a commercial return to the NSW government. Last year the NSW government quietly moved major water projects back inside the department to “Water Infrastructure” after WaterNSW warned the three proposed dam projects were not viable and would require a budget subsidy or a waiver from its charter. Greens NSW Upper House MP, Cate Faehrmann who chaired an inquiry into NSW dam projects, vowed to ensure that the business case for Dungowan dam would be made public. Her inquiry called on the government to consider other alternatives to boosting Tamworth’s water supply such as managed recharge of aquifers in the area and water efficiency projects. The report pointed out that the project’s proponents had failed to take account of climate change when considering the merits of a bigger dam. The Nature Conservation Council said it was appalling the public would only have access to selected excerpts of the business case. “The government is treating the public like mushrooms – keeping them in the dark and feeding them the bare minimum,” the council’s acting chief executive, Jacqui Mumford, said. In 2020 WaterNSW, which was then in charge of the process, said many of the questions about the dams could be answered once the business cases were complete. “Work on the development of the proposed Dungowan dam is only in its early stages,” a spokesperson said. “Estimates of the practical benefits and additional availability of water for the community of Tamworth will be clearer once the final business case is complete in 2021.” The spokesperson for the NSW department said the EIS, which will be released by the end of 2022 would now provide more limited financial information. “The EIS process allows the community to have their say on the project via public submissions. It also provides transparency to the community without disclosing cabinet and commercially sensitive information.”I read somewhere that our relationship with the ocean is a reflection of how we see ourselves. Which makes sense because growing up I saw the moana as just a body of water. Nothing special. And sadly, that’s how I saw myself. I am a descendant of Ngāpuhi and grew up in Te Tai Tokerau with Waipu beach at my doorstep. I spent hours on the boat out at Langs beach, taking day trips as a child to Ninety Mile beach, the Hokianga, Cape Reinga and all the untamed places my ancestors landed on when they first arrived in Aotearoa. Despite being surrounded by oceans of water growing up, the moana was just somewhere I went to because Mum forced me. Mum said I almost drowned a few times so maybe that’s got something to do with it. I hated the feeling of being cold, of being smashed around by the waves and feeling unsafe. My relationship with the moana began to change as my relationship with myself became more defined. Last year I undertook a full-immersion te reo Māori course and it was the hardest year of my life. I began to unravel hidden parts of myself that I didn’t know existed through learning a language beaten from my ancestors. Emotions began to surface that felt beyond my control and I would hear the whispering to go to the moana. At the time, I couldn’t understand why. I live 40 minutes from Piha beach and it was the middle of winter. It didn’t make sense. I listened to the promptings, jumped in my car, and the rain pounded on the windscreen as I drove to what became my āhuru mōwai – my safe haven. It’s strange to think that despite growing up around the moana and being spoiled with choice, it was a black sand beach tucked away in Waitakere that became my favourite wild place in Aotearoa. You drive along the windy roads, get around the bend and see the cliff-top view of the ocean, and you breathe in the sight and say “woah” to yourself even though you’ve seen it many times. You pull up to the car park and there’s the rock that looks like a lion that reminds you Piha is wild and dangerous and there have been many deaths. The waves are imposing and the rips will get you if you’re not careful. The first time last year I went to Piha, it was pouring down with rain. Tangaroa is the God of the Moana and he is very much a life force. I said a karakia to him and dived into the water. When I came out of the moana, I felt light and connected. It was Tangaroa rejuvenating my spirit. I learnt that when you swim in the moana, you’re surrounded by his love. He caught my hopes and dreams and swept away my tears all at the same time. As the challenges of learning te reo Māori came, I escaped to Piha and gave it all to Tangaroa. It soon became a regular routine. It didn’t matter what emotions I was feeling or what I was going through, Tangaroa seemed to understand me. And slowly, my view of myself began to change. This year I didn’t just reclaim my language – I reclaimed my relationship with myself through the moana. Piha beach is rugged and moody and beautiful and imperfect. It is also a taonga (treasure). And that’s how I see myself now. There’s nowhere else in the world like it. Shilo Kino (Ngā Puhi, Tainui) is a writer, reporter and author of the novel The Pōrangi Boy What’s your favourite wild place? If you would like to contribute to the series, tell us about it in 200 words and send it to newzealand@theguardian.comTen years ago, Australian Amber Bourke was in her early 20s and backpacking through Egypt when she discovered something astonishing about herself. In a little village on the Sinai peninsula she came across a place that taught “free diving” – underwater diving without any breathing apparatus – and decided to give it a try. “I held my breath for four minutes and I dove to 18 metres,” says Bourke, who is the current women’s Australian pool and depth freediving champion. “And both of those things, I didn’t realise was possible.” Bourke had been a champion synchronised swimmer when she was a teenager, so already knew she could hold her breath for several minutes at a time. But discovering free diving “just opened my eyes to the possibilities … and I just got hooked on a feeling of diving deeper and wanted to see what I was capable of and how deep I could go.” By 2018, Bourke had established herself as one of the best competitive free divers in the world, and in deep waters off the coast of the Philippines, was ready to attempt to break the women’s world record in the discipline of “constant weight no fins”. Considered one of the most challenging forms of the sport, a diver descends vertically in deep water on a single breath, using only muscle strength to propel them downwards. With every metre of descent, the compressive pressure on the body increases, shrinking the spaces that contain air. By 30 metres down – the maximum depth physiologists in the early days of the sport thought humans were capable of reaching – the pressure exerted on the body is four times greater than on the surface and the volume of air inside the body has shrunk to one quarter. Once negative buoyancy is reached, the diver begins to freefall. Bourke reached a depth of 73 metres – a world record – but a split second blackout once she reached the surface disqualified her. “If you stay underwater long enough, there’s always the chance that your oxygen will drop to a level where your brain will decide to shut down in order to protect itself from brain damage,” Bourke says. “So, in a way, it’s a good thing … but frustrating at the end of a long dive.” The men’s world record for “constant weight no fins” is 102 metres, taking four minutes and 14 seconds. With fins, it is 131 metres. For the discipline of “static apnea”, where a competitor doesn’t dive but just submerges themselves under water, the longest breath-hold is 11 minutes and 54 seconds. When 100% oxygen is breathed in prior to the attempt, the record is 24 minutes and 37 seconds. Dr Anthony Bain, a vascular physiologist from the University of Windsor in Canada, has researched the physiology of extreme breath-holding – including conducting experiments with elite free divers – and says many of those at the professional level have larger lung volumes than the average person. Studies in native diving populations, for example the Bajau people in south-east Asia, “have also demonstrated larger spleens, which will theoretically allow for longer breath holds via splenic contraction and release of oxygen bound red blood cells”. Primarily, however, the ability to survive while submerged for a prolonged time is a learned skill. According to Bain, studies suggest that elite free divers have “enhanced” their Mammalian Dive Response. Theorised to be an evolutionary adaptation – a vestige from billions of years ago when all life was aquatic – it’s a reflex that’s triggered when a mammal’s face comes into contact with water. It prompts a number of physiological responses that promote survival, such as the slowing of the heart rate and metabolism, and a redirection of blood to vital organs, including to the lungs to bolster them against pressure. While Bourke doesn’t know if she has any innate physiological differences – she has never been tested – she knows that over a decade of training she has learned how to better use the space in her lungs. Even at 70 metres down, she can still “bring in” more air from her lungs. Free diving is gaining popularity as a pastime, with schools popping up along the Australian coastline, but becoming an elite free diver takes patience. Progression is slow – it often takes years to achieve several extra metres in depth, as the body becomes accustomed to pressure. “When I first dove to 30 metres deep, I really felt a lot of pressure on my body, and especially on my chest, it feels like you’re being crushed,” Bourke says. “But now, diving to 70 meters, I don’t feel that pressure at all.” The major adaptation though is psychological: developing a conscious ability to withstand the urge to breathe. According to Bain, an untrained person starts to undergo “involuntary breathing movements” after no longer than two to three minutes underwater, when the “body has barely desaturated with oxygen”. Elite free divers, however, are able to mentally push through this point, holding their breath until they “majorly desaturate their blood of oxygen”. Among free diving instructors, like Clinton Laurence from the Gold Coast, who is also a clinical psychologist, psychological strategies such as mindfulness are key to training. “That is where you observe the thought, ‘I have to breathe’,” he says. “But you just observe it. ‘Yep, there’s that thought again. That’s OK.’ And you just keep going.” Bourke says she enters a “meditative state” by slowing her breathing before she enters the water. Then, “it’s about maintaining that relaxed state, and for me, that’s really about staying in the moment and not thinking too far into the future, because if you think about how long you’re planning to stay under water and how deep you’re planning to dive, then it’s easy to get overwhelmed and to panic.” While the pandemic has stalled most international competitions, Bourke is still training – she does long sessions swimming underwater in the pool around four times a week, plus working out in the gym – alongside her work as an electrician and a free-diving instructor. Once competition resumes, she’ll be back pursuing world records. “When I first started, I was like, ‘I didn’t even know this was humanly possible’, but it’s just amazing what humans can do.”Astacia Stevens wanted to drive a haul truck – the giant yellow vehicles that bring ore from the mines – for Rio Tinto, the equally vast company that controls swathes of the iron-rich Pilbara. But, she told a West Australian parliamentary inquiry, her attempts to move from working for a contractor for Rio to working directly for it and wearing the company logo on her shirt were met with a demand from a superior she have sex with him. The supervisor, who the inquiry gave the code name “A”, “took me off the trucks and took me up to the site lookout in his supervisor vehicle”, Stevens, who now works in an administrative position at Rio, said in a written submission to the parliament. “The lookout is secluded and requires a site pass to access, which A held. At the lookout, whilst in the vehicle, he unzipped his pants and leaned back in his seat. “He was not wearing any underwear and said to me ‘if you want your shirt, you have to get on your knees first’.” She refused, did not get transferred to Rio, and was victimised and fired, she told the inquiry, which is investigating the sexual harassment of women on fly-in-fly-out mine sites. In a report Rio released this week, the company revealed that women who work for it reported 21 incidents of rape, attempted rape or sexual assaults over the past five years. The report, the result of an investigation by the former sex discrimination commissioner Elizabeth Broderick, showed that sexual harassment, bullying and racism is endemic across Rio’s global workforce. It was the latest blow for a company already reeling from its decision in May 2020 to blow up ancient rock shelters at Juukan Gorge, in the Pilbara, in order to mine more iron, the Serbian government’s decision last month to cancel its licence to mine lithium after a community outcry that saw thousands march in the streets, and ongoing controversy over its Oyu Tolgoi project in Mongolia, the cost of which has blown out by billions of dollars after Rio struck a new deal with the government a week ago that it hopes will end a long-running dispute over the country’s share of potential profits from the vast copper deposit. However, the inquiry in WA has shown that Rio is not alone when it comes to failing to provide a workplace free from rape, bullying and harassment. At BHP, in the two years between July 2019 and July 2021, there were 18 cases of rape, attempted rape or what the company called “non-consensual touching of a sexual nature”, the company said in a submission to the inquiry. This included five incidents of rape. Investors, the sex discrimination commissioner and the mining companies themselves say action is needed to curb a culture of sexual assault, sexism, bullying and racism in the industry, especially at mines where workers fly in and out and are often among strangers, far from their homes, friends and family. Debby Blakey, the chief executive of $68bn super fund Hesta, which has been critical of Rio’s management over Juukan Gorge, said Rio had done the right thing by conducting such a comprehensive review and said other mining companies needed to consider whether it was something they should also do. “The findings of the Rio workplace culture report that sexual harassment, racism and bullying were systemic are extremely concerning for investors and potentially point to broader issues across the mining sector,” she said. The sex discrimination commissioner, Kate Jenkins, said: “A broad shift in the culture of the mining industry is urgently needed.” She said the industry was identified as “an industry that required urgent collective action” in the Australian Human Rights Commission’s 2020 Respect@Work report. “I commend Rio Tinto for taking this important step of gathering evidence, acknowledging its role in the harms of sexual harassment and sexual assault in its workplaces and committing to change,” she said. Rio has pledged to implement 26 recommendations made by Broderick to improve the organisation’s culture and make the workplace safer for the groups she found bore the brunt of bullying and discrimination – women, non-white people and LGBTIQ employees. “The report is absolutely confronting, the stories sickening,” Rio’s head of iron ore, Simon Trott, told ABC Radio this week. “We aspire to be a business where everyone is safe, respectful and included, and clearly the report highlights that bullying, sexual harassment, racism, other forms of disrespect, are … right across Rio’s operations around the world.” BHP and the other big player in the Pilbara, Fortescue – where Astacia Stevens told the WA inquiry she also experienced sexual harassment while driving a haul truck for a contractor – have also said they are moving to eliminate toxic behaviour from their sites. “We know incidents of poor behaviour do occur in our business, as they do in the industry and the community more broadly,” a BHP spokesperson said. “We do not tolerate any form of racism, discrimination, harassment or bullying, and we are absolutely committed to eliminating it from our workplaces. We are making progress but we know we have more to do.” Fortescue’s chief executive, Elizabeth Gaines, who is soon to leave her position as one of the few women who run a big miner, said: “There is no place for harassment of any kind at Fortescue or in any workplace, and we continue to take decisive action to ensure our workplaces are safe for everyone.” The sentiments are noble but it is clear the industry has a long way to go. Fearful to speak out Broderick found problems across the global Rio workforce, but the mining camps where workers fly or drive in and stay on site were among the worst workplaces, with 56% of women she surveyed who worked at them saying they were bullied and 43% reporting sexual harassment. Women Broderick’s team interviewed who don’t work directly for Rio but are employed by one of the company’s many contractors also said they faced extra abuse. “The shut crew are groping you as you are taking your trolley around the camp,” one cleaner who worked for a Rio contractor told Broderick’s team. “Every day there is sexual harassment to women bar staff,” another said. A separate survey of FIFO workers in WA, conducted by union group the Western Mine Workers Alliance and submitted to the parliamentary inquiry, found 22% of women had been offered career advancement or other work benefits in return for sex and 22.9% had been sexually assaulted at work. “I will not go into the crib room at all,” one female Rio employee who responded to the union survey said. “I bring all my own food. I have experienced and witnessed so much leering and sexual comments. I have seen a man watch porn on bus and plane. I have found porn magazine in a truck. I have had underwear stolen. I have had a male try get into my room.” She said a woman on her crew “was bashed by a male colleague”. Bystanders did not report it, she said. “People were saying she got what she deserved.” All the big miners have systems in place that are supposed to allow employees to make complaints about violence, sexual harassment and bullying and have them resolved in a confidential way. But Broderick’s report and evidence to the parliamentary hearing shows many staff are fearful to speak out and have little faith in company systems. Kerin Collins, who told the inquiry she was bullied while working as an equipment maintenance trainer at BHP, said the company’s complaints system, Ethics Point, was better described as “Ethics Point (Less)” and a “spill kit for complaints” designed to “control, contain, clean up”. “It’s not a place with independent, ethical investigators looking at your complaint and making sure BHP are adhering to their own charter values, it’s just a website being hosted by a third party where you enter data and without any third party interference, the unseen ‘ones and zeros’ go straight into the hands of BHP,” she said in a submission to the inquiry. “Often complaints get handed back to the same leadership team in the same department and they investigate their own leadership personnel.” BHP said that since 2019 allegations of sexual harassment have been investigated by a specialist central team, which is separate from other business units. “This change was introduced in recognition of the need to enhance our investigation processes in order to improve reporting and increase the confidence of, and support for, impacted persons in our investigations,” it said in its submission to the WA inquiry. Broderick found that at Rio, harmful behaviour was tolerated or normalised and “harmful behaviour by serial perpetrators is often an open secret”. “Employees believe that there is little accountability, particularly for senior leaders and so called ‘high performers’ who are perceived to avoid significant consequences for harmful behaviour.” Mick Buchan, the WA secretary of the CFMEU, blamed many of the cultural problems at FIFO sites across the industry on the practice of “motelling” or “hot-bedding”, where employees do not have the same room for the duration of their work on site but are moved around so that the company uses space as efficiently as possible. “A huge step would be to go back to that community feel where once you land on a job, you stay in that room for the duration of that job so you can build up your own community,” he told the WA inquiry. He also attacked the increased use of labour hire and contractors, saying mining companies were using them to relieve themselves of their responsibilities. “You have got to the point now where some of them start up their own labour hire companies and some elements, so you may get to wear the shirt, but you do not get all the benefits,” he said. “You can be let go in a text message with a day’s notice on either side, so it puts all that extra pressure on you if you have got an issue, whether it be a safety issue or anything, to just keep your mouth shut and just do what you are there to do.” Ending culture of secrecy The weight of evidence has forced mining companies to take action that so far includes reducing the amount of alcohol available at FIFO camps, increasing security measures, beefing up complaints investigation and giving managers more training. But companies also need to abandon a culture of secrecy, Jenkins said. Already, both Rio and BHP have ruled out using non-disclosure agreements to gag victims of assault or harassment from speaking out after negotiating a settlement with the company. “Rio Tinto commissioning and publishing the results of its review is a significant shift from the common approach of denial, secrecy, and lack of proactive action that we identified for many Australian workplaces as a barrier to safety and respect,” Jenkins said. “I have consistently said that the focus of employers should be to stop sexual harassment, rather than to stop complaints and media reporting of sexual harassment. This is the mindset shift required from all employers.”The paradox of the oligarchical money that washes around the British elite like a sea of dirty water is that it has yet to buy every aspect of British foreign policy. Opposition politicians and journalists can identify the Kremlin-linked billionaires funding the Tory party. We can look in a mixture of revulsion and astonishment at how the naturally conservative milieu of City financiers, libel lawyers, estate agents, the art market and private schools has become as dependent on the proceeds of crime as opioid addicts on OxyContin. But we cannot say that Vladimir Putin owns this government. The UK supports Ukraine and shows no inclination to excuse Russian imperialism. If you want a truly cynical European power, look to Germany, which would rather see Putin’s armies march into Kyiv than risk Volkswagen losing the sale of a single hatchback. Domestic, not foreign, policy is corrupted. Your taxes are rising and your public services are failing because a governing elite that is at ease with easy money will not pass laws to drain the money swamp. Because it does not police oligarchs, the government allows every type of fraudster to flourish. The temptation is to focus on a London populated by caricatures out of socialist agitprop. Here we have Ben Elliot, connected to royalty via his Auntie Camilla. Elliot provides “unique access and exclusive privileges” to the super-rich on the one hand and charges Tory donors £250,000 for meetings with Boris Johnson and Rishi Sunak on the other. To show you the damage, however, let me take you far from Mayfair to Manchester crown court by the River Irwell, where Judge Anthony Cross stared at Asif Hussain last month and confessed to being staggered. Before him in the dock was the leader of an organised crime gang with 48 convictions on his record who had nevertheless received a £50,000 Covid bounceback loan without anyone in government undertaking “the most basic of checks”. The fraud was not detected because the Treasury stirred itself out of its torpor but because Greater Manchester police uncovered the swindle while investigating a stolen car racket. The pilfered £50,000 was a mere pittance. Thieves helped themselves to at least £5bn of bounceback business loans during the Covid pandemic and that is before you get to furlough and “eat out to help out” scams. More generally, if you are a victim of crime you will in all likelihood be a victim of online fraud. And as the humiliating realisation that you have been conned sinks in, you will also know the police will be unable to do a thing about it. The best guess is that in total the UK loses £190bn a year to fraud while the government spends just £852m fighting it. As with so much else this government does, the policing of fraud looks as if it is twisted for political gain. Students (who generally don’t vote Conservative) face a student loan company with a budget of £200m and 3,000 staff tasked with preventing fake applications. By contrast, Sunak committed just £100m to a taxpayer protection taskforce and employed just 1,200 staff to capture older, white-collar criminals (who tend to be solid Tories and, indeed, the friends of cabinet ministers). You can live a rich, comfortable and undisturbed life in the UK as a native fraudster or migrant oligarch. The secrecy of the financial system hides your assets. You do not have to declare which homes you own. Speaking before the Commons Treasury committee last week, senior staff of Her Majesty’s Revenue and Customs assured all watching criminals that they had taken a “deliberate decision” to reduce the prosecution of tax fraudsters. Meanwhile, what the Conservative MP Bob Seely nicely described as a “corrupting cottage industry” of law firms and barristers ensures that anyone who raises questions about fraudulently acquired wealth faces libel actions with costs that run to millions. The judges who hear them are not corrupt, but they lack the intellectual capacity to admit that the inordinate costs of the system they serve suit the interests of the wealthy rather than the interests of justice. The magnificently diffident Conservative peer Lord Agnew resigned as the minister responsible for countering fraud last month because “it feels somewhat dishonest to stay on in that role”. Total fraud losses across Whitehall were running at an estimated £29bn a year, he said, while a combination of “arrogance, indolence and ignorance freezes the government machine”. Ask why this arrogant, indolent and ignorant tolerance of fraud has so afflicted the leadership of a Conservative party that preposterously pretends to be the party of law and order as well as the party of sound money. Bear all three in mind while you listen to a clearly panicking Liz Truss as she promises to deliver an economic crime bill that ministers have delayed bringing before parliament for four years. Truss has to look as if the government will act because she told Putin that the UK would impose sanctions on the Russian elite if he invaded Ukraine, a threat that would carry more weight were the UK not a country designed to protect oligarchical wealth. A serious policy response would mean providing the funding to Companies House so it can weed out and prosecute the beneficial owners of the thousands of criminal enterprises it currently covers with a patina of respectability. It would include cleaning up the City, clamping down on corruption in UK-controlled tax havens and stopping the libel courts being used as weapons in asymmetrical warfare by hostile foreign powers. I am happy to be proved wrong, and ministers would have the support of patriotic Conservative MPs if they acted, but I cannot see this government doing it. When (not if) Johnson is thrown out, the odds are that he will look to the oligarchs for easy money, like George Osborne and so many others before him. In Butler to the World, a terrific book out next month, Oliver Bullough describes how the Treasury has always deferred to tax havens, hedge funds, private equity and venture capitalists and opposed any attempt to make fraud harder to perpetrate. It will do so again. Those same financial interests that influence the Treasury supply the Conservative party with donations and personnel. The sea of dirty money is the sea the Conservative leadership swims in. It can no more live outside it than a fish can live on land. • Nick Cohen is an Observer columnistI pānui au i te kōrero i hea rā e mea ana, e whakaatu ana tō tātou hononga ki te moana i te āhua o tā tātou titiro ki a tātou anō. Kei te mārama tēnei ki a au, nā te mea i a au e tupu ake ana i kite au i te moana hei wai noa iho. Kāore ōna hiranga. Ko te aroha, i pērā anō te āhua o taku titiro ki a au anō. He uri ahau nō Ngāpuhi, ā, i tupu ake ahau i Te Tai Tokerau, i waho tonu atu i tōku whare te one o Waipū. E hia nei hāora i pau i runga i te waka i waho i te moana i taku tamarikitanga, i ngā haerenga mō te rā ki Te Oneroa-a-Tōhē, ki te Hokianga, ki Te Rerenga Wairua, ki ngā wāhi mohoao katoa i tau mai ai ōku tūpuna i tō rātou taenga tuatahitanga mai ki Aotearoa. Ahakoa i karapotia ahau e te moana i a au e tupu ake ana, he wāhi noa iho te moana i haere ai au nā te āki mai a Māmā. I mea a Māmā he torutoru ngā wā i tata toremi ahau, nā konā pea i pērā ai ōku whakaaro. Kāore au i pai ki te makariri, ki te haukerekeretanga ōku e ngā ngaru me te kore i haumaru o te noho. I tīmata te huri o taku hononga ki te moana i te pakekenga ake o taku hononga ki a au anō. I tērā tau, i whai ahau i tētahi akoranga rumaki ki te reo Māori, ā, ko te tau uaua katoa tērā o tōku ao. I tīmata taku wewete i ētahi wāhanga ōku kāore nei au i mōhio mā te ako i tētahi reo i ngaro i te patunga o ōku tūpuna. I tīmata te pupū ake o ngā kare ā-roto tē taea e au te purupuru, ā, ka pā mai anō te wawaro e tō ana i a au kia haere ki te moana. I taua wā rā, kāore i mārama ki a au te take. E whā tekau meneti te matara o Piha i taku kāinga, ā, i te mātotorutanga hoki tēnei o te hōtoke. Kāore au i mārama. I whakarongo ahau ki ngā āki mai, i piki au i tōku waka, ā, i te tātā mai hoki te ua ki runga i te matapihi o mua o te waka i a au e haere atu ana ki te wāhi ka noho mai hei āhuru mōwai mōku. Ko te mea kē hoki, ahakoa i tupu ake ahau i te taha o te moana, huri ki hea, arā te moana, ka noho mai ko te one he pango te kirikiri e huna ana i te rohe o Waitākere taku tino wāhi mohoao i Aotearoa. Ka haere koe i ngā huarahi e pupuhi nei ngā hau, kātahi koe ka tae ki tua o te piko, ananā, ko te tirohanga atu tērā i te taumata o te pari ki te moana. Ka tangi te mapu i te tirohanga atu, ka rere te murakehu “wiiiii”, ahakoa kua kitea kētia e hia kē nei ngā wā. Ka whakatū koe i tō waka, arā e tū mai rā te pōhatu e rite nei ki te raiona te āhua, kātahi koe ka mahara he mohoao, he mōrearea a Piha, ā, he tokomaha kua hinga i konei. E papaki mai ana ngā ngaru, ā, ka mau koe i te kauere ki te kore koe e tūpato. I tōku haerenga tuatahitanga atu ki Piha i tērā tau i te pakaru mai te ua. Ko Tangaroa te atua o te moana, ā, nōna hoki te mauri o te moana. I karakia atu ahau ki a ia, kātahi au ka ruku ki te wai. I taku pueatanga ake, i māmā ahau, ā, i rongo anō ahau i te mau o te hono. Ko Tangaroa tērā e whakahaumanu ana i taku wairua. Ko tāku i ako ai, kia kaukau koe i te moana e whakaawhitia ana koe ki tōna aroha. I kapo ake ia i ōku tūmanako me ōku wawata me te horoi atu anō i ōku roimata. I te pānga mai o ngā uaua o te ako i te reo Māori, i whati atu ahau ki Piha ki te tuku atu i te katoa ki a Tangaroa. Nāwai rā, ka noho tēnei hei tikanga māku. Ahakoa te āhua o te kare ā-roto, o te āhuatanga rānei kua pā mai, ko te āhua nei i mārama mai a Tangaroa ki a au. Ka noho, ka noho, ā, ka tīmata te huri o tāku nei titiro ki ahau anō. I tēnei tau, kāore ahau i whakaora noa mai i tōku reo, i whakaora mai hoki ahau i tōku hononga ki ahau anō mā te moana. He moana hīngarungaru, he moana hūkokikoki, he moana ātaahua, he moana takarepa hoki a Piha. He taonga hoki, ā, he pērā anō te āhua o tāku nei titiro ki ahau anō. Kāore he ritenga i te ao katoa. Nā Shilo Kino nō Ngā Puhi me Tainui. He kaituhi, he kaikawe kōrero, ā, nāna te pakimaero The Pōrangi Boy i tuhiLured by the landscape and the inspiration that it offered, I envisaged a two-week visit when I arrived at the youth hostel in the mountains. I planned to work remotely, finish off the degree that I was working on part-time, and hike. I didn’t think I’d stay six months. But since international borders were shut, shelving my plans to move back overseas, I’d ended up in limbo in my small hometown. As a long-term expat, I was now making up for time away from my family who I loved. But all my school friends had moved away years ago, and after several months, it became isolating. Where to go to that wasn’t locked down? A former art nouveau ballroom in a mountain youth hostel became the unexpected answer, the setting for my life during a large chunk of the pandemic. In a year when so many people were alone, I accidentally moved into the biggest share house I’d ever lived in. By the time I left last year, I’d struck up friendships with people from all walks of life, from around Australia and the world, who I never would have met in normal circumstances. I had virtually nothing in common with my first and closest friend, a 50-something local government employee, who moved in because he did not want to be locked down alone. He was now working remotely. At night, I’d see him at his laptop in the building’s common area turned co-working space and joke: “These aren’t council hours!” We quickly became mates. I would ramble to him incessantly as he was deep in work about things I knew he had no interest in. He always listened politely. His tolerance of me was not the only lesson in peacekeeping. Another resident was a Canadian Trump supporter and handyman. In theory, we disagreed on absolutely everything, but it never ended up in an argument. When he spotted me, I’d be greeted with observations like, “Guess who’s going out of business – CNN!” He was harmless, more talk than anything. The day another guest called me a city latte type, telling me that he “despised everything about me”, the Canadian came over to me to see if I was all right. The place possessed great secrets. One woman, in her 60s with beautiful olive skin, was always immaculately groomed but wore a slightly pained expression. It was weeks until we got talking and I discovered that, despite her polish, she was receiving treatment for a debilitating brain injury. The hostel was a base for her to be closer to medical facilities. We began to bring each other pastries and coffees, and she invited me to her house “when things got back to normal”. But when would that be? With life so unpredictable now, some people would book accommodation on a “week by week” basis. Each day you’d wonder who would show up, and many guests would leave only to return later. There were “hostel hoppers”, there for the company, who spent most of their time sitting in the common area. I met women experiencing homelessness, who I knew could be me in another life. An ex-prisoner who had completely reformed their life joked that these digs were worse than jail. I became quite fond of them. There was a city professional who, appearing to have sussed out everyone, got dubbed “the reality consultant” by another resident. He was waiting for his apartment to be renovated, but I knew that he secretly liked the social aspect of the hostel. Young teachers and hospitality workers who were having a hard time finding suitable accommodation had also moved in. Meanwhile, the people you’d normally expect to meet – backpackers – were thin on the ground. As I worked on my university studies, it occurred to me this time was like an unintended anthropology lesson or a huge social experiment. While some days were exciting, living with so many different people meant that other days were hard. Sometimes, really late, I would go downstairs to what was once a ballroom and sit there alone, revelling in the space and stillness, but comforted in knowing there were people not far away. Most afternoons after work I went for a long bushwalk, but the interactions in the kitchen were always a bigger adventure. This was particularly true over dinner, when everyone came together. Some of the “long-termers” joked about what to call the place. One likened it to a spaceship. Others called it a nursing home. “A bit like a cruise liner with activities on each day – but going nowhere!” That one brought the house down. Yes, it was like all of those things. But for all of us, during what could have been a time of grim isolation, it was also a lifeline. A home.Head down to Sydney’s Manly Cove on a weekend, and you might see groups of people crouching diligently on the sand. They’re not searching for shells or bloodworms, but something just as visually striking, not least because it shouldn’t be there: coloured pieces of hard plastic, fragments of polystyrene foam and fibres from fishing line. For the last three years, a group of volunteers has been surveying the beach each month for microplastics, as part of the Australian Microplastics Assessment Project. Colloquially known as Ausmap, the citizen science project has collected more than 3.5m pieces of microplastic from more than 300 beaches around the country, ranging from Thursday Island in the north to Bruny Island, off Tasmania’s south-east coast. Volunteers collect plastics between 1mm and 5mm in length; pellets, fibres and fragments are meticulously sorted and documented. “That’s what we can see easily in our sieves,” Ausmap’s program director, Dr Michelle Blewit, says. “Microplastic doesn’t always refer to things that are microscopic,” she says. “Obviously it breaks up further and further … the smaller it gets, then there’s more chance of it being ingested by animals.” Blewitt, a marine scientist, says more than 8,500 people have been involved in the project since its launch in 2018. Its goal is to quantify the scale of microplastic pollution across Australia, and help address the growing problem. ‘It can block the gut’ Microplastics – any type of plastic less than 5mm in length – are virtually everywhere. They are found in the most remote places on Earth, from the world’s deepest oceanic trench to its most pristine mountains. They are in the air we breathe, the tap water we drink, and the food we eat. They have been found in human placenta and poo. On average, we ingest about one credit card’s worth of plastic a week, according to 2019 Australian analysis. “There are actually more microplastics on the seabed floor than floating on the ocean surface,” says Dr Denise Hardesty, a principal research scientist at the CSIRO. The presence of microplastics in aquatic environments doesn’t necessarily equate to harm to wildlife, Hardesty says. But there is a growing body of evidence showing that microplastics have negative impacts on at least some marine organisms. “For a really small animal organism, it can block the gut, it can make it so that an organism doesn’t feed as efficiently,” Hardesty says. “It can affect its reproduction, it can affect its lifecycle and trajectory.” Microplastics have been found to make mussels lose their grip, and to alter the behaviour of fish – one Australian study of damselfish found they were likely to take more risks and die earlier. Also of concern is the accumulation of microplastics in animals further up the food chain. “We even find microplastics in plankton, which are really at the base of the food chain and help keep our oceans healthy,” Hardesty says. “We have everything from very small fish to very large whales that eat plankton.” Plastics alone are one problem, but then there’s also the chemicals with which they interact. “Some of the plastics out there are quite porous,” Blewitt says. “Once out there in the environment, they can be attracted like a magnet to a whole bunch of other chemicals.” “If an animal consumes these plastics, then they’re not only getting a dose of the plastic itself … but also whatever contaminants are attached to those plastics as well.” Scientists are also concerned about interactions between plastic pollution and global heating on marine populations. A recent University of Sydney study found that fish grow slower when exposed to both the industrial chemical bisphenol A – a common compound used in plastics manufacturing – and higher temperatures. “Discarded plastics – as they break down, they leach BPA that’s been used in their manufacture,” Prof Frank Seebacher, one of the study’s authors, says. “So wherever you have lots of manufacturing plants, lots of plastic pollution, you will find reasonably high levels of BPA.” ‘In the dark’ on health effects What effects microplastics have on human health is still contentious. “We obviously can’t feed plastic to humans,” Blewitt says. “Health implications will probably rear their ugly head in the years to come.” Prof Andreas Suhrbier, who leads the inflammation biology group at QIMR Berghofer, says while microplastics have been found to damage human cells under lab conditions, compelling evidence to date has been scarce. “There is no consistent common understanding of if and what microplastic consumption would affect human health,” he says. Suhrbier believes new research of his may provide a clue. A recent study his team conducted in mice found animals that had ingested microplastics did not show any accumulation in internal organs, nor any significant changes in their microbiome. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning However, when they were exposed to a virus that resulted in arthritis, the mice who had eaten microplastics had joint inflammation for a significantly longer period. The team surmised that the microplastics activated immune cells that resulted in the inflammation. The research squares with a separate study, published in December, which found significantly higher levels of microplastics in the faeces of people who had inflammatory bowel disease – Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis – than people who didn’t. The researchers also concluded there was a correlation between the concentration of microplastics in the gut and the severity of disease. “Our emerging hypothesis is that plastic in the gut causes some level of inflammation,” Suhrbier says. Less is known about the health effects of even smaller plastic particles, nanoplastics, at sizes ranging between 1 nanometer and 1 micron. Dr Cheng Fang, a senior research fellow at the University of Newcastle, says in theory, nanosized particles can very easily “pass through the digestive system into the body, and can be transported by blood”. His research has estimated that whipper snippers generate thousands of microplastics and billions of nanoplastics each minute when cutting grass. In January, scientists reported detecting nanoplastic pollution in polar regions for the first time. “[We’re] really in the dark at this moment [about the health effects],” Fang says. Tackling a big little problem “Plastics and microplastics are ubiquitous,” Hardesty says. “They’re in our waterways, they’re in our stormwater drains, they’re being shed by tyres from cars, they’re being shed from carpet fibres in people’s homes.” She emphasises the importance of prevention at the source, citing the need for reducing reliance on single-use plastic. “People focus on microplastics, but most microplastics start out as larger plastics,” she says. “It’s actually starting with changing some of our consumption behaviour, [and] plastics manufacturing all up.” “We have power with what and how we choose to purchase,” Hardesty says. “Within Australia, we don’t need to buy bottled water.” “Your can lobby your government … You can support buying in bulk and … speak up against some of the very hard to recycle items, like soft plastics, multi-layered laminates.” By identifying microplastic hotspots, Ausmap is beginning to implement litter reduction strategies in certain coastal areas. They have installed nets to capture waste from stormwater outlets, “to identify which subcatchment is bringing down which kind of debris”, Blewitt says. The project has identified Dee Why lagoon, in Sydney’s Northern Beaches, as a microplastic hotspot, with an estimated 3.1m pieces entering the area yearly. “We were able to identify that nurdles – which are the resin pellets, the basis of plastic when it gets made in its base form – were coming down on one particular catchment,” Blewitt says. With support from the NSW Environment Protection Authority, Ausmap has developed a micro-litter reduction strategy, which it is piloting in three catchments, Blewitt says. “Hopefully we’ll be able to use this framework to be able to help identify where those potential hotspots might be … and then how do they stop it within their local catchment before it lands in the waterways as well.”The announcement took place in a fashion Australians have come to expect in election years, with the prime minister, Scott Morrison, cuddling up to a furry marsupial while promising record investment. This time it was a plan for the Australian government to spend $50m to improve the protection and recovery of one of the nation’s most-loved animals, the koala. Fifty million for a single species is certainly significant, particularly when you consider $10m in grants is to be shared between 100 animals and plants the government identified last year as priorities in a new threatened species strategy. But whether or not it makes a difference in turning around the fortunes of an animal – that a New South Wales parliamentary inquiry found could be extinct in that state by 2050 – could depend on multiple outstanding policies and decisions that are due to be settled in 2022. “Money alone isn’t the issue to save the koala,” says Alexia Wellbelove, a senior campaign manager at Humane Society International (HSI). “You need a strong conservation framework.” ‘Plugging holes in a sinking ship’ Much has been said about koala recovery since bushfires burned millions of hectares of land in Australia’s black summer fires in 2019-20. Already a prominent species in campaigns run by conservation organisations for stronger environmental protections, the koala’s plight was met with new urgency after images of burnt and starving animals were seen around the world. HSI, WWF Australia and the International Fund for Animal Welfare argue that the combined effects of multiple, ongoing threats – global heating, disease and habitat destruction – mean the species is on an accelerated track toward extinction. They submitted a nomination to the federal government calling on it to urgently assess the koala populations of Queensland, NSW and the Australian Capital Territory for an upgraded listing under national environmental laws. Listed as “vulnerable” since 2012, the koala now requires the more serious status of “endangered” due to continued declines in population numbers and habitat, they said. They also called on the Morrison government to finally develop a recovery plan that had been identified under national laws as a requirement for the species since 2012, but which successive Australian governments have failed to deliver. The nomination was accepted for assessment and the threatened species scientific committee – an independent body that advises the government on conservation listings – handed its recommendation that the koala be officially listed as endangered to the federal environment minister, Sussan Ley, late last year. A final version of a proposed recovery plan was handed to Ley for ministerial signoff around the same time. Unlike some past ministers in the portfolio, Ley has shown willingness to accept the deadlines and recommendations of the scientific body and her decision about the endangered listing – which must be made by mid-March – is expected imminently. A spokesperson said Ley is reviewing the committee’s advice and would make her decision in accordance with her statutory obligations. They said the minister was reviewing the final draft of the recovery plan at the same time. IFAW’s regional director, Rebecca Keeble, says patience has worn thin among conservationists almost 10 years after a national strategy to save the koala expired. “We need to understand what the strategy is to save this species and what that’s going to cost because $50m is just a drop in the ocean,” she says. “Without addressing the root cause of their decline, which is habitat loss and climate change, we’re just plugging holes in a sinking ship.” ‘No new steps’ to protect koalas Australian governments of all levels have acknowledged the koala’s trajectory needs to change. But destruction of koala habitat continues and development in important areas, such as Campbelltown in Sydney’s south-west, continues to be approved. Data from the Queensland and NSW governments, shows that land-clearing in both states continues to rise. The former NSW environment minister, Matt Kean, declared he wanted to double the number of koalas in the state by 2050, shortly after a parliamentary inquiry found they were on track for extinction. He also announced last year the government would spend $193m over a five-year period on a statewide plan for koala conservation. But that plan, known as the NSW koala strategy, is yet to be seen despite a previous strategy having expired in the middle of 2021. Promised new codes for land management and private native forestry, as well as an updated koala planning policy are also outstanding almost 18 months after koala habitat management nearly split the NSW Coalition. The policies are all issues to be resolved this year by a new ministerial team of James Griffin in environment, the agriculture minister, Dugald Saunders, and the deputy premier, Paul Toole. “The NSW government has taken no real steps to protect koala habitat,” says Jacqui Mumford, the acting chief executive of the Nature Conservation Council of NSW. Last year, the council brought together a group of wildlife carers who called on the Perrottet government to increase habitat protections to reduce the number of animals that were ending up in hospital care, sometimes for repeat visits. “What we really want to see is the release of the overdue koala strategy,” Jacqui says. A spokesperson for Griffin said detailed targets for koala populations and expenditure would form part of a new koala strategy but gave no date for its release. They said the government was also “reviewing the PNF (private native forestry) codes of practice to ensure robust protection for koalas.” ‘Whole lot more’ needed for all species The $50m announced by the Morrison government last week includes $20m for health and habitat protection projects, $10m for community activities such as habitat restoration, $2m to improve koala health, $1m for koala care and treatment and $10m for a national koala monitoring program. That monitoring program is an extension of a koala audit it announced in 2020 with an initial $2m in funding. The surveys for that koala count have faced delays due to Covid-19 restrictions and lockdowns, and the government handed carriage of the program to the CSIRO last year. It expects the audit will be finalised late in 2022. But still to be resolved are the overarching protections not just for koalas but for all of Australia’s wildlife at a national level. A once-in-a-decade review of federal environment laws by the former competition watchdog head Graeme Samuel in 2020 found successive Australian governments had comprehensively failed in their duty to protect Australia’s environment. Samuel made 38 recommendations to transform the act, including a proposal for new national environmental standards that require clear outcomes for Australia’s plants and animals. The government has never issued a response to any of those recommendations, instead drafting a bill that would reduce its role in environmental decision making by giving state governments carriage of decisions under the national act – that bill has stalled in the Senate. A draft set of national standards put forward by the government last year does not contain the improved protections Samuel had in mind. “If we had really good national environmental standards that were focused on environmental outcomes we could actually prevent the destruction of koala habitat,” Wellbelove says. Jess Abrahams, national nature campaigner at the Australian Conservation Foundation, says the $50m was welcome and a sign the government understood the decline of koalas was a serious issue for the Australian public. But he says the task for all of Australia’s threatened wildlife is far greater. In December, the International Union for the Conservation of Nature added 124 new Australian entries to its red list of threatened species, including spiders and insects on Kangaroo Island that were badly affected by the black summer fires. Almost 2,000 species and habitats are listed as threatened under Australian environmental laws. The state of the environment report, produced by the government every five years, is due early this year and is expected to show declines have continued. “It’s obvious the koala is an iconic and cute and cuddly creature and the PM had his photo opportunity with a koala,” Abrahams says. “But there’s a ton of species that aren’t charismatic – like the spiders on Kangaroo Island – and I sadly can’t see that kind of money coming to those and all the other species on our threatened species list. “We need to do a whole lot more.”Ali Hussaini cannot recall when he first started wrestling. “I was young!” the 28-year-old exclaims. But for as long as Hussaini can remember, he has wanted to compete on the world stage. “I have always been motivated to one day become a wrestling world champion and go to the Olympics,” he says. Hussaini is a multiple-time Australian wrestling champion, winning his most recent title last May in the men’s 57kg freestyle category. A bricklayer by trade, Hussaini rises early at his home in western Sydney to spend the day on sweltering construction sites. But despite the physically-gruelling nature of his day job, evening after evening Hussaini can be found at a local gym – training himself and coaching others in the finer points of freestyle wrestling. The wrestler claimed his first major domestic title in 2014, and has been almost unbeatable ever since. Hussaini is instantly recognised at the gym – “anything for the pro” laughs a staff member after spotting him. Even on rest days, Hussaini can be found in his backyard working out with his own weights (despite being in the lightweight category, Hussaini is renowned for his muscular strength). Together with a nightly call to his mother, wrestling provides the daily rhythm to Hussaini’s life. “Sport allows me to keep moving forward,” he offers. But the national champion’s Olympic dreams remain agonisingly out of reach. An ethnic Hazara refugee from Afghanistan, Hussaini arrived by boat in 2013. He remains in Australia on a temporary visa; which, under the federal government’s immigration policy, can never be made permanent. That leaves the wrestler unable to compete in international competition, blocked from wrestling under the Australian flag. In other words, the best wrestler in Australia may never represent the country. “When I arrived here, I was really excited to compete for Australia,” Hussaini says through an interpreter. “I was ready in 2016 to go to Brazil for the Olympics.” But unable to travel, Hussaini could not contest the Olympic qualification event in Algeria. “Because of my visa status, being a stateless person, with no passport, I was not allowed to travel,” he continues. “That crushed my hope.” Nine years after Hussaini arrived in Australia, he is no closer to fulfilling his dream. “Today I am still wrestling and still on a temporary visa,” he says in a deflated tone. “I have done everything I can in Australian wrestling.” His dreams live on – but only just. “It is still a dream that I can represent Australia one day,” he continues. “But time is moving really fast. Looking at my visa situation, it looks like very impossible at the moment.” Hussaini is not the only one. “There are about 5,000 Afghan refugees in this situation in Australia,” says Zaki Haidari from the Jesuit Refugee Service. In August 2012, the Gillard government froze the refugee application process for anyone who had arrived by boat; in 2014, the Abbott government amended immigration law to prevent boat arrivals from ever receiving a permanent visa. That prohibition still stands today. “We cannot get permanent protection from the Australian government, ever,” Haidari adds. This “temporary” cohort can lawfully work, but are effectively unable to pursue further education. These refugees are unable to sponsor visa applications for immediate family back home to relocate, and if they start a family in Australia, their children face the same limbo. “Ten years is a long time we’ve been away from family,” says Haidari. “We can buy a lot of things, but we cannot buy time. Once it is gone, it’s gone.” On Tuesday, to mark the return of federal Parliament, Afghan refugees from across the country will gather in Canberra to demand an end to the temporary visa limbo. “We are physically safe here but mentally, emotionally, we are dying,” says Haidari. ‘I was searching for a safe country’ Hussaini grew up in a small village in the province of Maidan Wardak, outside the capital, Kabul. The Persian-speaking Hazara people are a persecuted minority in Afghanistan. “The Hazaras have been persecuted for a century or more,” explains Haidari. “But especially lately.” The Taliban have massacred and persecuted the Hazara throughout their reign. The Hazara are predominantly Shi’a muslims, while the majority of Afghans – including the Taliban – practice Sunni Islam. As a teenager, Hussaini moved to Kabul to train professionally as a wrestler. Despite the post-9/11 American occupation and establishment of a new Afghan government, the Hazara continued to face persecution – including from Taliban rebel forces. As the security situation deteriorated in the early 2010s, it became increasingly dangerous for Hussaini to travel between Kabul and his home town. “The roads were not safe,” he recalls. “Every day it was high-risk.” Hussaini’s brother was kidnapped, tortured and killed by the Taliban. “It was a tough time,” he says. In 2013, barely an adult, Hussaini fled Afghanistan, alone. He flew to India, then Singapore, then Malaysia, before crossing to Indonesia. Hussaini subsequently made the journey by boat to Christmas Island, where he was detained by Australian immigration authorities and claimed asylum. “I was searching for a safe country,” he says. “I thought Australia would allow me to achieve my hopes and dreams.” He was mistaken. Hussaini spent several months in detention centres, shuffling between Christmas Island, Darwin and Western Australia, before being released on a bridging visa. Hussaini has been in limbo ever since: accepted as a refugee but unable to apply for a permanent visa, with no pathway to residency. “I will be on temporary visa forever,” he says. Throughout his arduous journey, the wrestler never stopped training – even during his stint in immigration detention. “Wrestling is a good distraction for me,” he says. “I can’t see my family, the visa, the crisis in Afghanistan – there’s a lot happening in my head. But wrestling gives me hope. Even though my life is not under my control – it feels like it is controlled by the immigration system – wrestling is something I can control.” Even still, the fall of Kabul last year has taken a heavy toll on Hussaini and the wider Hazara community. “Our families are dying in Afghanistan,” says Haidari. The refugee advocate says there have been a number of suicides, and increasing rates of depression, among the refugee cohort. Hussaini’s immediate family fled to Pakistan following the Taliban’s resurgence, which means they are out of harm’s way for now. But he is unable to bring them to Australia and cannot travel to Pakistan to see them (while refugees on temporary visas can get special travel documents, solely for travelling to see immediate family, Pakistan is not currently granting visitor visas to such travellers). “It is hard for me, not knowing when I can see my family,” he adds. He worries about his ageing mother; never missing their daily calls. His mother asks when he will come to see her again, but he cannot answer. “I say ‘I don’t know when I’m coming.’” Despite the enduring hardship, Hussaini remains optimistic. “I love it here,” he says. “It’s a peaceful country. I don’t face discrimination that I used to face in [Afghanistan]. I can see dozens of different nationalities all living together peacefully.” Approaching a decade since he arrived on Christmas Island, Hussaini says his predicament – his permanent limbo – remains baffling. “It’s a hard thing to accept,” he admits. “But I don’t have any other option. I just have to enjoy the life I have.” He tries to stay positive and give back to his community, providing training and mentoring to emerging wrestlers. “Life has been tough for me, but I must be a nice person,” he adds. “Otherwise there is no difference between me and the government.” Despite all this, he insists that he would pull on the green and gold in a heartbeat if given the opportunity to wrestle internationally. “The Australian government punished me because of my arrival on a boat, but the Australian people have always been nice to me,” he reflects. “Of course I would represent the Australians.” Hussaini’s sporting ambitions seem distant. Following the fall of Kabul, the Morrison government pledged that Afghan temporary visa holders would not be sent back, but there has been no indication the status quo will otherwise change. Yet Hussaini still dreams of competing under his adopted flag at the Olympics. “The hope will always be with me,” he says.In the already Covid-stretched hospitals of northern New South Wales, health workers are struggling with another growing pressure caused by the pandemic. House prices have soared in Byron Bay and surrounding areas since Covid lockdowns and work-from-home inspired many to flee the city for a sea or tree change. And while the impacts on buyers or renters in the area have been well documented, hospital workers say it’s having far-reaching effects on the community’s health. The consequences of the housing crush are being felt at hospitals such as Ballina, where nurse and New South Wales Nurses and Midwives’ Association (NSWNMA) representative Suzie Melchior works. “That’s not just staff struggling to get permanent housing, but we’ve seen people who are almost itinerant,” she said. “We’re not used to people living out of their vehicles, their cars. That seems to be a new thing.” Every additional stressor is being felt due to the surge in demand brought on by Covid, and already prevalent GP shortages. “They don’t have a GP so they’re coming to us for their basic healthcare needs,” Melchior said. “They know they’re not meant to be accessing emergency departments to get their blood pressure medication or their gout medication but they don’t have the option.” Long-term renter and mother of four Jenny – not her real name – is at breaking point after two years of housing instability, and has seen her health slide as a result. “There have been moments where I ask, ‘What’s the point in going on?’,” she said. “My stress levels are through the roof. A human right to safety and shelter – there’s nothing remotely close to that now.” Jenny has a month left at her short-term rental in Alstonville and after months of searching still can’t find a secure and affordable next step. She is considering buying a caravan or pitching a tent. “I wouldn’t have considered that in the past but what are our options? What else can we do?” she said. Melchior said many patients were presenting without Medicare cards because they didn’t have an address for them to be posted to, taking up extra admin time that overworked staff didn’t have. “There’s a ripple effect,” she said. “It is small in the scheme of things but if you multiply that across how many other people are having similar issues … it’s big.” Another local nurse – who wished to remain anonymous – said she was also seeing more patients without a fixed address. “Even in the maternity unit we see it – new mums living in caravan parks because they can’t find housing,” she told the Guardian. ‘A pressing need for urgent action’ The median house price in the Byron shire has more than doubled over the past five years, overtaking Sydney to hit $1.7m, according to the latest data from Domain. Prices in Lismore, Tweed and Ballina have all also risen more than 30% – outpacing the state’s capital, bringing with it a sizeable increase in levels of housing stress. This week, Byron Shire council sought to address the issue with a proposal, unanimously supported, to lobby the NSW government to “recycle” stamp duty and land taxes collected in the area into local social housing for the most vulnerable. “There’s a clear connection between house price inflation and homelessness,” said councillor Mark Swivel, who proposed the motion. “There’s a pressing need for urgent action.” Speaking in support, councillor Sarah Ndiaye said the housing boom was making the local community increasingly vulnerable, while the wealth is poured into state coffers. “Things like Airbnb and short-term holiday homes and the high-turnover properties... it’s all tax generated for the state,” she said. “The state government is getting all the carrots and local councils are getting sticks.” Tenants’ Union NSW head, Leo Patterson Ross, said he had noticed a jump in the number of renters in the area asking for advice. Many people had reported being served “no grounds” evictions before the properties were relisted for more money, pricing them out of a community they once called home. “We’ve seen double-digit rent increases year-on-year for a couple of years in some areas,” Patterson Ross said. “It has this really ongoing widespread effect and what it boils down to is that there’s just not enough homes that are actually affordable to the communities that need them.” Groups such as Homelessness NSW have been calling on the government to build 50,000 social housing units across the state over the next 10 years to deal with the crisis. “Homeless services across the state are telling us they are seeing people fronting up needing support, having never been homeless before,” the organisation’s chief executive, Katherine McKernan, said. “If you’re in unstable housing, you’re more worried about where you’re going to sleep in a week’s time than going to the doctor and getting yourself taken care of.” Doctors will always help homeless patients, but some factors make it harder, according to the AMA NSW president, Dr Danielle McMullen. “If you’re struggling with homelessness, you might also be struggling with finances, to be able to put food on the table, and then buying medications is another cost,” she said. “Visiting a doctor can often have an out-of-pocket cost and those are barriers to care. “Depending on the illness, housing stability is just important for our physical and mental health.”“Toilet!” yelled the midwife. “Toilet!” I was in the final stages of giving birth and the midwife, unable to speak English and convinced I could not understand German, wanted me to push. An hour or so later I was wheeled away, my daughter in my arms, into a dimly lit room where another mother was feeding her newborn baby. The nurse, kind but aloof, brought me a piece of white bread and cheese, lowered the bed to flat and left me there, presumably to sleep. But I was in complete shock. My boyfriend was out on the street, unable to stay due to Berlin’s Covid regulations at the time, and there was a little person on my chest, who still appeared better suited to her amniotic sac than the little knitted hat the midwife had put on her. I was jerked from this stupefied state when I spilled a half-litre bottle of water all over myself, the baby and the bed. Unable to sit up, physically exhausted and cautious of the stitches holding me together, I found myself lying soaked in water with my daughter going at my breast like a jackhammer, while desperately trying to figure out how to unclasp my maternity bra and use the hospital phone at the same time so I could ask for help in my A2 German: “Ich brauche Hilfe, bitte.” I felt immensely overwhelmed and pathetically helpless under the sideways stare of the woman in the other bed, but there was also something else building inside me. Something that in the weeks and months to follow turned out to be what the internet called postpartum rage. When we were back in my studio apartment – back in lockdown – I continued to be agitated by what I experienced as environmental and physical microaggressions. The unrelenting heavy footsteps of my upstairs neighbour. My engorged breasts, now the size, shape and feel of gridiron footballs. The neighbour across the way blowing his nose like a trumpet day and night. An empty fridge and an each-for-their-own trolley-ramming mentality at the supermarket. And the 32 square metres that once felt cosy – now, at times, unbearably small for the three of us, the only private refuge the bathroom. Outside things were no better. There was nowhere to go – everything closed, no café toilet to relieve the urgent requests of my bladder or check I hadn’t bled through my maternity pad, no friends to clutch on to. The Australian border was closed, and every day it became more and more clear to me that my family and friends would not visit me and my newborn, nor I them. I felt trapped in Germany (indeed, I was), the language more impossible than ever before. Meanwhile I was making regular trips to the internet café, my daughter strapped to my body, printing out hundreds upon hundreds of pages to send to the Finanzamt, Germany’s ATO, to which they would respond weeks later with yet more requests: where did the 60 euros that was deposited into your account in June 2018 come from? Early postpartum looked nothing like what Instagram had suggested it would. I wasn’t lounging in a neutral-coloured linen pyjama set, eating a bowl of congee while nursing my always-contented baby as my equally put-together friends looked serenely on. I was in a constant oscillation between joy and despair and anger. I was down on my hands and knees in my underwear, smelling rancid with sweat, feeding my daughter like a cow her calf in the hope that she would suck free the blocked milk duct that was making my entire body quiver in pain. I was obsessively Googling things like: Should breastfeeding hurt? Can sleep deprivation kill you? Does my baby have colic? Will the Australian dollar go back up? Why am I always so angry? At night, so long those nights were, I struggled the most. As I fed my daughter, teeth clenched against the pain of yet another blocked duct, all I could hear was the gentle snoring of my boyfriend next to me. “He’s only breathing,” I’d tell myself, “he’s only keeping himself alive.” Occasionally I’d move violently to stir him, other times I’d ask him to get me something, a glass of water, a tissue, pretext to wake him up. But when, with eyes still closed, he’d say to me, “Just give me a couple of minutes to wake up,” my rage didn’t feel irrational at all. In the grand scheme of things, none of it was terribly bad, except maybe the sudden collective fear of door handles and other human beings. And yet these moments of small discomforts, big once compiled, left me raging: turned mostly inward, but occasionally, with great drama, turned outward. I had not expected these feelings, of course, and in contrast to the elated hormonal trip of pregnancy and the all-consuming love I felt for my daughter, this undercurrent of frustration and fury was rather vile and shameful – not to mention grotesquely ill-fitting to the image of the glowing new mother I’d been fooled into believing. And that, perhaps, was my undoing: expecting a one-dimensional experience, when postpartum – especially in these times of prolonged isolation and uncertainty – was anything but. It was hard and it was lonely, and the anger, I can see now, was mostly just fear, the enormous responsibility of having borne a child into what feels like a very hostile world. • Gabrielle Innes is an Australian freelance writer and editor based in Berlin • Crisis support services can be reached 24 hours a day: Lifeline 13 11 14; Suicide Call Back Service 1300 659 467; Kids Helpline 1800 55 1800; MensLine Australia 1300 78 99 78; Beyond Blue 1300 22 4636 24.On 9 November 2019, Kumanjayi Walker, a 19-year-old Aboriginal man, was shot dead at his family home in a remote community north-west of Alice Springs, where police officers had gone to arrest him. Four days later, Constable Zachary Rolfe was charged with Walker’s murder. On Monday, Rolfe’s criminal trial will start at the Northern Territory supreme court in Darwin. Here is the background to the case. What do we know so far? Prosecutors allege that Rolfe and another officer sought to arrest Walker at his home in Yuendumu in relation to an outstanding warrant. Prosecutors allege that Walker was shot in the house as Rolfe attempted to arrest him. Rolfe also faces alternate charges of manslaughter or engaging in a violent act causing death. The police officer has pleaded not guilty, and was granted bail soon after the shooting. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Why has the case taken so long to come to trial? The main delays have been caused by the pandemic, the complexity of the case, and legal arguments regarding the evidence or defences that can be used in the trial. The first significant delay occurred in April 2020, when the case was postponed for 10 weeks, partly because essential reports had been delayed by Covid-19 lockdowns and partly because of the size of the brief of evidence. There have been other delays caused by Covid, which have been particularly disruptive as people central to the case, including lawyers, are based outside the territory. Among the legal arguments that have contributed to the delay has been wrangling over the location of the trial, and a contest over possible defences Rolfe could rely on. That argument meant his trial could not start in August 2021 as planned, and it eventually went to the high court. What can we expect from the trial? The trial is set down for three weeks. It is expected to start on Monday with jury selection, and gradually progress through the prosecution opening its case, then defence openings, before witnesses are called. These witnesses are expected to include other police officers involved in the operation to arrest Walker. It is unclear if Rolfe will give evidence. A live feed of proceedings will be shown at the supreme court in Alice Springs, which is closer to Yuendumu. The court is also seeking to provide an audio broadcast to media outlets nationally. But the spectre of Covid remains: there will be some changes to how the jury can interact with one another, to avoid the prospect of an outbreak among them which could force the trial to be cancelled.Movement from some remote communities, either to the court or to monitor the case, could also be made more difficult by lockdowns in parts of the territory.It’s not quite yet the new Berlin, as some have whispered, but a tipping point might have been reached as Australia’s sixth-largest city is being reimagined to embrace a very different future. Not that Newcastle can ever escape its industrial past. Coal will forever occasionally wash on to its beaches from exposed coastal seams, while Newcomen Street, Bolton Street and Watt Street in the city centre salute 18th century giants of power generation. And though there’s no Pitt Street, there is a Pit Street. But in the old warehouses, former customs house, railway station and central post office, there are the strong bones of an evolving city. Not long ago, empty shops and offices pocked Newcastle’s main thoroughfares. Then, in 2008, a homegrown program called Renew Newcastle was a catalyst for change. It was the idea of Marcus Westbury, which has since spread internationally, to revitalise the city centre through the letting of unused buildings, for peppercorn rents, as spaces for creatives to make and trade their wares. At the same time the University of Newcastle began to upscale its presence in the CBD with major building projects. A new light rail replaced the existing heavy rail line between Wickham and the CBD in 2019, freeing up an enormous corridor of land and adaptable infrastructure, though at a cost of about $600m. Last year the distinctive Roundhouse building of the City Administration Centre, a 1970 design by modernist pioneer Frederick Romberg, was repurposed as Newcastle’s first five-star hotel. A coup as brutalist buildings worldwide are disappearing fast. The Hunter River now glides past eateries, hotels and parkland. Riverside wharves have been reborn as a lifestyle precinct and once ghostly streets are lined with bars and cafes. Huge bulk coal carriers pushing upriver against the current look more and more like aberrant intrusions. But gentrification is not everyone’s cup of soy latte, and not just because Newcastle’s median house price has surpassed $1m. The test for gentrification will be whether it can avoid losing the distinctive non-Sydney feel of the place. It rubs against the rough edges of old Newcastle – Bill Dobell’s iconoclastic portraits, the grungy cool of teenage Daniel Johns; the southern hemisphere’s biggest KFC drive-through built atop one of Australia’s oldest Aboriginal middens; the dumb insolence of the Star Hotel riot; the Newcastle psychoscape of Sarah Kendall’s brilliant Frayed; or champions who took on the world, such as Dunghutti boxer Dave Sands and surfer Mark Richards. Awabakal inhabitants called today’s CBD area Mulubinba, thousands of years before it was renamed Coal River, then Kingstown and finally Newcastle, by British invaders who established a penal settlement in 1804 (for 34 Irish prisoners, exiled for their role in the Vinegar Hill insurrection). From the start they took coal and cedar, and lime made from the innumerable ancient shell middens. In the 1820s settler-capitalists began exploiting coal, timber and pastures further up the Hunter Valley into Wonnarua country and north into Worimi and Biripi country. So began a cycle of extraction and export that still goes on today, though that is inevitably changing. Weatherboard and ripple iron speak of working-class toil. Religious edifices and huge pubs dominate the historic mining towns beyond the city. Maybe the Newcastle 500, the V8 Supercars street race, is a nod to that traditional hard yakka Newcastle. But petrol-heads and waterfront real estate don’t mix and I suspect it will turn out to be a valediction for a Newcastle fast disappearing. Whether or not they can co-exist, it’s likely Newcastle’s dynamic calendar of arts and culture, not street racing, will become more central to what defines contemporary Newcastle. The Newcastle writers’ festival (March), Newcastle music festival (August) and the experimental multi-disciplinary festival This Is Not Art (October) are local in inspiration and national in quality and ambition. Newcastle’s coastal location offers a remarkable, almost physically affecting experience. But for the inner life there’s also the glory of the refurbished 1929 Civic Theatre – designed, like Sydney’s Capitol and State theatres, by Henry White – and her sister auditorium, City Hall, another White design. Rehoused in former railway workshops is the Newcastle Museum – the original convict lumber yard is now restored as an open-air historic site. Nearby Civic Park (once a coalmine) is animated by one of Australia’s finest public artworks, Margel Hinder’s 1966 water sculpture. The city’s classic mid-century modernist library building is its backdrop. Next door is the Newcastle Art Gallery, closed for a long-overdue expansion. A doubling in size will provide a venue for blockbuster exhibitions and a fitting home for its superb collection, the second largest in NSW. This might just be what cements Newcastle as a premier destination. Road-trippers will find it two hours north of Sydney, or fly to Newcastle airport, half an hour from the CBD. Matt Dickson is a Hunter Valley-based arts writer who has been visiting Newcastle for four decades.The New York Times acquisition of Wordle has left devotees of the mega-hit word guessing game fearful that it will – like the newspaper’s crossword and other puzzles – end up locked behind a paywall, despite the Times’ assurances to the contrary. While it’s unlikely that any other game will achieve the viral success of Wordle, there are free, browser-based alternatives out there to puzzle over as you sip your morning coffee. Clones and spin-offs Wordle’s creator, Josh Wardle, has said he loves the plethora of Wordle clones that have sprung up in his game’s wake, though his fans have been less impressed by apps trying to cash in on his work. Most clones copy Wordle’s current ethos: they don’t cost anything to play, run in a browser and are ad-free. Variants range from straight-up copies (often without Wordle’s one-game-a-day limit and with additional difficulty options) to versions in other languages, including Chinese and Tamil. There are the themed versions too, featuring swearwords, queer culture and Pokémon. Then there are the truly bizarre – like Letterle, which asks you to guess a single letter, Absurdle, self-described as “adversarial Wordle”, and word.rodeo, which lets you create custom challenges for a friend. My group chat is obsessed with Numble, in which players reverse-engineer a maths equation, and Quordle, where you play four games of Wordle at once. Other traditional games The New York Times has a handful of well-designed, minimalist-looking games available outside its paywall, including Mini Crossword and Spelling Bee, though the latter does ask you to subscribe once you guess enough words. Play Four by Merriam-Webster is a spin on the mini-crossword that offers a one-a-day fix, while there are the old standbys of online Sudoku and my personal obsession, Nonograms (better known to Nintendo fans as Picross). Of course, there’s always the Guardian’s various offerings online or on iOS or Android – though the apps do require a paid subscription. Wikitrivia This game requires players to place random historical facts into chronological order. Wikitrivia starts with one historical event already on the board. You then begin drawing cards and placing them on a timeline relative to the other events in play. Was Australia discovered before or after the founding of the Indian stock exchange? When did the Regency period end relative to the birth of Catherine de’ Medici? You can make three mistakes before the game ends, with the score showing how many cards you managed to place correctly before messing up. Sharing your results is possible but, given the random nature of each run, it feels somewhat pointless. The nice thing about Wikitrivia, as the Guardian’s Alyx Gorman says, is it makes you feel smart – you need to have some knowledge of when things happened, at least relative to other things, and having that knowledge confirmed (however trivial) is a satisfying little experience. That has its downsides, too: how could I possibly have known that Rashi, a French rabbi and commentator, was born in 1040? That’s trivia for you. GeoGuessr Ever used Google street view? GeoGuessr dumps you in a random place on Earth – at least, the parts of Earth that have been mapped by Google – and challenges you to guess where in the world you are, giving you more points the closer your guess is to the mark. You will need to sign up for an account though, which is a bit annoying. In classic mode you can roam around a bit, with five guesses to score as many points as possible, starting a new location with every guess. There are a bunch of different modes that limit you to various countries, or place you only near landmarks, and the “daily challenge” feature replicates the group one-a-day nature of Wordle. The genius of GeoGuessr is that it makes you feel like a detective, even if what you’re doing is the most basic detective work imaginable. Signs especially are invaluable for determining the primary language in your mystery location, but other context clues – forms of architecture, the flora and fauna, the side of the road cars are driving on, and so on – activate your brain in a way most other puzzle games don’t. Of course, sometimes GeoGuessr just dumps you on a long stretch of barren highway next to some terrain you’ve never seen; you’ll just have to blindly guess and hope for the best. On a free account you can only play for five minutes every 15 minutes, but that’s more than enough to get your daily fix in.In May 2013, Boris Johnson announced a flagship £1.7bn scheme for Chinese investors to transform east London docks into the capital’s third financial district. It was the biggest commercial property deal he had announced during his time as London mayor, and he pledged that it would be a “beacon for eastern investors”. While Johnson’s proposals for a new island airport in the Thames estuary and a new bridge linking Scotland and Northern Ireland never got off the ground, he hoped the Royal Albert Dock project would boost his mayoral legacy. Despite the grand ambitions, residents say there has been no significant work at the 35-acre industrial site for more than two years and the scheme now appears on the brink of collapse. The Greater London Authority (GLA) confirmed last week that a “final termination notice” had been served on the developer because of delays. The authority also said receivers have been appointed over six companies within the group structure of the developer. Unmesh Desai, a Labour London Assembly member who represents east London, said: “This was meant to be a jewel in the crown for east London, and it’s now a ghost town. It’s bitterly disappointing and we need to establish what has gone wrong and whether the proper due diligence was done on the project.” There were concerns about profitability when City Hall first announced the project, but it was hoped there would be a plentiful supply of Chinese funds to ensure its success. Johnson said at the time the commercial, retail and leisure complex on publicly owned land was intended to create thousands of jobs and bring billions of pounds in investment to the UK economy. He said the 19th-century docks and waterways were once again be the “arteries of trade and commerce”. The project was headed by charismatic property developer Xu Weiping, head of the developer ABP (London) Investment Ltd. According to a profile in Moneyweek, he started out designing knitting machines before working as a civil servant in Beijing. His previous development experience was mainly limited to a large development in one of Beijing’s least affluent areas. In an interview in November 2013, Xu – who was described as often being driven around in a red Bentley and owning a collection of luxury watches – admitted he did not yet have all the money for the project. “There’s no need for me to prepare £1bn in cash,” he said. “The market is quite good.” When Chinese president Xi Jinping made a state visit to Britain in October 2015, famously enjoying a pint of beer at a Buckinghamshire pub with then prime minister David Cameron, he presided over a new signing deal for fresh investment in the Royal Albert Dock project. In 2019, Xu admitted the project was struggling. He said there had been an adverse impact on marketing and letting for the project because of uncertainty around Brexit. He said his development company was reviewing the future of the scheme. The latest accounts for ABP (London) Investment Ltd, the property developer for Royal Albert Dock, said its parent company was trying to raise further funds for the project. The accounts state there is uncertainty whether this is possible and “this may cast significant doubt about the company’s ability to continue as a going concern”. Another company involved in the development, also controlled by Xu, says in its accounts it has failed to make contracted repayments on a £99m bank loan. A GLA spokesperson said: “The GLA has been concerned for some time by the lack of progress by the developer at Royal Albert Dock and served ABP with a Final Termination Notice in August after the developer proved unable to meet all of its obligations … for delivery of this scheme.” It said ABP’s guarantor, Dauphin Holdings Group, also controlled by Xu, had now formally stepped into the project. It is understood the Chinese-backed developer is likely to be removed from the project later this year unless it complies with the delivery schedule and contract. The GLA said the scheme was being delivered in six phases and most of phase one, comprising 560,000 sq ft of office and retail space, was completed in April 2019. It says since this time “no significant activity, lettings or investment has been undertaken by ABP”. It said most of the group was not in insolvency, but Deloitte had been appointed as receivers over six companies within the ABP group structure. Deloitte declined to comment. The standstill on the work is likely to lead to demands for an investigation into how the deal was structured and approved. A Channel 4 investigation in November 2014 raised questions over whether more robust checks should have been conducted on the ABP business before agreeing the deal. Caroline Pidgeon, a Liberal Democrat London Assembly member, said: “Boris Johnson’s record as mayor of London often seemed as though he thought that vital rules of fairness in procurement and setting of contracts were something he could ignore. His record … should be examined as closely as his record as prime minister.” ABP (London) Investment Ltd did not respond to a request for comment. • This article was amended on 6 February 2022 to correctly refer to Xu Weiping by his surname, Xu, after first mention.The UK and its Nato allies will be united in their fight against Russian aggression “wherever and however it might occur”, Boris Johnson has agreed with Emmanuel Macron. During a phone call on Saturday the prime minister and the French president discussed the worrying development of the Ukraine crisis. Johnson updated Macron on his visit to Kyiv this week, where he met the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelensky. During his visit, Johnson said there was intelligence suggesting the threat of “an imminent military campaign” by Russia was “a clear and present danger”. A No 10 spokesperson said of Johnson’s call with Macron: “They agreed that finding a diplomatic solution to the current tensions must remain the overriding priority. “The prime minister and president Macron stressed that Nato must be united in the face of Russian aggression. They agreed to continue to work together to develop a package of sanctions which would come into force immediately should Russia further invade Ukraine. “The leaders discussed their work to strengthen Nato’s Eastern flank, ensuring that allies are fully defended against malicious Russian activity, wherever and however it might occur.” European leaders are due to travel to both Moscow and Kyiv in a bid to calm tensions. Macron is expected to visit Moscow on Monday and Kyiv on Tuesday, while the German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, will travel to Kyiv on 14 February and to Moscow the next day. Foreign secretary Liz Truss had been due to travel to Ukraine with the prime minister on Tuesday to meet the Ukrainian president, but had to drop out of the trip after testing positive for coronavirus. Truss will reportedly travel to Moscow soon. On Thursday, US officials claimed to have evidence of an elaborate plot by the Kremlin to make a “very graphic” fake video of a Ukrainian attack as a pretext for a military invasion. Downing Street said on Friday it has “high confidence” Russia is planning to fabricate a reason for attacking Ukraine. Johnson’s official spokesperson said: “We have high confidence Russia is planning to engineer a pretext blaming Ukraine for an attack in order to justify a Russian incursion into Ukraine. “The details in the specific reports today are credible and extremely concerning. We’ve conducted our own analysis on this intelligence and share the US’s conclusion. “We’re considering options for further military deployments to support Nato’s eastern flank, we’re not at the stage of setting out details yet but we will come forward with those in due course.” In January, the US and UK alleged that Russia has deployed operatives inside Ukraine to stage false-flag attacks and has recruited Ukrainians to take over a puppet government that would collaborate with Russian occupation forces.The Six Nations is rarely short of dramatic finishes and from Scotland’s perspective this one will rank right up there. For the first time in 38 years the Scots have registered back-to-back championship wins over the auld enemy and the nerve-tingling climax made it all the sweeter for the home fans on a damp, cold Edinburgh evening. As a contest it was a slow burner but the tense final twist will haunt England for a while. Finn Russell’s second penalty with eight minutes left technically applied the killer blow but ultimately it was the desperate flapping hands of Luke Cowan-Dickie which did for the visitors. Referee Ben O’Keeffe correctly ruled the England hooker, in trying to stop a Russell cross-kick from reaching the lurking Darcy Graham in the right corner, had deliberately knocked the ball out of play and the resulting penalty try and yellow card tipped the balance of the entire game. Having previously led 17-10, a depleted England were left to cling on with 14 men and Russell duly stuck a final dagger through their hearts. The visiting what-ifs were compounded by the decision to substitute Marcus Smith with 17 minutes left despite the fact the Harlequins fly-half had scored all of his side’s points and was looking in control of pretty much everything he surveyed. There will also be questions asked about the thinking behind asking Joe Marler to throw into the lineout in Cowan-Dickie’s absence, with the ball failing to travel five metres and giving Scotland crucial possession. Opting to kick a penalty to the corner with two minutes left rather than inviting Elliot Daly to take a long-range shot at goal was another huge call in the circumstances, with Scotland’s Sam Skinner subsequently nicking the all-important lineout. England also reckoned they had the edge at the closing scrums but Scotland, without playing out of their skins, did enough at crucial moments to deserve their success. Neither team, to be honest, looked like champions elect but the conditions hardly helped. Maybe one day this fixture will take place in dappled spring sunshine with only a gentle breeze lazily ruffling the flags. Dream on. While the elements had eased by kick-off, it was still damp and slippery enough to make ball handling an occasionally hazardous business. England, though, will look back at their possession and territorial advantage in the first half and reflect that they should have made more of it. Having taken the lead through a 17th-minute Smith penalty, though, they trailed 10-6 at the interval with Scotland having produced the champagne moment of the half. Stuart Hogg broke thrillingly free in the outside-centre channel and fed Graham who slalomed his way superbly past Joe Marchant before finding Ben White on his elbow. The Stoke-born White, on for his first Test cap as a temporary replacement for Ali Price, cantered over for a pinch-yourself debut score and Russell’s angled conversion further compounded the damage. If the half-time scoreline did not necessarily reflect the balance of the game, the tackle stats made interesting reading. Scotland made 87 first-half tackles to England’s 43 but missed just four, reflecting the added close-quarters steel that defence coach Steve Tandy has been adding for a while. Interestingly, too, there were only three scrums in the first 40 minutes – all of them England put-ins – which is a surprisingly low figure for a wet weather contest. With Scotland making so few mistakes, the onus was very much on England to create a bit more themselves. Their hyper-flexible line of utility backs are all talented individual footballers but increasingly it cried out for a blast of something more dynamic. Sam Simmonds, popping up in the No 12 channel, did his best but the absence of Manu Tuilagi, as is so often the case, was conspicuous. Smith, in particular, could have done with the kind of foil that André Esterhuizen offers at Harlequins but he is the sort of player who is rarely quiet for long. When Scotland’s reshuffled front row were penalised for an unnecessary early engage, England suddenly had a decent platform to exploit and, with advantage being played, Ben Youngs combined expertly down the short side with his alert young fly-half to put the latter over. If it felt odd at the time to see Smith trotting off, it made less and less sense as Scotland seized on the opportunity to wrest back the initiative. Duhan van der Merwe made one promising surge and then, with England daring to dream, came the decisive Hand of Dickie. It was hard to argue with O’Keeffe’s far-reaching conclusion, with no other defensive cover in the vicinity, even if there was no absolute guarantee that Graham would have caught Russell’s deft lob. Maybe on another day it would have mattered less. On this occasion, though, George Ford’s arrival did not coincide with a late surge and when push came to shove, England’s execution was not clinical enough. The influential Russell’s 72nd-minute penalty was never going to miss and the rest, from England’s perspective, was tartan torture. It is the third straight year in which Eddie Jones’s side have lost their opening tournament game and they have now won only one of their last five Calcutta Cup fixtures. Scotland, though, will not care if Italy feel the backlash in Rome on Sunday. The high road to Cardiff now awaits and this result may yet prove just the start.A network of white supremacists, neo-Nazis and antisemites has celebrated Boris Johnson’s false claim that Keir Starmer failed to prosecute Jimmy Savile. Johnson was roundly criticised, including by some Tory MPs, after he made the accusation during an ill-tempered exchange in the Commons last Monday. His accusation led to renewed calls for him to resign, prompted chancellor Rishi Sunak to publicly rebuke the prime minister and saw one of his closest aides, Munira Mirza, quit over her boss’s “scurrilous accusation” and subsequent failure to apologise. An Observer investigation can now reveal how Johnson’s comments have since been seized upon by notorious far-right groups including the Pie and Mash Squad, a network of football hooligans linked to the anti-Muslim English Defence League and violent Casuals United, as well as a white nationalist organisation called the Traditional Britain Group. Other rightwing British figures to appreciate Johnson’s intervention include neo-Nazi Mark Collett, who leads the white supremacist Patriotic Alternative group, as well as Nick Griffin, former leader of the fascist British National Party. The Savile accusation has long been touted among far-right groups, including the anti-immigrant neo-fascist Proud Boys, labelled a terrorist entity by Canada following its “pivotal role” in the US Capitol attack last year. Other infamous far-right figures to have endorsed the allegation that Starmer failed to prosecute Savile when he was director of public prosecutions include EDL founder Tommy Robinson. A statement from Tech Against Terrorism, an initiative launched by the UN counter-terrorism executive directorate, said the prime minister’s willingness to repeat discredited far-right tropes was disquieting. “We are gravely concerned by this recent example of extremist ideology manifesting in mainstream British politics,” it read. Meanwhile the Centre for Countering Digital Hate (CCDH), an international group that seeks to disrupt online hate, said the episode was a striking instance of how social media amplified information that was probably untrue. Imran Ahmed, chief executive of CCDH, said: “It’s a very good example of disinformation that has benefitted from the specific amplifying dynamic of social media.” Johnson’s repeating of the Savile slur was celebrated instantly by the extreme right, with CCDH recording that posts on rightwing channels on the messaging app Telegram had attracted 42,521 views in the two days after Johnson made the remark. The prime minister’s comments also induced threats of violence with one account, whose avatar is a confederate flag, posting “hang the lot of them” in reference to Labour politicians on alt-tech platform Brand New Tube, while an anonymous poster on the 4Chan bulletin board suggested Starmer “should kill himself”. On Telegram, the Traditional Britain Group account, whose members have previously called for black people to return to their “natural homelands”, bemoaned the “synthetic outrage” around Johnson’s Savile comments. Neo-Nazi Mark Collett, who once suggested Hitler’s Mein Kampf as one of three books people should read and has attended combat training with former members of the proscribed terrorist organisation National Action, posted about the “establishment” and “paedophilia”, a longstanding far-right obsession. Another notorious figure to seize on Johnson’s comments was Mark Steele, a British conspiracy theorist with more than 20,000 Telegram channel subscribers, who posted: “Johnson ousts Keir the knight of the realm who blocked the police investigation against the knight Savile for his disgusting sex offences”. Claims that Starmer failed to prosecute Savile have been shared on far-right Telegram channels as well as Facebook for years. In January 2021 it was also propagated by Official Proud Boys Britannia, who described Starmer as a “paedophile/serial killer protector”. The group is affiliated to the US white nationalist misogynistic group and its Canadian wing that was last year named by Ottawa as a terrorist entity. Before the prime minister’s Savile comments, CCDH said it had monitored a spike in the claim last month. One reason is believed to be the US anti-vaccine conspiracist Sherri Tenpenny, who has 159,000 Telegram subscribers and reposted a message in January claiming that Starmer “decided there was ‘insufficient evidence’ to charge Saville”. That message had been viewed more than 220,000 times by the time Johnson repeated the slur.Glory on the track. Growing criticism off it. China ended day one of these Winter Olympics by celebrating a thrilling first gold medal, while also finding itself facing growing condemnation from human rights groups after selecting a Uyghur to light the Olympic flame. The small number of fans in the Capital Indoor Stadium because of Covid regulations nevertheless made themselves heard as China’s mixed relay quartet held off Italy by the width of a blade in a dramatic short-track speed skating final. Afterwards, Wu Dajing, the country’s most famous active winter sports star, dedicated the victory to the nation. “We achieved this by working hard and pushing the envelope,” said the 27-year-old Wu. “We are very happy for this first gold medal for China, and as a motivation for our teammates in other events this is a very good start. We will work together. Thank you!” However, China’s early success in these Games was overshadowed by the reaction to its decision to choose cross-country skier Dinigeer Yilamujiang, from the western Xinjiang region, where more than a million Uyghurs are in re-education camps, to perform the ceremonial act of lighting the flame. The criticism was led by the World Uyghur Congress, which said it was “shocking and insensitive” and that China was deliberately sending a blunt message to a people it represses. “China is politicising the Olympics, which we warned the IOC [International Olympic Committee] would happen,” its spokesperson, Zumretay Arkin, said. “But they didn’t want to listen to us. It is shocking and hugely insensitive to use a Uyghur athlete this way, when there is an ongoing genocide.” The IOC has not commented on the repression of the Uyghurs, saying that it must stay politically neutral. But Arkin insisted that position is a sham. “At the opening ceremony, the whole IOC narrative about sports and politics not mixing was shown up,” she added. “China’s government was sending a message: we control you, and we get to do whatever we want without being held accountable, and everyone is complicit in it.” Her comments were reinforced by Bennett Freeman, a member of the Coalition to End Forced Labour in the Uyghur Region’s steering committee, who called China’s decision “a brazen, cynical ploy that the world should see through”. But the IOC adopted a very different tone when asked about the opening ceremony, as it defended the right of China to choose Dinigeer as a flag bearer. “Obviously the opening ceremony is something that the organising committee put together and there’s creative input,” said IOC spokesman Mark Adams. “We are involved to a certain extent.” “This is an athlete who is competing here. She has every right, wherever she comes from, whatever her background, to compete and to take part in any ceremony.” Games organisers said the final handful of torchbearers who entered the stadium with the flame had been picked on the basis of their birth dates, with each having been born in a different decade, starting from the 1950s through to the 2000s. “I think it was a lovely concept,” added Adams. The IOC also promised that a Dutch reporter who was dragged away by Chinese security officials in the middle of a live broadcast was the victim of an isolated event. “I think someone was being overzealous,” said Adams. “He was able very quickly afterwards, with the help of officials there, to do his piece to camera. “These things do happen. I hope it is a one-off, and we assure you that within the closed loop you will be able to go about your work.” China ranks 177 out of 180 in the 2021 Reporters Without Borders World Press Freedom Index, but Beijing 2022 spokesperson Yan Jiarong promised that media rights would be respected. “We welcome all the international media to cover the Beijing 2022 Games and we will also protect the legal rights of the international journalists,” she added. Meanwhile there was further controversy as the Norwegian Therese Johaug, who missed the 2018 Winter Olympics because she was serving a doping ban, won the first gold medal of the Beijing Games in the women’s 7.5km+7.5km skiathlon. Norwegian skiing officials blamed the positive drug test in 2016 on a team doctor’s mistake, claiming she had accidentally given Johaug a banned steroid that was contained in a lip balm, but the skier was still given an 18-month suspension for her negligence in missing a clear warning in the label listings. But the most thrilling gold medal on the first day came in the short-track speedskating as China’s team of Wu, Ren Ziwei, Fan Kexin and Qu Chunyu took gold from Italy by less than two-hundredths of a second. They were lucky to have made the final after only coming third in their semi-final, with only the top two making it through. However, a referee spotted an infringement by the US and Russian teams, which meant they were back in.“We were all disappointed and a little confused,” said US skater Andrew Heo. “It was an interesting call, for sure,” added teammate Maame Biney. Afterwards, Wu became emotional when discussing his family. “It has been a very difficult four years,” he admitted. “But we didn’t give up. I didn’t give up. Our families keep cheering us up, and providing us with the best support, even though we barely come home. I can’t imagine how they feel now.” Or the rest of China, for that matter. Team GB’s Rupert Staudinger was also competing on Saturday in the men’s singles luge in which he was 24th after the first two runs.Player ratings. Plenty more to come from Marcus Smith. Momentum, they always say, is key in the Six Nations. Ireland and Scotland currently have it. Thanks for reading and see you next time. Robert Kitson reports from Murrayfield: The England head coach Eddie Jones has a chat with the BBC: “Look, it was a good effort by our team. Scotland were a bit better than us, took their chances, there was nothing in the game, it was a three-point game, that could have gone either way, but congratulations to Scotland, they deserve their victory.” On the possibility of England being awarded a scrum penalty at the end: “We’re not going to debate that. The referee’s in charge and we accept his decision. We don’t apportion any blame to Luke [Cowan-Dickie, for the yellow card]. He was just contesting the ball in a different area. The referee adjudicated that it was a yellow card. So we accept that and just get on with it. “I think we had opportunities in that second half to kick on a little bit and we just weren’t clinical enough. We’ve only got ourselves to blame. It just comes down to we weren’t clinical enough today, but we will be next week.” On taking off Marcus Smith: “I thought George [Ford] could lift the game a little bit, but Marcus played really well, we were really happy with his performance ... but it’s a 23-man game. “Given the quality of the competition, all we’ve got to worry about is the next game. So we go to Italy, get a win against Italy, we’re back in the competition.” The Scotland head coach Gregor Townsend speaks: “Amazing. I don’t think any Scottish supporters have been that excited about a set of scrums at the end of a game, or as nervous ... look it’s a great occasion. That’s why sport and the Six Nations is something you have to live through. That was a brilliant end, for us, obviously ... You know, it was crossing my mind what England might do if they won a penalty [in the final seconds] ... but fortunately it wasn’t decided on a penalty ... it was tough conditions in that second half. We probably would have backed our defence to go through the phases anyway, because it would have been hard to break us down with a wet ball. “Character, fitness, self-belief is there. We had a lot of that game without the ball. I thought England played really well. They’re going to be a real danger in the Six Nations to other teams ... but we got through that period, and we were behind on the scoreboard, and we came back, and the confidence came through us. I thought some of our best rugby was in the last 15 minutes when it was terrible conditions. I’m really proud of the team. “Finn Russell was outstanding, the whole game. He was calm, he nailed his kicks ... and he was still able to play our ‘shape’ ... he had a great game. “It means a lot to us but it means more for our country, for the people here. We know how important this game is for Scotland as a nation. We just wanted to focus on the game, and we delivered a winning performance, but we know we’ll need to improve if we want to win another trophy later on this season.” Some Ireland v Wales reading, from Michael Aylwin and Jonathan Liew: The England captain Tom Curry speaks to the BBC: “It was up-down, up-down ... first half, I thought we put ourselves in a really good position, second half, probably our discipline cost us. It’s just one of those games, mixed emotions really.” On Cowan-Dickie’s yellow card: “Listen, if we’re going to win big games and big moments like that, we’re can’t just rely on one moment in the game. We’ll get round, we’ll have a look, but at the end of the game, it’s a game of 80 minutes, not just one moment. So we need to reflect, and be better ourselves. “Whoever scores more points wins ... Credit to them, they put a lot of pressure on at the tackle area and the breakdown and we probably weren’t accurate enough and it slowed us down. As I said, we’ll have a look at it, but mixed emotions. It’s an emotional day [being captain] but we play rugby to win, so as I said, bittersweet.” The Scotland captain Stuart Hogg speaks to the BBC: “I’m absolutely chuffed to bits ... I think for us, we wanted to come out and put on a show, and show what we’re about. And at times we got it right, at times we were up against it. You know, England are a fantastic side ... but we’re absolutely delighted with that.” [Kicking the ball out at the end was] “Unbelievable ... for Darcy Graham to get that turnover at the end, you know, the little pocket rocket ... absolutely delighted, a full squad effort. “We want to believe in ourselves as individuals and as a collective. Next week is a challenge to back it up, and be better again ... We’re not going to get carried away. This is one victory.” “That was a terrific game of rugby,” emails Chris Healy. “I have no idea how Scotland managed to win that being on the back foot for so long. They were better in open play than England and that ultimately was probably the difference.” “England lacked a cutting edge. But, whereas last year England were giving away a lot of penalties today they played with a lot of discipline, except crucially under one high ball. If the rest of the tournament is as good as this we’re in for a treat.” Stuart Hogg holds aloft the Calcutta Cup. A fine win, one that came from a lot of determination and a refusal to be beaten, in contrast to Ireland’s crushing win against Wales earlier. Fagerson’s interview with Sonja McLaughlan of the BBC, continued. How did Scotland come back? “I think it’s just going back to basics, you know ... just exit well, get back up the pitch, and re-put the pressure back on them.” On Finn Russell: “Yeah, massive. I think his kicking game is probably the best in the world ... he showed that when he went end-to-end [cross field] with Duhan and then to Darcy ... it’s amazing playing with him and it relieves a lot of pressure on us big boys, having to go up and down the park.” On the atmosphere: “In the anthems especially, when the music went off, it was pretty hard to hold back the tears, it was pretty emotional. We could hear them throughout and it was massive yeah, awesome.” The Scotland back rower Fagerson, the player of the match, speaks: “It’s pretty crazy. We’ve been building the squad for two years and I think this is probably just the culmination of it all. Every time we come to Murrayfield, every time we play, we want to win. We put a lot of work in through the week. It was getting a bit harum scarum in the beginning of the second half. But it just shows the heart of the boys to bring it home in the end. And the crowd were a massive part of that.” A dramatic match that included a lot more running rugby than we hoped for given the weather forecast. Marcus Smith scored all of England’s points ... was he withdrawn from the action too early? England did a lot of things right, but Cowan-Dickie’s infringement from Russell’s cross kick gave up a penalty and a sin-bin at a crucial time. There was also a missed touch by Smith beforehand that felt important. The former England hooker Brian Moore, on his last commentary in the men’s Six Nations for the BBC, says: “For a game that we thought beforehand could have been rain affected, it could have been a dour game, it turned out to be an exciting year, a thrilling finish. I’ve just got two words to leave you with: Thank you.” Scotland have done it! Back to back Calcutta Cup wins! 80 min + 4: England get the shove on. Youngs tries to use the ball but it’s flicked away by a teammate’s boot. There will be another reset scrum. This is tense ... it’s also a bit ludicrous. 80 min + 3: Ben O’Keeffe says ‘time off’ and calls the fronts rows over for a talking to. Another scrum coming up. 80 min + 2: Another reset scrum ... no penalty for England but they’re clearly hoping for one. We will scrum down a third time. 80 min: Clock in the red. Scotland lead by three. We’ll have a reset scrum for England. “It’s a good contest, that one,” says the referee of the scrum ... Jack Nowell comes on for a few seconds. 79 min: Wow. Schoeman, the replacement Scotland prop, steals England ball. Itoje almost grabs it back straight away ... England have a scrum, in the Scotland half, in the final minute. Fagerson is player of the match. 78 min: Ford’s kick for touch wasn’t the best ... but Scotland steal the lineout anyway! 77 min: Ewels is on for England. George Ford is the fly-half who is looking to crack the Scotland defence in the dying minutes ... England win a penalty! They will kick for the corner and go for the win rather than let Daly have a crack at a long-range penalty. 77 min: Watson on Curry, a neck roll, a penalty to England. That could be massive. Three points the difference, instead of what should have been six. 76 min: England are back up to 15, but they are also penalised for not rolling away at the tackle area and Scotland have a kick to move six points clear. Simmonds comes on for England, Cowan-Dickie will not be coming back after the end of sin-binning. Now, the TMO and the ref is looking at a potential neck roll by a Scottish player ... which would be a huge momentum swing if this is given. 74 min: Itoje appears to have pulled off a brilliant charge down from a box kick by White but he’s offside. Scotland get the penalty and they kick for touch. It flirts with the right-hand post but it’s through. The crowd goes wild! Russell holds his nerve with a crucial penalty and Scotland are back in front for the first time since Marcus Smith’s try, which came 20 minutes ago ... that already feels like a lifetime. 70 min: England penalised! Penalty to Scotland ... They will take another scrum ... hang on, no they won’t, they will go for the points instead. A handy penalty for Russell, but there is plenty of pressure on this. 68 min: The noise from the home fans goes up another level. Russell bangs a low touch-finder for the right corner and finds his target. Scotland in the ascendancy ... England huddle before the lineout ... which Joe Marler will throw in, in the absence of Cowan-Dickie who is in the bin for the next six minutes ... Marler goes to the front, and it’s either not straight or not five metres, and that’s another howler from England. Now Jamie George comes on and Sam Simmonds goes off, because Scotland have a five-metre scrum put-in. Pressure on England, a lot of pressure. Drama. The Scotland fans roar, as well they might. Cowan-Dickie made no attempt to catch that cross kick by Russell and patted it forward into touch. It’s all square, and Scotland are a man up! 66 min: Scotland roar down the left wing then a cross-kick is contested by Luke Cowan-Dickie, with Darcy Graham, in the right-hand corner. Cowan-Dickie goes down injured ... it looks like he’s going in the sin bin and it’s a penalty try too. 65 min: Marler and Stuart are on in the front row for England ... Dombrandt is on in the back row. Scotland cough up another easily kickable penalty in their 22. Smith strokes it through the middle and then goes off. The lead is seven points. And here come a ton of England replacements ... 62 min: Jones, surely, is going to empty his bench any second? 60 min: Just as I was about to observe that England look fresher, Van der Merwe embarks on a rousing, lung-busting run down the middle ... but he soon concedes a penalty, which Smith kicks for touch in the corner ... but he misses touch! A big let-off for Scotland in a tight game. 59 min: Tuipulotu on, Johnson off at inside centre for Scotland. 59 min: An injured Ritchie is down and out for Scotland ... Magnus Bradbury comes on for the final quarter. Ritchie, unfortunately, seems to be badly hurt as he’s being taken off on a buggy. Looks like he may have done a hamstring. He’s sitting up as he’s taken off, though, and claps the crowd. 58 min: Clean lineout ball for England in the Scotland half. England drive the maul forward again ... but Youngs is then mugged by Ali Price as he looks to pass off his right hand, the Scotland scrum-half coming from the blind side and turning it over. Scotland steam down their left, and Youngs makes a recovering tackle. 55 min: Possession for Scotland around halfway. Initially, England rush up in defence and the Scottish passing is hurried ... but Darcy Graham takes matters into his own hands, scooping up the ball and then embarking on another wonderful jinking run and causing panic in the English defence. We are in for a ding-dong final quarter by the looks of it. It had been coming. England put pressure on Scotland with another driving maul following that lineout, Isiekwe claiming it. Youngs grabs the ball after a strong drive and makes a dart to the left inside the 22 ... Smith is running a lovely line, at short range, and slips over the line and dives over! Smith misses the kick, so Scotland trail by four. 50 min: Scotland have a lineout. They win the ball and shove a driving maul up a few metres ... but good work by Sinckler leads to an England scrum. Townsend freshens up his entire front row with Stuart McInally, Pierre Schoeman and WP Nel on. Their first act is to give up a penalty for moving early ... and Smith kicks for the corner. Field position, and possession, for England. Smith strikes the penalty sweetly and it’s a one-point game. This is going to get nervous, isn’t it? Or even more nervous. 46 min: Sustained pressure from England in the Scottish 22. Slade, Smith and Steward all get hands on the ball and England make some powerful carries. The home defence holds firm, though. England had two penalty advantages, and Smith will have an easy kick at goal ... 43 min: Scotland get a free-kick at the scrum. Price takes it and Russell hacks a low kick out into touch, pinning England back. The Exeter hooker Cowan-Dickie crunches into contact after the lineout and Gilchrist of Scotland is then penalised for obstruction when Scotland get the ball and try and run it back ... it’s kicked for touch and it’s a good position for England inside the Scots’ 22. 42 min: Steward fumbles a high ball and knocks it on. Scrum for Scotland just inside the English half. The handling errors have been relatively few so far but that was a clumsy one. 41 min: Martin Johnson, on punditry duty at half time, predicted that Jack Nowell could have a big impact for England off the bench. We shall see. Russell puts boot to ball. It’s a four-point game in the second half. Tremendous timing from Gabby Logan on the BBC: Scotland have made 83 tackles to England’s 37. Is that going to take a physical toll? Here’s some half-time reading: Finn Russell nails the kick. England are ruthlessly punished by that infringement by Sinckler ... and were indeed punished for Marchant’s missed tackle for Scotland’s try, even if it was a nice step by Graham. All to play for in the second half. 40 min: Russell, who has been quiet to say the least, tries a chip kick behind the defensive line in midfield. He’s flattened by one of the England forwards but Sinckler had already been penalised for an attempted tackle-and-jackal ... Russell will kick for the posts. 39 min: England have had 76% of possession and yet they trail by a point. 37 min: Scotland roar into the England half with Van der Merwe in possession, but he’s tackled, and soon penalised for holding on to the ball after being brought down by Daly. Itoje nabs the lineout after England kick the penalty for touch ... but the visitors are immediately penalised themselves, I think for going off their feet at the breakdown. Into the final couple of minutes of the half. 36 min: “With a bit of selective amnesia over one missed tackle, England should be delighted with the game,” emails Hugh Molloy. “Elite sport is brutal, however.” Something to show for the pressure, from an England perspective. Smith nails this kick which bullets through the middle of the posts from a modest distance. England move to within a point, five minutes until half time. 31 min: England get a good, powerful shove on with a driving maul from the lineout. Even the scrum-half Ben Youngs has a little shove from the back. They eventually roll over the line but it’s held up by Scotland. No try. Marchant and Turner smile at each other about something as they pick themselves off the floor and out of the pile of bodies. More pressure for England but still no points, other than the Smith penalty. 30 min: Youngs makes a clean line break for England into the Scotland 22. He’s brought down, but Smith then lofts a cross kick looking for Slade on the right wing, switching the point of attack. It’s overhit ... but it was a shot to nothing, the referee brings it back for a penalty, and England kick for the opposite corner. 28 min: Marcus Smith angles a lovely touch-finder, low, with the outside of his boot to the England left wing. A lineout for Scotland, five metres out ... Turner throws long yet again and England aren’t alive to it. 27 min: England move the ball through the hands again, Slade to Genge, then through Itoje. Malins gets it and tries a grubber kick which bounces in-goal and Hogg touches it down. 25 min: Curry crashes into contact for England, driving his team onwards. Youngs gets the ball and box-kicks in behind ... Van der Merwe fields the kick and runs it back. England are then penalised for offside. 23 min: Smith has ball in hand once again. He feeds Slade, who hammers a left-footed kick from hand deep into the corner. The Scotland full-back Hogg is in position and grabs it but his attempted clearance is charged down by England. A good territory gain for the visitors, but Scotland win a penalty at the lineout, the decision going against Nick Isiekwe. 20 min: The England coach, Eddie Jones, will be annoyed that a positive start has been somewhat wasted but Scotland will hardly care about that. It was a fine break by Russell – the weather isn’t as bad as forecast and both sides are willing and able to play some good stuff. Price, who went off for that HIA during which White, his replacement, scored the first try, is ready to come back on. First chance for Scotland, first try. Darcy Graham makes a break on the right serves up a lovely inside ball for the fly-half and he roars with delight as he crosses the try line. Russell converts. It looked like a missed tackle by Marchant that helped Scotland there. The young fly half cracks a penalty which swerves wildly right but still sneaks inside the post. He makes a bit of a face as he runs back ... but England have something to show for their early superiority. 16 min: More England ball. Curry and then Ludlam carry powerfully, smashing into contact ... and a penalty comes for an infringement by Jonny Gray. A chance for Marcus Smith to edge England in front ... 14 min: A fine kick for touch by Hogg puts England on the back foot. England get the resulting lineout right though, inside their own half, Ludlam claiming it at the front. 13 min: England have mixed up a kicking and passing game beautifully so far and they are winning the collisions, too. But nothing to show for it on the scoreboard: the score remains 0-0. 12 min: Scotland throw the lineout long, a risk, but it comes off, and an excellent clearing kick by Price takes the pressure off the home defence. Price is now going off for an HIA after a clash with Simmonds. Ben White, the London Irish fly-half, is on for his debut. 11 min: Another lovely attack by England, sending it through the hands, and Malins is nearly in on the right! With the tryline beckoning he passes inside for the full-back, Steward, but he’s bundled into touch. England have started really well. Scotland haven’t fired a shot so far. 9 min: Scotland again kick down the middle. Malins, again, runs it back and into contact. The fly-half Smith gets hands on it again. England are playing here, and keeping it in hand, perhaps more than Scotland would have expected. Daly dummies then sends a decent grubber kick down the England left. 7 min: Another scrum. England are on top, and win a penalty. They try to run it, playing advantage, but fluff it up. No matter: it’s a penalty in their own half. It looks like Slade and his siege gun boot is going to kick it. He does and he finds touch on the Scotland 22. 4 min: A first scrum. England put in. Ben O’Keeffe, the referee, has words with the front rows about a safe engagement. England win a free-kick, Scotland penalised for moving before the ball was put in. It’s been a tight opening and this has all the hallmarks of a low-scoring arm wrestle. Which isn’t too surprising considering the state of the weather. 2 min: Van der Merwe kicks from inside the Scotland 22. It’s straight down the throat of the England backs. Malins juggles initially in midfield, running on to a pass, but tidies up and England enjoy working through a few phases in the middle of the park. Slade, then Smith, get hands on the ball. England keep running it but are eventually penalised for holding on, and Scotland have the penalty. England begin, and Malins crushes into a tackle, perfectly timed, on Hogg on the England right wing. Price manages to clear for Scotland. The teams are out. First, there’s a rendition of God Save the Queen, then a blast of bagpipes and a rousing rendition of Flower of Scotland. It’s on! Hopes, dreams and fears from an England fan: Scotland and England played the first rugby union international in 1871: this is the 140th Test between the nations. Scotland have won 44, England 76 with 19 draws. Quite a few people thought Ireland would beat champions Wales. They were wrong. Ireland absolutely obliterated them. But even that is not quite right. What makes this win so impressive was the dexterity of it, the effortless command of fingers and angles, which made us almost not notice the physicality of which they have long been purveyors. Scotland have threats everywhere in the back line: Van der Merwe, Hogg, Russell, Price ... while the back row of Ritchie, Watson and Fagerson is the one that did so much damage at Twickenham last year. No Courtney Lawes for England today, which is a huge loss for them. No Owen Farrell either, so Tom Curry leads the side at the tender age of 23. It’s a big day for Sam Simmonds of Exeter at No 8 and it’s a relatively unfamiliar back line with Max Malins and Joe Marchant on the wings and Elliot Daly at No 13. England must hope that his selection works out a little better than Josh Adams did for Wales earlier. This year just happens to be the 1,900th anniversary of the building of Hadrian’s Wall and it feels almost as long since English rugby fans headed north with so much apprehension. While the Calcutta Cup dates back “only” to 1879, Scotland have rarely been as fancied to retain the venerable trophy or inflict successive Six Nations defeats on their neighbours for the first time in 38 years. There are myths about Murrayfield that we hear about every year. Some I agree with, some I don’t, but I can honestly say it is a stadium where the conditions can be like nowhere else. It is one of the hardest stadiums to play in because the shape of it means that when the wind gets inside the bowl it just doesn’t stop swirling. The BBC panel is talking about defence. “Some guys are natural destroyers and some guys are natural creators,” says the former England captain Martin Johnson, who destroyed a few in his time. Eddie J says Scotland are favourites: Ireland’s 29-7 dismantling of Wales qualifies as a statement of intent ... Can Scotland do similar, and kick off their tournament with a second straight Six Nations win over England? Scotland and England fans: What are your thoughts, hopes, dreams, fears? You can email me or tweet. Don’t be shy. Scotland: Hogg, Graham, Harris, Johnson, Van Der Merwe, Russell, Price, Sutherland, Turner, Z. Fagerson, Gray, Gilchrist, Ritchie, Watson, M. Fagerson. Replacements: McInally, Schoeman, Nel, Skinner, Bradbury, White, Kinghorn, Tuipulotu. England: Steward, Malins, Daly, Slade, Marchant, Smith, Youngs, Genge, Cowan-Dickie, Sinckler, Itoje, Isiekwe, Ludlam, Curry, Simmonds. Replacements: George, Marler, Stuart, Ewels, Dombrandt, Randall, Ford, Nowell. Referee: Ben O’Keeffe (New Zealand) Pre-match reading from Bryn Palmer: Everyone loves beating England. Scotland, in particular, take great pleasure from it and they outclassed and outfought the Auld Enemy at Twickenham last season. The difference this afternoon is that Gregor Townsend’s side, playing at home and prompted by the abundantly talented fly-half Finn Russell, are expected to win. Strong winds and heavy rain will play their part but present-day Scotland possess the tools to win in different ways: via forward grunt or attacking finesse. Much has been made of Jones’s ‘New England’ in recent months and this is certainly a fresh-faced bunch, by accident or design. Many of them have never experienced a challenge quite like a Six Nations match at Murrayfield. Familiar names have either been dropped or are absent injured – Tom Curry is the side’s youngest captain since Will Carling. Marcus Smith is even younger but has displayed no lack of bottle for the big occasion. In the context of last season’s poor Six Nations showing, this can be characterised as one of the most important matches of Jones’s tenure. Team news, pre-match reading and more coming up. Kick-off: 4.45pmBoris Johnson’s desperate efforts to save his premiership were undermined on Saturday as one of his most loyal backbench supporters said it was now “inevitable” that Tory MPs would remove him from office over the “partygate” scandal. In an interview with the Observer, Sir Charles Walker, a former vice-chairman of the 1922 Committee of backbench Conservative MPs, implored the prime minister to go of his own accord in the national interest, and likened events in the Tory party to a Greek tragedy. “It is an inevitable tragedy,” Walker said. “He is a student of Greek and Roman tragedy. It is going to end in him going, so I just want him to have some agency in that.” Walker, who announced at the start of the month that he was stepping down as an MP, said that in his view Johnson had got many things right, including the handling of the vaccine rollout, and deserved to be remembered for them, rather than suffer the indignity of losing a leadership challenge. But he said the succession of parties in Downing Street during national lockdowns had focused the anger of a traumatised country on No 10 in a way that could only be addressed if the prime minister moved aside. “It is just not going to get better,” he said. On Saturday night, Johnson moved to shore up his operation at No 10 – which was rocked by the resignations of five of his key aides last week – by the appointment of the chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster, Steve Barclay, as his chief of staff and Guto Harri, who worked for him when Johnson was mayor of London, as his director of communications. The appointment of an MP to be chief of staff is highly unusual and suggests Johnson may have faced problems in recruiting an outsider to the role at a time when many in Whitehall doubt he will last much longer in No 10. Harri’s appointment is also a surprise as he has strongly criticised Johnson in recent years, including saying in 2018 that he would be “hugely divisive” as prime minister. Labour’s deputy leader, Angela Rayner, said: “Boris Johnson is panicking as he frantically rearranges deckchairs. The prime minister has clearly run out of serious people willing to serve under his chaotic and incompetent leadership so now expects a cabinet minister to be his chief of staff.” Walker is understood not to have submitted a letter of no confidence in Johnson himself. But on Saturday night Tory backbenchers who have been trying to “crunch numbers” said they thought those wanting to ditch Johnson were only 10 to 20 short of the 54 letters that need to be submitted to the chair of the 1922 Committee, Sir Graham Brady. Some Conservative MPs said they believed about 40 to 45 letters were in or pending, while another estimate that was circulating suggested the number was closer to the “early 30s”. The Observer understands that several MPs who have yet to go public are likely to put in letters early this week, before MPs go away for a 10-day recess on Thursday. “The recess would be a time for the prime minister to regroup so there will be an incentive to get the names in before then,” said one Tory source. The Tory MP for Wimbledon and former minister, Stephen Hammond, said he was “considering very carefully this weekend” whether he still had confidence in the prime minister and added that it “certainly looks like” the beginning of the end for Johnson. If and when Brady receives 54 letters, he would then consult the prime minister on when a vote of confidence among all Tory MPs should take place. If Johnson failed to win a majority, he would have to stand down. The mood has turned further against Johnson in recent days after he criticised Sir Keir Starmer in the Commons on Monday for failing to prosecute the child abuser Jimmy Savile during his time as director of public prosecutions. The baseless attack on the opposition leader led to the resignation of Johnson’s longtime aide and head of policy at No 10, Munira Mirza, who had demanded that Johnson apologise, which he failed to do. Investigations by the Observer show that the unfounded claims about Starmer were being promoted, before Johnson aired them, by far-right groups including the UK branch of Proud Boys, a violent white nationalist organisation labelled a terrorist entity. After Johnson made the comments in the Commons, other notorious far-right groups, including football hooligans linked to the anti-Muslim English Defence League and the nationalist organisation the Traditional Britain Group, lauded him. The allegation appears to have roots in the far right’s obsession with the unfounded suggestion that the establishment is protecting paedophiles. On Saturday, the culture secretary, Nadine Dorries, repeatedly sought to blame Remainers for plotting against the prime minister during a round of media interviews. However, of the 15 Tory MPs who have so far publicly called on Johnson to go, just seven of those backed remaining in the EU in the 2016 referendum. Among Leavers who have said Johnson should go are David Davis, Andrew Bridgen and most recently the former education minister Nick Gibb. Dorries told Times Radio: “There are a small number of voices, whether they are people who were ardent supporters of Remain, who see this as their last opportunity to reverse Brexit.” Hammond, a Remainer, described Dorries’s remarks as “predictable rubbish from a predictable source”. In a further blow to the prime minister, his actions during the partygate scandal have been blamed by scientists for a sharp decline in the number of people getting a vaccine booster. Numbers of people being boosted dropped below 30,000 a day last week, with only 64.6% of the UK population over 12 years old receiving a third dose or booster so far. Behavioural scientists said declining trust in the prime minister, as well as the belief that Omicron is mild despite its impact, were behind the fall in vaccine take-up.They will always have Newcastle. Cambridge’s heroes of the third round could not extend their FA Cup run. They were thoroughly outmuscled by a Luton team expert in punishing their opponents’ mistakes. First-half goals from Reece Burke and Carlos Mendes Gomes, and a late strike from the impressive Admiral Muskwe, were enough to guide Luton through to the fifth round for the first time in nine years. Despite making eight changes, Nathan Jones’s team still looked battle-hardened by the Championship, where they are mounting a serious play-off challenge. They were rocked in the early stages only to kill off the home team’s momentum with Burke’s 17th-minute header and Mendes Gomes’s first goal for the club six minutes later. “It was a tough draw coming to Cambridge,” said Jones, relieved by pain-free progress that allowed him to rest players for a promotion push. “The pitch was lively, the wind was all over the place. I made sure that we weren’t a tippy-tappy Championship side that got sucker-punched. I thought we were very professional.” The Cambridge manager, Mark Bonner, made an almost gladiatorial entrance before the match as he walked around the field whipping up the home fans. Cambridge and Luton were reheating a rivalry going back to darker days when both clubs dropped into non-league football. He and Jones are close friends who share a Christian faith but that was set aside in a contest of crunching challenges where Luton’s physical prowess eventually told. “We didn’t quite have enough to get through,” said Bonner. “I think the scoreline is harsh on us. But they didn’t have to work too hard for the goals they scored.” This was Cambridge’s biggest home tie since they hosted Manchester United seven years ago at the same stage of the competition. This Cup run was similarly successful in capturing local imaginations, producing a fourth sell-out of the season. There was no Joe Ironside, with Cambridge’s goalscoring hero at St James’ Park absent with an ankle injury. Jack Iredale, outstanding in defence that day, was another of six first-team players missing. “Goodness, those players would make a difference to a lot of teams and they are pivotal for us,” said Bonner. Wes Hoolahan, 40 in May, played as an old-style schemer, the former Ireland international a throwback in dropping down the divisions for the love of the game, and his touch was a cut above in those early moments when Cambridge’s speed and passing game had Luton worried. “We had a brilliant start to the game,” said Bonner, but Burke’s goal came immediately after some Hoolahan wizardry had created a chance for James Brophy. The former Tottenham youngster Elliot Thorpe made quite a mark on his senior debut with a blistering free-kick from the right. Burke, once of West Ham, climbed highest to nod into the bottom left corner. The home fans’ mood soon darkened further. Gomes was assisted by another Premier League veteran in Cameron Jerome, and his high-stepping celebration did not go down at all well. Cambridge’s desire to play from the back was admirable but also the source of much of Luton’s threat, with Peter Kioso and Fred Onyedinma charging up the pitch from wing-back and Muskwe causing huge problems driving forward from an unfamiliar midfield role. Sam Smith missed Cambridge’s best chance when shanking wide on the hour before Luton’s defence reconfigured into a back five rather than three amid some heavier pressure. “They are hard to create chances against,” Bonner admitted. Hoolahan completed the 90, clearly tired, but was still able to set up a late move from which the substitute Ben Worman tested Jed Steer, on loan from Aston Villa and another making his Luton debut. Such Cambridge pressure equalled extra space. Muskwe completed the job, extinguishing the romance with a deflected finish. Cambridge return to normal life mid-table in League One but at least with memories to cherish.Well that was a hard watch. Boos ring around Turf Moor. A point doesn’t help either side much, but maybe come the end of the season, you never know. Thanks for reading this MBM. Nighty night! 90 min +1: Cleverley is booked for a late slide on McNeil. Somewhere in the multiverse, he’s walking, after that earlier challenge on Stephens. 90 min: Sweet mercy: there will only be two additional minutes. 89 min: Everyone squeezes into the six-yard box. A brief game of head tennis breaks out before the corner is cleared. 88 min: Cornet is about to take the free kick when the wind blows the ball away. Burnley reset, then Cornet blasts straight into the wall. The ball flies out for a corner. 87 min: Weghorst chests down to the left of the Watford D, and is clattered unceremoniously by Cathcart for his trouble. A free kick in a very dangerous position. 86 min: Cleverley’s low drive towards the bottom left is tipped around the post by Pope. One corner leads to another, and Burnley deal with the second one. 85 min: Femenia curls in high from the Watford right. King loops a header towards the top left, and Pope needs to concentrate hard to gather, the ball threatening to dip under the bar at the last. 84 min: Burnley haven’t scored in the last ten minutes of any of their matches this season. Now would be a good time to address that. 83 min: Joao Pedro makes way for Hernandez. 81 min: A Watford free kick out on the right. It’s lumped in, and Kucka sticks up a hand to bat it away, a very strange business. Burnley want him booked, but the referee isn’t interested. 80 min: Pieters has another opportunity to shoot, just inside the box this time, but hesitates. When he eventually pulls the trigger, his effort is blocked. 79 min: Pieters has a rake from 25 yards. It sails harmlessly wide left. Earlier in the move, Cleverley came through late on Stephens, and is lucky to escape censure, the referee forgetting about it having waved play on. 78 min: Burnley have turned it up a notch. Stephens busies himself down the right and nearly releases Rodriguez with a slide-rule pass down the channel. The ball goes out for a throw instead. It’s flung in, but only half cleared. Roberts curls in from the right, and Rodriguez flashes a header wide left from 12 yards. Much better from Burnley. 76 min: So that was relatively exciting. We deserved that, we’ve been more than patient. 74 min: Kamara’s touchline hugging run down the left earns another Watford corner. Burnley break from it again! Seconds later, the ball’s at Cornet’s feet, just to the left of the Watford D. He curls powerfully towards the top right. Foster parries well, but the ball breaks right to McNeil, who drives a low ball straight through the six-yard box, Rodriguez and Stephens unable to react in time to prod home. 72 min: From the Watford corner, Tarkowski strides clear on the counter. It’s a four on three situation. Tarkowski slips a pass to Weghorst, just to the right of the D. Weghorst whacks an awful first-time effort deep into the stand. Nothing comes from a very promising situation. 71 min: A long free kick sent into the Burnley box. Mee is forced to head behind. Corner for Watford. Femenia takes. Mee heads behind again ... though he very nearly planted that into the bottom-right corner of his own net! Somewhere in a parallel universe, Mee has scored two own goals tonight. 70 min: Kayembe is replaced by Cleverley. 69 min: Another long throw by Roberts. Weghorst flicks into the arms of Foster. Burnley are achieving very little. 67 min: Scrub that about the rain, by the way. It’s belting down again. 66 min: Sissoko strips McNeil of possession and Watford pick up the pace as he strides upfield. He slips a pass to Kucka on his right. Kucka drops a shoulder to come back infield and sends a shot rising over the bar. Then Watford come again, Pedro’s pea-roller gathered by Pope with ease. It’s a little better from Watford, and it forces Burnley into the first change of the evening, Rodriguez coming on for Lennon. 64 min: The rain’s eased off, so there’s that too. 62 min: This will be good viewing for fans of Newcastle, Norwich and Everton, at least. 60 min: Kucka crosses from the right. Pedro whistles a header straight at Pope from six yards. He should have scored. 58 min: Weghorst stands on Kucka’s foot. An accident. A yelp. 56 min: Mee makes a poor blind pass infield from the Burnley left, allowing Pedro to intercept and race at last man Tarkowski. He’s got King with him on the outside. He passes the ball too far right. King can only send a weak shot into the side netting. A great chance spurned. 55 min: Nothing’s happening. 53 min: Roberts flings another of those long throws into the mixer. Femenia volleys it clear, and the ball sails all the way back to Pope. The wind is swirling, but even so, dear me, they’re making hard work of this. 51 min: Pedro gets back up, and soon enough he’s slaloming into the Burnley box from the left. He can’t work space to shoot, but at least it was a decent enough run. 50 min: Pedro is down, unhappy at the attention of Tarkowski. There wasn’t a whole lot in it, but he takes his sweet time to get back up. 49 min: The rain continues to pelt down as the match settles back into its old dismal pattern. 47 min: Well, that’s better already. Farcical, but still better. 45 min 20 sec: Almost immediately after the kick-off, Weghorst breaks into the Watford box from the left. As he shoots, Kamara slides in to block, sending the ball looping miles into the sky and back down onto the bar and away! Burnley get the match restarted. I’d say the second half can’t be any worse than the first, but to tell you the truth I don’t want to tempt fate. Half-time entertainment. Sema crosses from the left. The ball hits the arm of Roberts. That arm’s not in a natural position, flapping well away from his side. But the referee blows the whistle. VAR has a quick check nonetheless, but doesn’t pull the players back for a penalty. Burnley have got away with one there. 45 min: Kucka has a dig from 30 yards. His shot is always curling wide left. Then Stephens sticks his hand in Pedro’s face as they contest a high ball, and he goes into the book. 44 min: A few groans and murmurs around Turf Moor. Neither team is playing well, but Watford are the ones finishing the half stronger. 42 min: Scotland have retained the Calcutta Cup, I see. 40 min: The resulting corner’s flicked on at the near post. Cue a scramble in the six-yard box. The ball pings off Mee’s shin and looks like heading in, but Lennon prevents the own goal by blocking and whipping clear. The nearest we’ve come. 39 min: Kamara slips a clever ball down the inside-left channel to release King into the box. King zips clear of Tarkowski, but he’s faced with a tight angle, and his low shot towards the bottom left is soft and easy for Pope to turn around the post. 38 min: There’s not a whole lot happening. 36 min: The rain continues to pour. Dyche and Hodgson, masochists both, stand on the touchline, hoods down. It’s a grim evening all right. 34 min: Lennon spins Kayembe down the right, and nearly pulls off a defence-splitting one two with Cornet. Not quite, the ball rolling through to Foster, but that was very easy on the eye, and therefore out of keeping with most of what’s gone before. 32 min: Kamara drives down the left but can’t get past Lennon. A corner will do, though. Kayembe’s delivery fails to beat the first man, and Burnley clear. 30 min: Better to miss chances than to create no chances at all, I guess, but both Weghorst and King will feel they should have done better. 28 min: Kucka dribbles hard down the inside-right channel, swivels, and fires a low cross across the edge of the six-yard box. King takes a fresh-air swipe when he surely should be scoring. 26 min: Weghorst is tutored in the ways of the Premier League, hesitating with the ball at his feet on the edge of the Watford box, Kamara sliding in to nick it off his toe. Seconds later, Burnley launch another attack, Lennon whipping in from the right. Weghorst winds his neck back, preparing to crash a header home, only for Cathcart to eyebrow it away. 25 min: Kucka does well to win the ball off McNeil out on the right. He strides towards the Burnley box and slips a pass down the inside-right channel for Pedro, who sends an aimless shot-cum-cross through the box and away from danger. 23 min: A long ball down the Burnley right. Cornet can’t get anywhere near it. Goal kick. Foster takes an age over the restart and receives pelters from the crowd as a result. 21 min: Not much point lying, this isn’t a great game. 19 min: King goes up with Tarkowski to challenge for a high ball. His arm flaps into the defender’s face, and he’s booked as a result. 18 min: This is better, though, as Pedro grooves his way down the inside-left channel and into the box. He’s just preparing to shoot, carefully cocking his leg, when Tarkowski slides in to challenge. Pedro goes down and wants a spot kick, but it’s a well-timed challenge. 17 min: Roberts and Sema wrestle to the left of the Burnley box. Sema is eventually penalised. Some rare time for Watford in Burnley’s final third, if nothing else. 15 min: Roberts again with another long throw. This one drops to Stephens, who shins a weak, looping volley over the bar. 13 min: Roberts launches a monster throw into the Watford box from the right. The ball is only half cleared, and Pieters meets it 25 yards out with a first-time volley. His shot is on target, but then deflected wide left. Nothing happens at the resulting corner. Burnley are on top. 11 min: Some classic route-one stuff here, as Pope launches long, Wieghorst flicks on, and Cornet sends a shot rising towards the top right. Foster turns the shot around the post, and nothing comes from the corner. 10 min: Watford draw a little of Burnley’s early sting with some sterile possession at the back. 8 min: Roberts drops a shoulder to make ground down the right. He slips infield to Lennon, who goes over in the box, though doesn’t claim a spot kick. He’s forced a corner. Foster plucks it from the sky. The rain continues to belt down. 6 min: Cathcart slips on the wet turf under a long ball. For a second, it looks as though the pratfall will allow Weghorst to break clear down the middle, but Femenia races back to cover and intercept, just in time. 5 min: Cornet makes a nuisance of himself down the inside-right channel, then rolls inside for McNeil, who aims a curler towards the top left. Always high, always wide. But this is a brisk, positive start by Burnley. 4 min: It really is a filthy night in Lancashire. The rain is almost horizontal. 3 min: Westwood curls it long. Cornet tries to make something out of the situation, just inside the box on the left, but can’t short his feet out for a shot. Both teams look in the mood. 2 min: Kamara pointlessly clatters Westwood out on the right wing. Free kick, and a chance for Burnley to load the box. Weghorst’s eyes light up. 1 min: Watford are on the front foot immediately. A cross in from the right. A throw from the left. The whistle eventually goes when King puts himself about with too much enthusiasm. Welcome back, Mr Roy. Watford get this crucial relegation six-pointer going ... but only after the teams take a knee. The gesture is met with warm applause. There’s no room for racism. No pre-match interview with Roy Hodgson, but never mind that, because the teams are out. Burnley in claret, Watford in yellow. It’s wet and windy at Turf Moor this evening. We’ll be off in a couple of minutes. Sean Dyche speaks to BT. “We’ve got games to catch up on. A big start today if we get a win. We defended well at Arsenal and that’s a good base to work from, we’ve got to add to the attack of course. All form is important. Our away form last season was strong. We’re looking for our home form to be right, of course.” Burnley’s towering new striker Wout Weghorst makes his debut this evening. He’s one of three changes made to the team that drew 0-0 at Arsenal, with Maxwel Cornet and Dale Stephens also in. Jay Rodriguez drops to the bench, while Josh Brownhill and Matej Vydra miss out altogether. Roy Hodgson makes four changes to the XI that did for Claudio Ranieri at Norwich a fortnight ago. Ben Foster replaces Daniel Bachmann in goal, while Christian Kabasele, Emmanuel Dennis and Tom Cleverley make way for Ken Sema, Craig Cathcart and Jurej Kucka. Burnley: Pope, Roberts, Tarkowski, Mee, Pieters, McNeil, Westwood, Stephens, Cornet, Lennon, Weghorst. Subs: Lowton, Cork, Hennessey, Rodriguez, Collins, Norris, Bardsley, Long, Thomas. Watford: Foster, Femenia, Cathcart, Samir, Kamara, Kucka, Kayembe, Sissoko, Sema, King, Joao Pedro. Subs: Ngakia, Troost-Ekong, Louza, Cleverley, Masina, Fletcher, Bachmann, Kabasele, Hernandez. Referee: Craig Pawson (South Yorkshire). This is a big relegation six-pointer. Look! No, it’s not looking good for the Clarets or the Hornets. But things can change quickly at the bottom. Just look at Norwich, who have clambered out of the relegation zone with back-to-back victories! Three points for the winner tonight, then, and they’ll be very much back in business. Kick off is at 6pm GMT. It’s on!Over 150,000 homes across the US are without power after a winter storm tore through the country and was followed by freezing temperatures that created icy conditions. By Saturday, over 100,000 homes had their power restored after outages on Friday, though some states were still experiencing service interruptions. The bulk of the outages took place in Tennessee, where over 93,000 homes were experiencing outages, according to PowerOutage.us. Another 43,000 homes in New York and 30,000 in Ohio were without power. Memphis Light, Gas and Water, a major utility company in Tennessee, said that 95% of customers should have their power restored by Thursday next week. The company said on Twitter that crews are working hard despite icy conditions and debris. The storm spanned 2,000 miles and dumped up to 17in of snow on Friday and early Saturday from Indiana to Vermont, according to the National Weather Service. Pennsylvania, Ohio, New Hampshire, Michigan and Maine all saw over 10in of snow. In the Northeast, arctic cold bought freezing temperatures that created slippery hazards on the road. Massachusetts state police reported over 200 car crashes, including one fatality, with many more crashes that have not yet been recorded. In Texas, roads remained icy on Saturday as water on the roadways froze overnight. The state’s department of transportation warned drivers of refrozen slush and black ice on Saturday. While a winter storm last year led to prolonged power outages in the state, Texas’ power grid, which is separated from the rest of the country, largely held up during the storm. Over 3,800 flights were cancelled on Friday because of the storm, with delays and cancellation continuing into Saturday in some states.Thousands of protesters have hit the streets of some of Brazil’s biggest cities to denounce racist violence after the murder of a young Congolese refugee on one of Rio’s most famous beaches. On Saturday morning demonstrators flocked to the waterside bar where 24-year-old Moïse Mugenyi Kabagambe was beaten to death late last month with fists, feet and sticks. The racially-charged murder – captured in chilling security camera footage – was followed days later by another killing in which an unarmed black man was shot by a white neighbour who claimed to have confused him with a thief. “It’s as if black blood is worth nothing,” said Bruna da Silva, one of several thousand people to join Saturday’s rally on Barra da Tijuca beach in Rio. “We’re here to say it does matter and that we won’t rest until we get justice.” Silva, 40, said she understood the pain of losing a child. Her son, Marcos Vinícius da Silva, was 14 when he was gunned down during a police operation in Rio’s Complexo da Maré community. “This was the shirt he was wearing,” Silva said, pointing to a bloodstained school uniform on the grass beside her. Adriana Rodrigues, whose 23-year-old son was killed last year during the deadliest police raid in Rio’s history, said: “I’m here for justice … what they did with this young man was wrong. “We’re victims of the same cowardice – and this must stop. Enough. Stop killing us.” Also present was the mother of Kabagambe, who fled conflict in the Democratic Republic of Congo in 2011 and built a new life in Brazil. “We will seek justice until the end,” Lotsove Lolo Lay Ivonne told protesters as they assembled under a fierce sun to demand an end to racist violence. Many demonstrators also demanded the removal of Brazil’s far-right president, Jair Bolsonaro, who is notorious for making prejudiced remarks about black and indigenous people. Bolsonaro has said nothing about the refugee’s death – but marchers had a great deal to say about him, chanting “Fora Bolsonaro!” (“Bolsonaro out!”) as they filed down the beach. Protesters also gathered in Brazil’s biggest city, São Paulo; the capital, Brasília; and Recife, Belo Horizonte, Salvador and Porto Alegre, as well as in London, Berlin and New York. Rio authorities have taken steps to support Kabagambe’s family, with the mayor announcing relatives will be handed control of the bar where he was murdered. “What happened was brutal, unacceptable and something that isn’t in Rio’s nature,” the finance secretary, Pedro Paulo, told reporters. Statistics, however, show the violent, premature death of young black men is very much part of life in Rio. Of the 1,245 people killed in police operations in Rio state in 2020, 86% were black. In the city of Rio, the proportion was 90%. “The only policy they have for the favela is the policy of genocide,” said Ana Paula Oliveira, 45, whose 19-year-old son, Johnatha, was killed by police in 2014. “It’s sickening that it never stops.” Social activist Wesley Teixeira said the scale of Saturday’s mobilisation gave him hope, while the normalisation of black deaths had made him despair. “The people here are survivors,” Teixeira said. “It’s in our unity we find solace.”Welcome back to the Premier League, Roy. When you consider that Burnley and Watford have scored 39 goals in 40 league games between them this season, maybe there was only ever going to be one outcome here. In truth, the biggest winners on a blustery night in Lancashire were Newcastle and Norwich, who watched their two main relegation rivals huff and puff their way to an uninspiring draw. Watford have turned to Hodgson to try to keep them in the league while Burnley’s big January move was the arrival of Wout Weghorst. That gave supporters of these sides cause for tentative optimism that they could claim the win that would have moved them out of the bottom three. By the end, though, there was almost a sense of relief the points were shared on a night where the issues they possess were laid bare. The fact Burnley’s best chance was assisted by the swirling wind, as Weghorst’s blocked shot got caught in mid-air and dragged on to Ben Foster’s crossbar, underlined the level of quality on show. Yes, the conditions did not help matters at all, but it really was not difficult to see why Burnley and Watford are entrenched in the mire of a relegation battle as the final months of the season approach. For Burnley, with games against Manchester United and Liverpool to come over the next week, this result will be harder to take. “Two clean sheets is something to build on and we’ve got a three-game week so we’ll see where we go,” a defiant Sean Dyche insisted. “The performances are going to be key. We defended resolutely and there’s things we’re dissecting about the game, but at some point we’ve got to make it click.” Dyche’s players were met by boos from the home supporters at the final whistle after a chastening watch. There was precious little in the way of clear-cut attacking opportunities and while Weghorst’s record suggests he will adapt to the Premier League, he and Maxwel Cornet will have to click sooner rather than later for Burnley to stand any chance of survival. The fact Ben Mee, who almost turned into his own net twice, is the third highest scorer in their squad with two goals epitomises their situation. It was Watford who could take more positives from this encounter, despite the final score. This was their first clean sheet of the season in the league and while the better moments in attack belonged to the visitors, their clinical touch deserted them at the wrong moments. Hodgson, perhaps unsurprisingly for a manager with his experience, took a pragmatic approach. “It’s a really difficult place to come,” he said. “I don’t think many will look forward to games against Burnley. I thought we probably did enough today to come away with a victory. I’m pleased with the way the players went about their work.” Hodgson and Dyche cut forlorn figures at various stages as they watched their sides toil amidst the horrendous wind and rain which engulfed the stadium for most of the evening. The closest either side came to scoring in the first half was when a deflection from Mee had to be cleared off the line by Aaron Lennon. Mee then headed wide of Nick Pope’s goal from a routine Watford corner and had João Pedro’s pass to free Joshua King been more accurate, Burnley could have been in even greater trouble. Their responses at the other end were few and far between and the boos at the end spoke volumes. Both these sides are in trouble, but Hodgson’s arrival and Watford’s first clean sheet of the season perhaps offers them a brighter glimmer of hope.Mohamed Salah against Sadio Mané, two great Liverpool forwards going head-to-head in Sunday’s Africa Cup of Nations final. It’s the headline clash of Egypt against Senegal, the meeting of the most successful side in African history and a team that has never lifted the trophy. But to focus on them would be misleading: although both have had an influence late in games, neither Senegal nor Egypt could be said to be teams based around their attacking talent. There is an unavoidable sense that even to focus on the football is itself uncomfortable, given the tragic events of a fortnight ago when eight fans were trampled to death outside Stade Olembé, where the final will be staged. The quarter-final at the venue was moved, but after a review it was decided Thursday’s semi-final should be played there. Emotionally that may have felt strange, walking across the road and through the gate where the tragedy occurred, but logistically it was almost certainly the right choice given the absence of viable alternatives for a major game featuring the hosts. Olembé is a magnificent stadium set in a vast amount of space; to create the conditions in which a crush could occur took spectacular incompetence. The extent to which lessons had been learned was difficult to tell on Thursday given only 24,000 turned up, seemingly put off by safety concerns. The disaster rightly dominates any consideration of the tournament, but what happened a week gone Monday was just part of much wider chaos. The Cup of Nations is a competition that feels as though it always has to justify its existence; these last few weeks have not made much of a case either on or off the pitch. The organisation has been generally dismal while, not helped by some poor playing surfaces, much of the football has been grim, with an average of just 1.88 goals per game. Senegal’s method is to stifle the opposition, take control of midfield and strike late on, something in which they have been aided in the last two games by the returning fitness of Ismaïla Sarr, who has been able to come off the bench and add to their attacking threat. Eight of the nine goals Senegal have scored in the tournament so far have come after the hour. Defensively they have been all but impeccable, letting in only one goal – Jannick Buyla’s kneed volley late in the quarter-final – and conceding nine shots on target in the whole tournament. Egypt’s method is simply to stifle, the natural caution of Carlos Queiroz combining with their traditional aptitude for timewasting to produce a style that has yielded just four goals in 630 minutes of football. They have let in only two, although they have been offering up 12.33 shots per game, most of which have been from range. The sense is that their greatest strength is their mental robustness and the way they get in the heads of their opponents – that, and penalties; Egypt have won their last six shootouts, including two here. Although they have beaten only Guinea-Bissau and Sudan in normal time so far in the tournament, they have had a far harder route to the final than Senegal, seeing off Ivory Coast, Morocco and the hosts Cameroon. And it should never be forgotten how difficult north African sides have always found tournaments in sub-Saharan Africa; Egypt themselves, in 2008 and 2010, are the only north African side ever to have won the Cup of Nations outside north Africa. But for all that, the lasting impression is of their gamesmanship. The legacy of their veteran goalkeeper Essam El-Hadary, who had the lowest pain threshold of any man ever to play international football, is secure in the hands of both Mohamed El Shenawy and, after he really did get injured in a confusing boy‑who‑cried‑wolf irony, Mohamed Abou Gabal. Egyptian goalkeeping is a long‑running medical soap opera to rank alongside Casualty or Emergency Ward 10, with Abou Gabal spending much of the semi-final writhing in hopeless agony. Queiroz himself has been in a bafflingly fretful mood all tournament, seething as he stalks his technical area, apparently convinced everything is rigged against him. The general behaviour of the Egypt bench in the quarter‑final was a disgrace, as they contested decision after decision, berating the fourth official and antagonising Morocco’s coaching staff, earning the assistant coach Roger De Sa a four-game ban. The Egyptian FA then protested against the appointment of the experienced referee Bakary Gassama for the semi-final, for no better reason it seemed than that he had taken charge of their group-stage defeat to Nigeria. Gassama, with his bald head and staring eyes very much the Gambian Collina, likes to impose himself and, having warned Queiroz when he went down on his knees, giving it the full Platoon as a free-kick near the halfway line went against his side early on, showed him two yellow cards for dissent in three second-half minutes. As a result, Queiroz will not be on the bench for the final. Queiroz continued his assault on Gassama after the game and then, laughably, another coach, Diaa El-Sayed, asked for the final to be delayed 24 hours because Egypt would have had a day’s less rest than their opponents. Senegal will have their own memories of how referees can be influenced by Egyptian pressure: the last time the sides met in the final stages, in the semi-final in Cairo in 2006, they were denied a blatant last-minute penalty when Diomansy Kamara was chopped down by Ibrahim Said with Egypt leading 2-1. That is just one of the historical disappointments Senegal are trying to overcome. Their coach, Aliou Cissé, missed the decisive penalty in the shootout in the final in 2002, and there is the fresher memory of defeat in the final to Algeria in 2019. For Senegal, winning the Cup of Nations has become a quest, their own doubts almost as much of a barrier as their opponents. In that context Egypt, ruthless serial winners, may be the worst side for them to be facing.Emma Hayes and Gareth Taylor, managers of Chelsea and Manchester City, echoed each other as they prepared for the teams’ meeting at Kingsmeadow on Sunday by calling for an expansion of the Women’s Super League. Both made the appeal for an increase from 12 teams unprompted and off the back of conversations about just how exciting the title race is this season. “For the neutral it’s exciting, especially when you have these types of fixtures at the weekend,” said Taylor, also referring to the game between Arsenal and third-placed Manchester United on Saturday. “It just goes to show that the levels are improving in the WSL and if we were able to ever get to add a few more teams into it, to make the competition more than 22 games in a season, I think you would see really different types of results on a more consistent basis.” Hayes said: “I wish the season was longer. I want it to go to 14 teams. I want more games, that’s the next step for our league.” For the first time in a while the title race is wide open with less than half a season remaining. No team has looked unbeatable. Of the traditional top three, City racked up four defeats as they struggled with an injury crisis in the first half of the season while Chelsea have dropped points to Reading, Arsenal and Brighton, and Arsenal failed to collect more than a point against Aston Villa, City and Tottenham while also losing to Birmingham. Manchester United, meanwhile, have grown into contenders under Marc Skinner, while Tottenham remain a point above City despite their challenge seeming to be on the wane. “It never stops and we’ll keep going until the end,” said Taylor, whose side sit fifth, nine points behind Arsenal, the leaders, and five behind Chelsea. “It’s such an unpredictable race this season and very different to what we’ve seen over the last few years. In football anything can happen and it’s good that we’re still in the hunt.” Hayes similarly played up the opposition’s title credentials. “The pendulum can swing really quickly,” she said. “This is a six-point game; if they [City] win the pendulum swings in another direction. But I think next weekend [when Chelsea play Arsenal] will have a much bigger impact and give clarity on the positions.” For both managers, with an array of injuries affecting their teams, the chance to give minutes to almost every squad member has been a small silver lining. “I’ve got an incredibly happy dressing room,” said Hayes. “Every single player is involved. When you’ve got a big squad and not many games it’s a lot harder to manage, but we’ve had no choice, we’ve not had the players. ‘You’re tired? Don’t care, you’ve got to go again.’ Then you develop resilience. “That’s why I’m so proud of these performances. Because I didn’t know how we’d fair with all these back-to-back games. I didn’t know how Jessie Fleming or Niamh Charles or Erin Cuthbert would cope but they’ve been brilliant, they’ve shown something when the team really needed them to.” Taylor conceded Chelsea “have had the edge over us this season” and, with the London team unbeaten in each of their last nine WSL games against City, it could be argued they have had the edge a lot longer. However, City are far from the side that lost the reverse fixture 4-0 and Taylor praised the resilience his side have shown after a tough start to the campaign. “It’s testament to the squad,” he said. “Everyone stuck together in that moment, everyone pitched in, sometimes not playing in their ideal role but understanding the needs of the team. We don’t look at that lightly, we understand the importance of that. Now we’ve got real competition in the team whereas previously it was a little bit ‘needs must’, but the application and attitude has been spot-on.”A major Tory party supporter is demanding the repayment of £200,000 in donations after complaining that he was excluded from elite political events and was never given auction prizes he had bid for at fundraising dinners, including breakfast with Boris Johnson. Telecoms businessman Mohamed Amersi paid £50,000 for membership of Tory donor club the Leader’s Group in December 2020. But he says he was excluded from the invitation list for high-level events last year, and that officials were instructed not to invite him to the party’s winter ball last November. He says he also paid £150,000 for auction prizes he never received, including the breakfast with the prime minister, a Japanese meal with Jeremy Hunt and a “magical show” by former defence secretary Penny Mordaunt, who once worked as a magician’s assistant. Emails and documents regarding Amersi’s donation reveal how anxious officials in Conservative headquarters were to secure his support. One note even proposed he be helped in his ambition to become chair of the National Lottery Community Fund, a £40,000-a-year post for which he had been shortlisted. Amersi said this weekend that while the donation system appears to offer a “leg up” to donors, it needs an overhaul to bring more transparency. He said he had been failed by party officials who had not fulfilled their obligations. Amersi, 61, said this weekend: “You would expect [what is arguably] the oldest political party in the world would treat a significant donor with courtesy and respect. If for any reason they felt they could not fulfil any of the promises, they could have said ‘can we write you a cheque and give you your money back?’ Instead, they’ve not given me my money back and didn’t invite me to any events.” A legal letter seen by the Observer and sent to Ben Elliot, co-chair of the Conservative party and co-founder of the concierge company Quintessentially, is the latest sally in a year-long dispute involving Amersi and other party figures over a new Conservatives’ friends of the Middle East group, which he chairs. Amersi’s lawyers warn that unless the dispute is amicably settled, officials should set out proposals for reimbursing his donations and other costs. Amersi believes one of the reasons for his exclusion is that he exposed the “access capitalism” he alleges Elliot presides over, in which he claims privileged relationships are extended to those who make hefty donations. His business dealing in Russia and an advisory role on a deal in Uzbekistan also faced scrutiny last year, but he denies any wrongdoing and a report on him by party officials did not flag any significant concerns. Amersi has donated more than £500,000 to the Conservative party since 2018 and, at a fundraising dinner at the Carlton Club in London in November 2019, he successfully bid £100,000 for breakfast with Johnson. He says he paid £50,000 for other prizes, including the meal with Hunt and the show with Mordaunt which he bid for in February 2019 at the annual Black and White ball at Battersea Evolution in London. According to internal documents obtained by the Observer, Tory officials were anxious in December 2020 that Amersi renew his membership of the Leader’s Group, which requires a minimum donation of £50,000 and gives access to events with senior Tories, including the prime minister. “Amersi is very interested in the Lottery Fund chairmanship and certainly has the skills,” said one redacted email sent on 21 December 2020 from a parliamentary email address to a party official. “I know you work with the public appointments team. Can we see that he is at least considered for the role.” It was agreed in the email correspondence that there would be efforts “to get the progress Mohamed deserves”. Amersi had in fact been interviewed for the role the previous month after being shortlisted by the public appointments team, but was told a final decision would not be made until the new year. He said he had been shortlisted on his merits and was not aware of any help from the Conservative party. On 22 December, Mike Chattey, head of fundraising for the party, said Amersi had agreed to join the Leader’s Group. Amersi said, in an email sent the same day, that he hoped, given his background and qualifications, that the party would support his application to be chair of the National Lottery Community Fund, and for a group that he led, Comena, the Conservative Friends of the Middle East and North Africa, to be affiliated with the party. He stressed that this support was neither conditional nor “transactional” and said it was “great to be part of the family again”. In the event, the lottery role was given to a prominent lawyer, Blondel Cluff. In late 2020, a “due diligence” note was compiled on Amersi by former Tory MP Charlotte Leslie, who is director of the Conservative Middle East Council, a separate group from the one Amersi had been working on. The memo gave details of Amersi’s past, his associates and his dealings with Russia. The note was reportedly sent to party officials in January 2021 and triggered a flurry of emails. Amersi said he considered the note defamatory. There were concerns about “blue on blue” conflict in the party, and it was suggested in one email that Amersi be kicked “into the very long grass”. It was also proposed that a detailed report be conducted on his background. But there was no hesitancy over taking his cash. Amersi’s £50,000 Leader’s Group donation was accepted on 18 January 2021. The pandemic caused initial delays in arranging the breakfast with Johnson, and officials also wanted to ensure he was properly vetted before any meeting. One No 10 official wrote in April 2021: “He’s a massive donor, just want to know if it’s likely to blow up into something if we do a breakfast.” By 25 August 2020, a vetting report by the Conservative research department had concluded that the party’s close links to Amersi were “fine to proceed, with minor concerns”. The six-page report said he had international business interests, with some evidence of involvement with tax havens, but it did not flag any significant issues. In the summer of last year Amersi had lifted the lid on how Elliot provided wealthy benefactors with privileged access to the highest ranks of the Conservative party and even access to Prince Charles. Amersi paid £15,000 a year for membership of Elliot’s concierge business, Quintessentially. It was also reported last October that he had advised on the structure of a deal that was later found to be a $220m (£162m) bribe for the daughter of the then president of Uzbekistan. Amersi’s lawyers said others had done due diligence on the deal and he had no reason to believe it might be a bribe. Amersi says he is now effectively frozen out of the party’s “inner circle”, despite passing its vetting checks, and thinks his revelations about Elliot’s operations are probably to blame. The businessman is now taking legal action against Leslie over the note on his background and has been criticised in parliament for using the court to try to “bully” her into silence. He says he wants to vindicate his reputation, but his efforts at reaching a settlement and avoiding a costly legal battle have been unsuccessful. Amersi says Elliot reneged on an agreement for Comena to be affiliated to the party. Amersi said last week he did not consider Elliot fit to be party co-chair: “You cannot ask donors for support, expect them to purchase auction prizes, keep their money and then, like rubbish collectors, consign them to the wastepaper bin.” Lawyers acting for the Conservative party are understood to have notified Amersi’s legal team that they consider his potential claim “legally unmeritorious”. A Conservative party spokesperson said: “Public appointments are for the government. Donations to the Conservative party are received in good faith, after appropriate due diligence, from permissible sources. Donations are properly and transparently declared to the Electoral Commission, published by them, and comply fully with the law.”As four New South Wales electorates prepare to hold byelections next weekend, one face is noticeably absent from Liberal party campaign material. In Bega, where the former teacher, scientist and small business owner Fiona Kotvojs is running, the outgoing local MP Andrew Constance is everywhere: on how-to-vote cards expressing support for her, on leaflets praising her “experience and track record”. Bridget Sakr’s leaflets in Strathfield in Sydney’s west are all about her personal story, with references from the federal MP Fiona Martin and other local figures. While in Willougby, former premier Gladys Berejiklian’s endorsements for Menzies Research thinktank head and new candidate, Tim James, are plastered far and wide. The NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, though, is missing in action. In fact, the only place the premier features prominently is in Labor’s campaign material. Posters of the premier’s face are bordered unsubtly with biohazard-tape and the words “make him listen, don’t vote Liberal” have been plastered throughout Strathfield. Ahead of next Saturday’s four byelections, Perrottet’s lack of prominence tells the story. Most governments struggle in byelections, especially after 11 years in office. Throw in the loss of the ultra-popular Berejiklian to a corruption scandal, anger over handling of the Omicron wave, and green shoots in the long-dormant NSW Labor party, and the government is concerned. “We’re preparing for it to be bad,” a senior NSW Liberal party figure told the Guardian this week. “How bad is the million dollar question, but it has the potential to set a tone, one way or another.” The byelections will take place in the Labor seat of Strathfield, in Sydney’s west, and three Coalition electorates – Willoughby, in the city’s north, and Monaro and Bega in the state’s south. All four were sparked indirectly by Berejiklian’s resignation. After she quit in October when the state’s anti-corruption watchdog revealed it was investigating her conduct, NSW politics witnessed a rush for the door. Constance quit to run in the federal seat of Gilmore, while former deputy premier John Barilaro, and former Labor leader Jodi McKay, both bowed out of politics. Of the four seats, it’s Labor’s Strathfield that is the most marginal, but all three Coalition seats housed senior government ministers who brought with them a high recognition factor. Ben Raue, a Tally Room election analyst, said seats could certainly be lost. “I think the most likely outcome is that all the seats stay in the same hands, [but] I wouldn’t say the chances of a change are slim. I would say less than 50%, but if it’s 40%, 30%, that’s still a pretty good chance,” Raue said. He said Perrottet “doesn’t have a lot of seats to spare so he has to hold all of them”. The Coalition is already effectively governing in minority, holding 46 seats in the 93-seat lower house. Two former government MPs, Gareth Ward and John Sidoti, both moved to the cross-bench after separate scandals and have continued to vote for the Coalition, meaning the loss of a seat would not be a threat to its ability to hold on to power. But it does make the margin for error going into next Saturday slim. For the Liberals, a large swing, even one that doesn’t result in them losing a seat, will open the door to layers of interpretation about the government leading in to next year’s state election. “If we got a 5% swing against us, I think most people would accept that as expected,” one Liberal party figure said. “If it’s 15%, well, that starts to create some uncomfortable questions leading into the general election next year.” After 11 years and four leaders, including the enormous electoral loss of Berejiklian, a weak showing could create a dangerous narrative for Perrottet. On the other hand, if the Labor party are unable to make headway, it would undo the strides made by opposition leader, Chris Minns, in establishing Labor as a genuine electoral challenger after more than a decade in the political wilderness. “It’s almost a two election strategy,” one Labor party figure said. “We might not win it this time, but you take the wind out of the government’s sails by getting a big swing and then the conversation becomes, ‘is Labor finally ready to take back power in NSW?’”. Seats up for grabs McKay, who quit as Labor leader in May after a poor showing at an Upper Hunter byelection, previously held Strathfield on a 5% margin. But while the government has preselected a solid candidate in businesswoman and victim support advocate Sakr, whose daughter Veronique was killed in a car crash in Oatlands in 2020, few in the party hold out significant hope of winning. However, the entry of former Sydney Morning Herald columnist Elizabeth Farrelly into the race as an independent could also pose problems for Labor because NSW’s optional preference system allows voters to exhaust their ballot. Monaro, held by the former deputy premier, Barilaro, covers the southern inland parts of the state surrounding Canberra, including the suburb of Queanbeyan. Held by the Nationals on an 11.6% margin, it has been held by Labor as recently as 2011 but is expected to stay in the government’s column. So too is Willoughby, the seat of former premier Berejiklian. Ultra-safe at 21%, the government is in no danger of losing the seat, but some Liberal party insiders fear a substantial swing after the preselection of conservative Tim James in an area traditionally dominated by the party’s moderate faction. It’s Bega, which stretches from just north of the coastal town of Bateman’s Bay to the Victorian border, which is shaping to be the most compelling of the contests. Despite its status as a safe Liberal seat, last held by Constance with a margin of 6.9%, multiple sources expressed a level of fear about the party’s chances of hanging on. “We’re definitely going to take a hit,” one party insider in Bega said. “What we’re hearing is that it might be down to a margin of maybe 2% to 3%. “I would still put my money on the Liberals holding it but when you factor in a three-term government, losing a popular member … it’s going to be tough.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Raue said Bega and Monaro were interesting because it was hard to predict how significant the loss of the previous, high-profile members would be. “The other thing is if there is a decent swing and the ALP does well, there’s a sense of people having to take them seriously.”Last time England made the trip to this stadium was back in February 2020, their last away game before the world turned upside down. That was a tight, miserly game on a miserable wet, grey and windy day, and there were long stretches here when it felt as if they had picked the contest up right where they’d left it before the pandemic. The biggest difference was in the England team. Only five of this starting XV had been in that one: Elliot Daly, Tom Curry, Lewis Ludlam, Maro Itoje and Kyle Sinckler. One of them, Daly, was playing in a different position while another, Ludlam, was making his first start since that previous encounter. It was the greenest team Jones has put out in the Six Nations, with a new backline and a new captain in Curry. You could see it, too, in the telling moments. They looked and played like a work in progress. Curry kept a can of Red Bull by the posts during his warmup, and kept swigging from it right up to the final minutes of the match. Whatever he did with the energy, he didn’t waste it on his team talk in the huddle, which ran to a scant mouthful of words. They do say he is a man who leads by his actions. And there were plenty of those: in the first half Curry carried the ball more than anyone – seven times – but he only made 11 metres. It was dirty work because he was bogged down in a muddy battle with his opposite number, the devilish Hamish Watson, who seemed to be there in front of Curry every time he lifted his eyes. Curry’s play rather summed up his side’s in that first half. England controlled the possession and the territory in those first 40 minutes; they dominated both, in fact. But they weren’t able to do anything too much with either of them. There were moments when they came close: a hanging kick from Marcus Smith which sailed just over Max Malin’s fingertips as he leaped for it out on the right wing, a rolling maul that they carried over the line but which ended with the ball being held up. Scotland, on the other hand, made it into England’s 22 exactly once, and scored a fine try while they were there. England did not lack effort. Following Curry’s lead, they threw themselves into the game body and soul. But they lacked effect. Eddie Jones said afterwards they had not been “clinical” enough. It felt more like they just weren’t ruthless enough to understand that they had to press home their advantage. They needed something extra, some edge, some inspiration. And then, early in the second half, they found it. They launched another messy, brawling rolling maul in Scotland’s half, and just as it began to falter, Ben Youngs prised the ball out the side, glanced over his left shoulder and saw Smith rushing up behind him. Youngs made the pass. Smith only had 10m or so to go – it was a split-second business – but that was all he needed to light up the game. He swerved one way and shimmied the other, a switch which left Finn Russell grasping at air while Smith slid over the tryline. Boy, they’re going to get awfully sick of Smith up here by the time he’s finished. They might have had their fill of him in this match if Jones hadn’t replaced him with George Ford soon after. Jones struggled to explain that “it’s a 23-man squad and we felt George could do a job”. And it did make some sense: his team were leading by seven and he wanted fresh legs (and old hands) to shut the game down. It wasn’t Ford’s fault but England immediately started to unravel, and a game they had almost won ran away from them again. Five minutes later Scotland had been awarded a penalty try, and England were a man down after Luke Cowan-Dickie was sent to the sin-bin for slapping the ball into touch. There was heavy pressure coming down on England now and the atmosphere inside the stadium, which had been simmering all afternoon, began to boil over. In the tumult they lost the run of themselves. Joe Marler ended up filling in at hooker for a defensive lineout while Jamie George was left on the bench; he failed to throw the ball five metres and the set piece collapsed in a heap. Jones took the blame for that one himself. They conceded two penalties in short succession, Scotland kicked one of them, and all of a sudden the hosts were three points up. One felt England’s lack of a cold, hard edge then, and felt it again during the long series of reset scrums that carried on into overtime, but which ended with an uncertain attacking play that fizzled out in midfield. There will be a lot to unpick about those final 15 minutes when Jones runs the team debrief on Monday. Between Curry’s effort, Smith’s electricity and all the other good things they have going, this England have all the makings of a great team. But they are missing some important qualities and they have a lot of learning to do. This defeat will be a particularly painful lesson.Scotland 15 Stuart Hogg (capt) Another excellent Six Nations performance for the catalogue. Kept busy by England’s varied kicking game but coped well. 9 14 Darcy Graham Excellent work in buildup to White’s try to wrongfoot Marchant and made a scintillating break in the second. 8 13 Chris Harris Is growing in stature as one of the best defensive centres in the northern hemisphere. Not many frills but a calming presence. 7 12 Sam Johnson Two carries for six metres – he was another victim of how little ball Scotland enjoyed in the first half in particular. Defensively solid, though. 5 11 Duhan van der Merwe Felt hard done by when penalised with Scotland well placed and always looked dangerous when in space. 8 10 Finn Russell Has a knack of upping the tempo with one perfectly fizzed pass and after a quiet start he grew in authority. 8 9 Ali Price Off for HIA on 13 minutes – and his replacement scored a dazzling try while he was receiving treatment – but proved his worth when returning. 7 1 Rory Sutherland Not his best performance in that Sinckler got the better of him at scrum-time. Schoeman was more involved when he came on. 5 2 George Turner Ran a decent lineout despite Itoje and Isiekwe doing their best but did not offer much with ball in hand before he was replaced. 6 3 Zander Fagerson Put England under pressure at the breakdown and got through plenty of tackles in a busy first 52 minutes. 7 4 Jonny Gray Having missed the autumn internationals his was a welcome return to the Scotland boiler room. 7 5 Grant Gilchrist Got through a mountain of unseen work and is developing into one of Scotland’s most reliable forwards. 7 6 Jamie Ritchie A real menace in his hour on the pitch. It was not always legal but most of the time it was effective and his injury-enforced withdrawal was a blow. 8 7 Hamish Watson Not many of his barnstorming carries but Scotland edged the back-row battle and he has to take his fair share of credit for that. 7 8 Matt Fagerson Led the resistance, tackling everything that moved as England dominated possession and territory in the first half. 8 REPLACEMENTS: Stuart McInally (for Turner 52) Improved things 7; Pierre Schoeman (for Sutherland 52) Got stuck in 7; WP Nel (for Z Fagerson 52) Strong scrummaging 6; Sam Skinner (for Gray 63) Crucial late lineout steal 7; Magnus Bradbury (for Ritchie 60) Strong showing 7; Ben White (for Price 59) Fairytale try 7; Sione Tuipulotu (for Johnson 60) Couple of carries 6 England 15 Freddie Steward First away performance for England suddenly not looking so assured under the high ball. That may sound harsh but a wobble was inevitable. 6 14 Max Malins Plenty of early touches, cutting infield and taking on his man on the outside but couldn’t deliver a telling contribution that a more specialist winger might have done. 5 13 Elliot Daly Flitted between centre and wing but showed some classy touches in both positions. Should he have demanded a late shot at goal? 7 12 Henry Slade Did his best to prise open Scotland’s defence but was well shackled, often facing two-man hits. 6 11 Joe Marchant Outfoxed by Graham for White’s try but stuck to his task. Not as involved as he would have liked. 6 10 Marcus Smith Backline was a bit clunky but England’s boy wonder took matters into his own hands with a fine try. England unravelled almost immediately after he went off. 8 9 Ben Youngs Clever break when England were searching for some inspiration but his kicking seemed a little prescriptive and was less effective as a result. 6 1 Ellis Genge Likes playing here, having scored the decisive try two years ago and gave it everything but was unable to influence proceedings as much as he’d have liked. 6 2 Luke Cowan-Dickie Can’t argue with his yellow card nor the penalty try decision – it was blatantly slapping the ball into touch and a deliberate knock-on to boot. Costly. 4 3 Kyle Sinckler Won a scrum penalty, gave one away just before half-time and showed his delightfully soft hands. A typical performance from a player now established as key member of England’s pack. 7 4 Maro Itoje Tried to get to Hogg for opening try but that ultimately created the opening. England’s go-to man at the lineout and was influential in his side’s maul dominance. 7 5 Nick Isiekwe No major complaints on his return to the side after a long wait but England lost the battle of the back five of the scrum. 5 6 Lewis Ludlam Palpably fired up on first start since this fixture two years agoin 2020. Tried a bit too hard at times but England went backwards when he went off. 6 7 Tom Curry (capt) Vowed to lead by example and always gets stuck in but this was the kind of match where England needed cool heads as the temperature rose. 6 8 Sam Simmonds Made an eye-catching break down the left on his first start for four years and a crucial tackle on Van der Merwe when the Scot was flying. 7 REPLACEMENTS: Jamie George (for Cowan-Dickie 77) Lineout stolen n/a; Joe Marler (for Genge 63) Lineout throw didn’t work 4; Will Stuart (for Sinckler 63) Solid 6; Charlie Ewels (for Isiekwe 77) N/A; Alex Dombrandt (for Ludlam 63) On the fringes 5; George Ford (for Smith 63) Poor penalty to touch 4; Jack Nowell (for Marchant 80) n/aBoris Johnson’s dwindling inner circle greeted his double appointment last night of Steve Barclay as the new chief of staff and Guto Harri as director of communications at No 10 as proof that the prime minister was a man of his word – and one who acted fast. Conor Burns, one of Johnson’s cheerleaders, tweeted: “He is delivering. @SteveBarclay is a talented and serious Minister and @Guto_Harri is a professional operator. Both great appointments.” But elsewhere the appointments – made necessary by the resignation of five Johnson aides last week – caused almost universal bafflement. Barclay is MP for North East Cambridgeshire and also sits in the cabinet as chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster. He will now be chief of staff and “in charge of integrating the new Office of the Prime Minister and the Cabinet Office, driving the government’s agenda more efficiently and ensuring it is better aligned with the cabinet and backbenchers”. Jonathan Powell, who served as Tony Blair’s chief of staff, said the appointment appeared desperate, and he was amazed it had been approved by the cabinet secretary, Simon Case. “Steve Barclay MP as chief of staff?” Powell wrote on Twitter. “Does he resign as an MP? Or is he answerable to parliament? I can think of no democracy where the chief of staff can also be in the legislature. “I found being No 10 chief of staff a full time job. Not sure how it could be combined with representing a constituency. And having to go to answer parliamentary questions about the PM would be tricky. Who pays his salary – does it count against the ministerial salaries limit? Amazed that the cabinet secretary has agreed to this. It all seems a bit desperate.” The return of Harri to Johnson’s side as director of communications – he served in the role for four years during Johnson’s time as mayor of London – was met with even more disbelief given Harri has hardly been his most vocal supporter recently. In 2018 Harri said Johnson would be “hugely divisive” as prime minister, a remark that has proved prescient. Dominic Cummings, Johnson’s former adviser, wasted no time before he too was on Twitter saying: “So our new boss is a pro-Remain lobbyist who’s said the PM is ‘sexually incontinent’, ‘hugely divisive’, ‘destructive’, ‘dragging the country down’, &amp; picked ‘wrong side’ in referendum’ GREAT.” Labour’s deputy leader, Angela Rayner, was also scathing. “Boris Johnson is panicking as he frantically rearranges deckchairs. The prime minister has clearly run out of serious people willing to serve under his chaotic and incompetent leadership so now expects a cabinet minister to be his chief of staff,” she said. “This is a farce. Being No 10 chief of staff is a 24/7 job so if Steve Barclay is taking it as his third job then Tory MPs and the public can have no confidence that the dysfunction in Downing Street will come to an end. Steve Barclay’s constituents and the public deserve more respect. So much for Boris Johnson’s promise to get a grip. Instead this is just a further collapse into chaos.” Johnson said the new appointments would help drive his government forward, adding: “I promised change, so that we can get on with the job the British public elected us to do. We need to continue our recovery from the pandemic, help hundreds of thousands more people into work, and deliver our ambitious agenda to level up the entire country, improving people’s opportunities regardless of where they’re from. “The changes I’m announcing to my senior team today will improve how No 10 operates, strengthen the role of my cabinet and backbench colleagues, and accelerate our defining mission to level up the country.”Eddie Jones refused to blame Luke Cowan-Dickie for a painful opening Six Nations defeat as England suffered a second successive loss to Scotland for the first time in 38 years. The visitors had transformed a 10-6 half-time deficit into a 17-10 lead with 15 minutes left at Murrayfield after two penalties and a try from the fly-half Marcus Smith but the momentum swung decisively in the 66th minute when Scotland stand-off Finn Russell launched a crossfield kick towards wing Darcy Graham. The airborne Cowan-Dickie patted it forward with both hands into touch and Ben O’Keeffe, the New Zealander referee, ruled the England hooker’s act was deliberate and awarded a penalty try, with the resultant yellow card leaving the visitors a man down at a critical juncture. “That happens in the moment,” Jones said. “He played exceptionally well for us and he is very disappointed but all the boys are supporting him. We don’t apportion any blame to Luke – the referee adjudged it was a yellow card and we have to get on with it. “We had opportunities to kick on, but we just weren’t clinical enough. We are massively disappointed we lost and Scotland deserved to win. I thought we dominated lots of the game but didn’t get points out of the domination. Rugby is a simple game: when you dominate, you have to get the points.” Jones also defended his decision to replace Smith with George Ford immediately after the youngster had put England seven points clear on the scoreboard. “It’s a 23-man game, mate,” he said. “We felt George could come on and do a job for us in the last 20 minutes. “It’s a tough one for us. For a young team I thought we fought well and played well; we just didn’t get the result. Last time against South Africa [in November], we got the penalty at the end – this time they got it. We just have to go to Italy next week and win now.” The game ended with a sequence of four reset England scrums with the clock deep in the red. Tom Curry, the captain, said “it felt like we had domination” but no penalty was forthcoming and Gregor Townsend admitted his heart-rate was “the highest it had been throughout the whole game”. “I’m glad it wasn’t decided by a scrum decision and we had to defend their attack,” the Scotland coach said. “Fortunately we got the ball back. “This fixture means a lot to us and means a lot to our people. It will make everyone really happy for maybe 365 days, but certainly the next few days. That is a strong England side. The way they attacked and with the power of their pack, they will cause some damage to teams in this competition.” Townsend praised his side’s resilience in coming back from a 17-10 deficit to earn their third win over England in five years. “We didn’t start the second half well but in the last 20 minutes we played really well and got our attack going in difficult conditions. “I am really pleased with the character, the belief, the effort and the skill to find ways of creating tries and scoring points. We were not at our best but our defence was outstanding.” Scotland will now head to Cardiff next Saturday aiming for a first win in the Welsh capital for 20 years, before hosting France, the favourites, in their third game on 26 February. “Belief is a massive weapon,” Townsend said. “We know we are going to have some really tough challenges, especially in our next two games. We haven’t won in Cardiff for a long while but we know we can play better. If we want to deliver something special, we have to play well next week.” The one downside was the sight of Jamie Ritchie being carted off on the hour with an injury to his groin area. “He is a in a bit of pain and I wouldn’t expect him to be available next week,” Townsend added.All too aware of a desire within the dressing room he leaves, and offered only a short-term contract extension by a board that had put the pro in procrastination, Justin Langer quit as head coach of Australia on Saturday. The question now, after a week of bloodletting in English cricket, is whether one of the Baggy Green’s most devout acolytes will cross the Ashes divide. And it will be asked. Andrew Strauss, England’s interim director of men’s cricket after Ashley Giles, Chris Silverwood and Graham Thorpe were sacked, is usually cautious when discussing recruitment. But at Lord’s on Friday he happily engaged with the subject of Langer’s candidacy, 24 hours before the decoupling from Cricket Australia was sealed, saying: “He will be one of the names [in the frame].” Strauss is a longtime friend and admirer, writing in his 2013 autobiography that Langer was “one leader I consider myself very fortunate to have worked with” after their time at Middlesex. He also praised “a gritty little fighter” who, while “a little intense”, was “passionate, driven and hated the lazy, in-your-comfort-zone attitude displayed by so many county cricketers”. Quite how England’s players would feel about this prospect is another matter. Hotels were shared throughout the Ashes, relations were cordial while a 4-0 pasting was being dispensed and the subject of Langer’s future was said to be a regular topic of chatter on the Australian side when he was not within earshot. By all accounts, little of it was positive nor hopeful of his contract being renewed. Come the end of the series there was only one outcome. Three nights out from the fifth Test in Hobart a group that included the captain, Pat Cummins, David Warner, the assistant coaches, Michael Di Venuto and Andrew McDonald, plus other backroom staff members, met at a bar called The Den in Salamanca and discussed who they would like to replace Langer. As reported in the Guardian, a head coach like Trevor Bayliss, renowned for not sweating the small stuff, is the type of figurehead they are hoping for. While sidelined towards the end, Langer’s time with Australia ends with the two trophies England coveted. Though there may be reservations, England’s cricketers have very little clout after a record nine Test defeats in 2021 and scant performances of note. As passionate and talented with the bat as Joe Root is, he chiefly remains captain for next month’s Caribbean tour due to a lack of alternatives. Strauss said as much on Friday, bemoaning the fact so few players had grabbed their chance of late. So if there is a belief from above that a cosy environment needs shaking out of its torpor – and Root requires a more hard-edged head coach alongside him – then Langer could fit the bill. Though the 51-year-old bleeds gold and green, Cricket Australia’s bungled handling of their team’s desire to move on – one that denied a great of their game a hero’s send-off – could work in England’s favour. But then the permanent head coach is a few steps down the line for English cricket and only part of what is being described as the “red-ball reset”. Strauss must first install an interim head coach and convene a selection panel to pick a squad to face West Indies – a team that knows all about such existential crises but has lost one Test series at home to England in the past 54 years. Having ruled himself out of the director’s job long-term due to family commitments, Strauss must also start the search for the permanent successor to Giles. The new director of cricket will hire the new head coach (Strauss will be on the panel) and decide whether the task is now so all-consuming by way of headspace and fixture list that it needs to be split into separate Test and white-ball appointments. Certainly a return to having a national selector appears on the cards, Giles having described it as “antiquated” on sacking Ed Smith last April, only for Silverwood to struggle with the additional burden. Once the setup is reconfigured and a path laid out, Strauss’s continuation in an advisory capacity is almost guaranteed and the former Test captain represents a life raft of proven cricketing competency for Tom Harrison to cling on to. The ECB chief executive is seven years deep with a waning mandate, no permanent chair above him, an independent board made up of corporates and a team beneath that has been over-stretched and distracted by the evangelical pursuit of the Hundred project. After taking charge in 2015, Harrison has twice gone 12 months without deigning to speak to the media but over the past six – during the fires of the sport’s racism crisis and the meltdown of the flagship men’s Test team – he has been forced to become a regular in front of the dictaphones and cameras, not to the mention two chastening appearances in front of MPs in parliament. The governing body also almost fully drained reserves that sat as high as £73m in 2016 just before the ill-wind of the pandemic swept through, forcing cuts and redundancies. Harrison, weeks away from his share of a £2.1m executive bonus scheme, has overseen the aggressive white-ballisation of English cricket but now states with certainty he is the right person to sort out the Test mess that resulted. It all sounds a bit Downing Street, as does talk of an independent review into the domestic game because if past such exercises are a guide, the ECB will cherrypick the conclusions. Take the Schofield Report, commissioned after the 2006-07 Ashes whitewash. Among its 19 recommendations, it said domestic formats must mirror those played at international level, while the volume of cricket must be slimmed down at county level and for the national team in order to allow players to “prepare, perform, repair and regenerate”. This does not quite tally with the subsequent expansion of the T20 Blast, the introduction of a fourth competition in the Hundred – a format not played anywhere else – nor that in 12 of the 15 calendar years since the report’s publication England men have played more than 40 international fixtures, having never done so previously. Overseas development programmes, such as the placements in Australian grade cricket, were another suggestion, only for these to be slashed in recent times and the budget transferred to you know what. The report also called for improved development of English coaches but Strauss conceded that the search to find the right candidate(s) will have to be global again. Whether this is Langer or otherwise, if the “red-ball reset” is to take place it will require more than just filling a handful of management positions.The Queen has expressed her “sincere wish” that the Duchess of Cornwall becomes Queen Consort when Charles becomes king. In a candid message marking the 70th anniversary of her accession, the monarch made clear her desire, unambiguously paving the way for Queen Camilla. When the duchess married the Prince of Wales in 2005, it was made clear by Clarence House that she would carry the title of HRH The Princess Consort. It has long been speculated that this was a title of convenience at a time when the duchess was seen to be less popular in the polls, due to her relationship with Charles when he was married to Diana, Princess of Wales. Charles is understood to have long harboured a firm desire his wife should carry the title of Queen Consort, and be thus crowned and anointed, when he becomes king. The Queen made clear she supported this in a written message released on Saturday before Sunday’s Accession Day. In it, the Queen thanked the nation for the “loyalty and affection” she had received over her long reign. She added: “And when, in the fullness of time, my son Charles becomes King, I know you will give him and his wife, Camilla, the same support that you have given me; and it is my sincere wish that, when that time comes, Camilla will be known as Queen Consort as she continues her own loyal service.” The Queen has recently signalled her strong support for Camilla, making the duchess a Royal Lady of the Most Noble Order of the Garter, in recognition of her contribution to the monarchy. Many observers saw this as a step towards confirming Camilla would be accorded Queen Consort status. Senior royals clearly feel public opinion about Camilla has changed in recent years with her popularity growing, and that this historic moment in the Queen’s reign as she marks her platinum jubilee is an appropriate time to end speculation about Camilla’s future title. At the time of her marriage to Charles, many questioned that she could not be styled Princess Consort and that protocol dictated she would be Queen Camilla in any event, in the same way the Queen Mother became Queen Elizabeth when she married George VI. The Queen, who will mark the 70th anniversary of her accession in private at Sandringham on Sunday, said in her message that it was still a day “even after 70 years, I still remember as much for the death of my father, George VI, as for the start of my reign.” She renewed the pledge she first gave in 1947 “that my life will always be devoted to your service.” She also paid tribute to the Duke of Edinburgh, who died in April aged 99 after being at her side during 73 years of marriage. She said: “I am fortunate to have had the steadfast and loving support of my family. “I was blessed that in Prince Philip I had a partner willing to carry out the role of consort and unselfishly make the sacrifices that go with it. “It is a role I saw my own mother perform during my father’s reign.” She reflected on the “goodwill shown to me by people of all nationalities, faiths and ages in this country and around the world over these years.” “I remain eternally grateful for, and humbled by, the loyalty and affection that you continue to give me.” It is not the first time the Queen has expressed her “sincere wish” on a delicate matter. In 2018, she ensured Charles would succeed her as head of the Commonwealth, after much debate over who her successor would be. She voiced her views the day before top government officials from the 53-nation body met at Windsor Castle, saying it was her “sincere wish that the Commonwealth will continue to offer stability and continuity to future generations and will decide one day the Prince of Wales should carry on the important work started by my father in 1949”. Unsurprisingly, after that declaration, the Commonwealth agreed Charles, who was not a universally popular choice, should succeed his mother as head. Camilla would technically have been Queen when Charles acceded to the throne, and only legislation would have prevented it. But royal aides insisted, when she married Charles in 2005, that Camilla did not want to be queen and said originally that the former Mrs Parker Bowles “intended” to be known instead as Princess Consort – the first in British history – instead. Any mention of “Princess Consort” was removed from Charles’s website during a revamp in 2018. Former BBC royal correspondent Peter Hunt said: “This is the most extraordinary message. The Queen is ensuring the transition, when it comes, to her son as king is as seamless and trouble-free as possible. “She’s future-proofing an institution she’s served for 70 years. And for Camilla, the journey from being the third person in a marriage to queen-in-waiting is complete.” Women married to a monarch have historically been crowned Queen Consort. Such was the case for the George VI’s wife, Queen Elizabeth the Queen Mother, and for George V’s wife Queen Mary – the Queen’s grandmother. The exception was Queen Mary II who, with her husband, King William III, was joint-Sovereign from 1689 to 1694. The royal website used to declare: “A Queen consort is crowned with the King, in a similar but simpler ceremony.” But after Charles’s marriage to Camilla, it added the get-out clause “unless decided otherwise”. Queen Victoria’s husband, Albert, was appointed Prince Consort 17 years after his marriage. He worked diligently to win the public’s affection after suffering initial hostility. Victoria had wanted him to be King Consort when they married, but the then prime minister Lord Melbourne ruled it out. The Duke of Edinburgh did not hold the title Prince Consort, having rejected the offer in the early years of the Queen’s reign. Queen Consort v Queen Regnant Camilla may be destined to be a Queen but not the Queen. The Queen is Queen Regnant, a female monarch equivalent in rank and title to a king, who reigns in her own right. A Queen Consort is the wife of a reigning king. While a Queen Regnant possesses and exercises sovereign powers, a Queen Consort – such as the Queen’s mother, who became Queen Elizabeth when George VI became king – does not formally share her spouse’s powers.Exactly the same, yet very different. Tottenham’s FA Cup score of choice this season is seemingly 3-1. But whereas a lacklustre performance against League One Morecambe required Harry Kane to spare blushes from the bench, Brighton were convincingly beaten under the Saturday night lights. Kane was again instrumental, bookending the scoring. The England captain took his tally to 25 for club and country in what is supposed to be a season of discontent. Most striking though was the intensity, perhaps for the first time befitting of Antonio Conte’s reputation. Talk of finals might be premature, but breaking a 14-season trophy drought would be a promising first trick for a manager who reached the Wembley showpiece in both his seasons at Chelsea. “The players know very well that we want to play and bring high intensity during the game,” he said. “Especially in the first half, we brought that. Our fans, the noise tonight was so intense it was difficult to communicate with our players.” Brighton, who trailed by two at the break after an unfortunate own goal adding to Kane’s sumptuous opener, rallied. But when Yves Bissouma threatened to start a comeback, Kane’s response was swift and fatal. Memories of Tanguy Ndombele’s slow-death trudge from the pitch with his side trailing were banished, replaced by promising late cameos form deadline-day duo Rodrigo Bentancur and Dejan Kulusevski. Brighton’s philosophy under Graham Potter is based on passing from the back. For the opener that proved their undoing. Robert Sánchez had miscued a pass to Adam Webster that almost allowed Kane to pounce. Rather than act as a warning, that simply served for Webster to become an unlikely guilty party. Mooted for an England call-up, his ability on the ball caught Jamie Carragher’s eye in Brighton’s last trip to London. But Son Heung-min – full of zip – stole possession and found Kane via Pierre-Emile Højbjerg. Not that a goal was a formality mind; Kane still had plenty to do, but produced a curled edge-of-the-box finish. Going behind is not new to Potter’s side, who have now netted first in just eight of 27 games across all competitions this season. And a little hiccup will not see them depart from their principles. But what felt like a terminal blow came 24 minutes in. Emerson made a powerful, if lonely, surge forward on the break, and his cross took a wicked deflection off Solly March to leave Sánchez helpless. Brighton’s clearest opening of the first-half came late on, Jakub Moder’s scoop though was never troubling Hugo Lloris. Potter tinkered at the interval, Joel Veltman replacing Adam Lallana. That allowed a switch to a back four, giving Marc Cucurella, one of the Premier League’s stand out roaming full-backs, licence to push forward. And it gave encouragement to their 5,700 travelling contingent too, Bissouma forcing Hugo Lloris to shift his weight in order to avoid being wrong-footed when his effort deflected off Cristian Romero. If anyone deserved a slice of luck, it was Bissouma and he got with 63 minutes gone, his shot from range the beneficiary of a deflection off Højbjerg. The blip was momentary. Son burned past Webster into the box, the defender doing well to seemingly recover only for his feet to get tangled. His failure to clear compounded a miserable evening, and offered Kane a simple sliding finish. “Our personality, our attitude was great but if we’re honest tonight we weren’t good enough to win,” said Potter, honest in his assessment. “We turned the ball over a little bit too cheaply. Sometimes these things can happen. Sometimes it’s not your night. And there’s another team on the pitch that we have to credit as well. Tottenham deserved to go through.”Graham Potter is giving his thoughts, looking, as ever, like a novelist who teaches creative writing on the side. “Probably wasn’t one of our better performances,” he says, “but credit to Spurs, they deserved the win. They’re a good, well-organised side with some fantastic players. We gave the ball away, a little bit unlike us. The first goal was quite cheap from our perspective, the second one’s a deflection that goes in. We responded well after half-time, got the goal, but then their third goal, yeah, it’s not a great one from our perspective. So that took the wind out of our sails, but the boys gave everything.” And that’s me done after an absorbing day that didn’t quite deliver the shocks it promised. Thanks for your company, your correspondence and your outrage when I mentioned Jose Mourinho. We have a match report! It’s by Sam Dalling at the Tottenham stadium and it’s here. Antonio Conte, so noisy in the technical area, is very quiet in interviews. “Harry Kane played a fantastic game for us,” he whispers. “It was good, good for Harry, good for Sonny to come back.” The draw for the next round, as usual, feels as if it was scheduled by an administrator who was having a laugh. It seems to be at 11.40am tomorrow, before Liverpool’s game against Cardiff. And these are the teams that are definitely in it: Middlesbrough, Chelsea, West Ham, Crystal Palace, Everton, Huddersfield, Man City, Peterborough, Southampton, Stoke, Norwich, Luton and Spurs. Plus the six that play tomorrow – Liverpool-Cardiff (noon), Forest-Leicester (4pm) and Bournemouth-Boreham Wood (6.30pm). Harry Kane now has 15 goals this season, only five of them in the league, and he’s giving an interview. “Yeah no,” he says with a big smirk on his face, “obviously delighted with the result. Brighton are a good side, having a great season.” He’s very pleased with the first goal and suitably grateful to “Sonny” for the second. Can he dare to dream? “Still a long way to go. Plenty of games to go in the league and now in the cup.” And Conte? “He’s been brilliant, as a coach and as a person. He’s changed the mindset of the players and that’s all you can ask for.” And that’s it. Spurs were far too good from the 13th minute, when Harry Kane scored that very characteristic goal, curling a long shot precisely past Sanchez. Brighton did a lot of things right, and the admirable Bissouma dragged them back into it, but their finishing let them down. Kane was one difference between the sides; purposefulness was the other. 95 min: Welbeck registers a shot on target with a flicked header. The cross just wasn’t rapid enough. 94 min: a corner for Brighton. Can they convert it? They can’t even head it. 92 min: Kane gets his chance! And fluffs it, scooping a left-foot shot into the crowd. The pass, from Kulusevski on the right, was crisp and confident. 90 min: there will be five added minutes. Not sure even that will be enough for Brighton. 89 min: Lee Dixon’s man of the match is Harry Kane, which is fair enough. 88 min: Reguilon has time and space for a shot but hits it straight at Sanchez. “When we lived in Deepdale in the 60s,” says Mike Boulton, “I managed to get into the game when we [Preston, I presume] beat Spurs 2-1 in the FA Cup 5th round. They had Greaves, Mullery, Mackay and Pat Jennings in goal - needless to say it was a surprise - and me at 16 successful in getting into the pub afterwards.” Those were the days. 86 min: Bentancur gets too close to Bissouma and marks his debut in English football with a well-earned booking. Yet another Spurs sub: Matt Doherty for Emerson Royal. 83 min: what a miss! Bergwijn gets a gift from Kulusevski, after a cock-up at the back from Brighton, but he leans back and lofts it. 80 min: Bentancur and Kulusevski are combining so well in midfield that you wonder why clubs don’t sign players in pairs more often. Nothing comes of it, but Kane can smell a hat-trick. 79 min: a glimmer for Welbeck, peeling off shrewdly at the back post as a long ball comes in from Gross, but he can’t control it. 76 min: another sub for Spurs – Cristian Romero walks off, after going down with cramp, and Joe Rodon comes on. And another: Rodrigo Bentancur, the second of the new signings from Juventus, for Harry Winks. 74 min: Dunk, at left centre-back, aims a long high ball over to the right wing. It would be a good ball if there was anyone there. 72 min: Brighton have to do to Spurs what Spurs did to Leicester. And although they’ve been better in this half, there still hasn’t been much cutting edge. 70 min: here is Danny Welbeck, replacing Lamptey. He’s greeted by the crowd with all the affection they reserve for former Arsenal players. 68 min: Antonio Conte makes some changes. Son trots off, along with Lucas Moura; on come Steven Bergwijn and the new signing, Dejan Kulusevski. 67 min: Brighton chance! Maupay is clean through with only Lloris to beat, but his shot is so tame, a failed dink. Get Welbeck on! An instant riposte, and it’s Kane and Son! Son goes on a terrific run, shoving defenders out of his way, and Kane slides in to make sure. Game off again. He’s been the best player in this half and he’s got his team back in it! Yves Bissouma runs sideways, shoots from the edge of the box and picks up a big deflection, off Hojbjerg I suspect. Game on! 62 min: another sub for Brighton – March off, Moises Caicedo on. 60 min: Brighton’s bright start to this half is fading. The Spurs fans sense it and go big on “When the Spurs go marching in”. 59 min: Kane and Son – the old firm – are almost back in business. Kane slips it to his left, Son takes the shot, and if he hadn’t had four games off he would surely not have hit it straight at Sanchez. 57 min: it’s been a good-natured encounter so far, but Veltman brings some bite. He crashes into Son and goes into the book. 55 min: Lamptey is getting some joy down the right. His opposite number, Reguilon, is a lovely player but not very interested in defending. 53 min: it’s not hard to work out what Graham Potter had to say at half-time. “Move it faster! Be more direct!” 51 min: Brighton waste a free kick but then come back strongly as Bissouma drives into the box and draws a fine save from Lloris. “Tottenham’s purple patch in the FA Cup?” says Stewart Bowling. “I’m fortunate to have spanned that period of FA Cup wins from 1981-1991. Here’s hoping for another Ricky Villa moment in the final this year! COYS!” 48 min: Moder finds the ball at his feet just outside the D, but he skies his shot. 46 min: Graham Potter makes a substitution, taking off a midfielder and sending on Joel Veltman, so it looks as if Brighton are switching to a back three. The man sacrificed is Lallana, who may not be 100pc fit. “Yep,” says Yash Gupta, “it’s been a tiny bit like Mourinho-esque, except there is a clear plan as to how to progress well into final third and staying there for more than five seconds. Not meant as a dig to Jose but most of defence and midfield personnel is same and still there is a clear difference.” True. “No Tim! No!!!!” says Peter Crosby in the Catskills. “Hey – nice work so far but also this couldn’t be further than the bleak Mourinho days. We’re snappy and more confident and more energetic and more interested and less filled with fear. And we’re more clinical and more interesting and a far cry from the mess he turned us into. Please don’t compare us to that!!!” Truth be told, part of me was hoping to get a reaction. Half-time reading from my colleague Nick Ames in Minawao: “We play to forget what happened”. The players go off with Brighton wondering how they are 2-0 down. They’ve had half the shots (five-all) and more than half the ball (53 per cent), yet Spurs have been a cut above. Whisper it, but it’s been a Mourinho-esque performance: sitting back in numbers, then roaring forward on the counter. As Brighton always score one, they could soon be back in it – but where will a second come from? 45 min: there will be one more minute of this half. 44 min: better from Brighton as Maupay lays it off to Moder, who leans back too far and lifts his shot over the bar. 43 min: a rare spell of possession for Spurs, but nothing comes of it. When Brighton finally get hold of the ball, their build-up is too slow. 39 min: Brighton are getting players forward. Bissouma plays it square to Maupay, who spins and hits over the bar. There’s a ripple of warm applause for a late lamented Spurs fan, Ashley Savage, who died aged 39 after suffering from cancer. His team nearly mark the moment with a goal as Kane hovers in the box. 38 min: a lovely perpendicular ball finds Lallana in the box, but he can’t get it out from under his feet. He’s been the one Brighton player who might make the Combined XI. 36 min: March gets a cross in from the left but Lallana, at the near post, can only deflect it into the arms of Lloris. 34 min: Reguilon, on the touchline, gets a blatant shove in the back from Webster and loses a boot. Hard to work out what that meant: maybe just frustration that Brighton have had half the possession and none of the good chances. 32 min: Kane chips through to Son, who cuts back and starts a game of pinball. Anything could happen, but it doesn’t. That deflection, from Solly March, is reckoned to have been so vital that Emerson Royal is off the scoresheet. 29 min: end to end! March has a shot at one end, safely held by Lloris. Spurs sprint up the other end and Kane misses with a dink, but he’s offside anyway. 27 min: Spurs break at speed, Reguilon whips in a cross, and Brighton are grateful that the chance goes to Winks, who targets Row W. 26 min: so bang goes Brighton’s run of 1-1s. They’re still passing the ball nicely, but where’s the threat? They may need to get Danny Welbeck on sooner than planned. Ah, there was a deflection. Royal had raced from the halfway line but he didn’t have anyone to cross to. Turned out, he didn’t need anyone to cross to. What the hell? A cross from Emerson Royal ends up looping over Sanchez. 22 min: never mind Harry Kane, Harry Winks is having a go from distance. He had time and space to do a 360-degree spin, and the shot was good enough to stretch Sanchez. 20 min: after performing one of his party tricks, Kane produces another by dropping deep and playing a lofted through ball, but Lucas Moura can’t get on the end of it. 18 min: Spurs are knocking it around confidently now, but Brighton still get into their box through the outstanding Lamptey. The ball stays up Spurs’ end, only for Bissouma to slip as he takes a shot. That came from our old friend, playing out from the back. Brighton got away with one cock-up and immediately committed another. Hojbjerg pounced and teed up Kane, who cashed in on his first appearance in the FA Cup for four years. A beauty from Harry Kane! Right foot, curled into the corner from just beyond the D. 10 min: if you were told that one of these teams was down to ten men, you’d assume it was Spurs. Brighton’s midfielders are hunting as a pack. 8 min: Brighton are in some bother but Adam Lallana eases them out of it with a slalom through the traffic. They’re playing a back four in possession, Lee Dixon reckons, and a back five the rest of the time. 5 min: Brighton have a free kick on the left, but it’s right in the bread basket for Hugo Lloris. 4 min: Spurs attack, not on the counter, and Son’s backheel almost finds Ben Davies. Good defending by Pascal Gross. 3 min: Brighton have had more of the ball, playing it around nicely, and Adam Lallana had something that may even be classified as a shot. But Spurs are looking purposeful on the break. The players take the knee, and Brighton get the ball rolling. Prediction time for the ITV4 pundits. “Tottenham win,” says Robbie Keane. “One-one and penalties,” says Glenn Murray. If you didn’t already know which of these sides they used to play for, you might just be able to work it out. Meanwhile, in the Premier League, there’s a result, of sorts: Burnley 0-0 Watford. “Well,” says The Guardian’s Scott Murray, “that was a hard watch.” Is this a 4-5-1? Hard to say. On the team sheet Maupay is in the middle, so maybe it’s a 4-6-0. The main thing is that Yves Bissouma, probably Brighton’s best player, is back from playing for Mali in the Africa Cup of Nations. Sanchez; Lamptey, Cucurella, Webster, Dunk; Bissouma, Gross, Lallana, Moder, March; Maupay. Subs: Steele, McGill, Alzate, Duffy, Calcedo, Veltman, Offiah, Ferguson, Welbeck. It looks like a 3-4-3. Heung-Min Son is back after four games out with injury, and both the new recruits from Juventus, the winger Dejan Kulusevski and midfielder Rodrigo Bentancur, are on the bench. Lloris; Romero, Sanchez, Davies; Royal, Winks, Hojbjerg, Reguilon; Lucas, Kane, Son. Subs: Gollini, Doherty, Sessegnon, Rodon, White, Bentancur, Kulusevski, Bergwijn, Scarlett. Evening everyone and welcome to the FA Cup fourth-round tie that struck ITV’s bosses as Saturday prime-time material. But only for their fourth channel.Whether they were right, time will tell, but it does look like an entertaining game. And it must have a good chance of going to penalties, given Brighton’s ability to grab a draw from the jaws of almost anything. Are you old enough to remember when Spurs were a cup team? In the 11 years up to 1991, they reached four FA Cup finals and won three of them. It was as if the song Chas and Dave wrote for them in 1981 – Ossie’s going to Wembley, his knees have gone all trembly – worked its magic for a whole decade. Then they turned into Tim Henman: in the 30 full seasons since that last triumph, they’ve made eight semi-finals and lost the lot of them. For the past three years they haven’t even reached the quarters, and these days they’re capable of going out of a tournament on a technicality. Still, that should add fuel to the fire of Antonio Conte’s intensity tonight. Kick-off is at 8pm, so I’ll be back soon after 7 with the teams.Jürgen Klopp is confident his “warriors” Mohamed Salah and Sadio Mané will be able to process their delight and dejection from the Africa Cup of Nations final and want to get straight back into the battle for the Premier League title. Liverpool’s two top scorers of the Klopp era face off on Sunday when Salah captains Egypt against Mané’s Senegal in Yaoundé before they team up again against Leicester on Thursday. The Liverpool manager is convinced that, rather than asking for a break, each will be eager to return to action and, while it is likely one will come back to Merseyside jubilant and the other disappointed, he insisted it is not a test of his man-management skills. “No one asks how they will deal with it,” he said. “I don’t think that will be a problem. Both play a successful tournament. I can deal with it; no problem. I will help them with all I have. When they come back, we will talk and see if they need anything. They are our boys: we will do everything to help them in all the situations.” The two forwards willingly shoulder a huge workload for Klopp. Salah made the joint most appearances last season and, even though he has been in Africa for a month, only the goalkeeper Alisson has started more games for Liverpool this campaign than their top scorer. While Klopp expects the beaten finalist back at Anfield sooner, with the winner likely to take the trophy back to his homeland, and will consult both before plunging them back into action, he is likely to have them available on Thursday to bolster an attack that could also include his January signing, Luis Díaz. “These two boys are real warriors,” he said. “They are constantly ready. They are both not worried about holidays or days off. I never heard them ask about it, so especially with these two, it is really simple. I know they want to play immediately but together with them we have to find out how much sense it makes. You can imagine both want to play against Leicester, both want to be involved, score goals and win football games for Liverpool.” While Mané and Salah are on opposite sides at the Africa Cup of Nations, Klopp does not believe they have a rivalry and he argued the only intra-squad contest is between his full-backs, Andy Robertson and Trent Alexander-Arnold, to create the most goals. The right-back has the most assists in the Premier League, but only one more than Salah, who has a six-goal lead in his bid to win a third Golden Boot. The second, in 2019, was shared with Mané and Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang and, while the Senegalese tends to be outscored by the Egyptian, he has one more goal in the Africa Cup of Nations, Mané having scored three to Salah’s two. “Three years ago they were together and got the golden boot,” Klopp said. “It was a really nice moment. Apart from that, do they have a competition? I know Robbo and Trent have a competition for assists.” Salah was seen rousing Egypt with an on-pitch speech before extra time in Thursday’s semi-final against Cameroon, taking more responsibility after the manager, Carlos Queiroz, had been sent to the stands. Klopp was pleased, though not surprised, to see Salah and Mané take on the kind of motivational duties that James Milner, Jordan Henderson and Robertson adopt in the Anfield dressing room. “I have my meetings but in the pep talk before the game Milly and Hendo and Robbo are more vocal,” he said. “As a not native speaker, I am not very vocal and it doesn’t make sense when in these moments each word has to hit the nail. Now Mo and Sadio are there in their home language, the most important players, the best players in their countries, they take the role. I was never in doubt that they have leadership skills. They wear the hat and have been pretty impressive.”Brazil has registered 1,308 new Covid-19 deaths over the last 24 hours, the country’s health ministry said on Saturday. It is the highest number of fatalities since July 29th last year. A further 259 people have died in the UK within 28 days of testing positive for Covid-19, bringing the total to 158,243, the government said. Conservative MP Stephen Hammond has said he is “considering very carefully this weekend” whether he still has confidence in the UK’s prime minister and it “certainly looks like” the beginning of the end for Boris Johnson. The US death toll from Covid-19 has hit 900,000. Turkish president Recep Tayyip Erdoğan has tested positive for Covid-19. Russia reported a record daily number of Covid-19 cases with new daily cases of 177,282. The government coronavirus task force also reported 714 deaths. From Sunday, people will no longer need to self-isolate after contacting those infected with the virus, Reuters reports. In Moscow, schools and nurseries may end isolation requirements for pupils from next week. South Korea reported more than 30,000 daily Covid-19 infections for the first time. Hong Kong reported a record 351 daily cases of coronavirus. Japan’s daily Covid-19 cases have exceeded 100,000, marking a new high, public broadcaster NHK reported. About 50 of Iran’s 290 parliamentarians have contracted Covid-19, a senior MP has said. Compulsory vaccination for over-18s came into force in Austria today. The head of the World Health Organization (WHO) has said he discussed with the Chinese premier, Li Keqiang, the need for stronger collaboration to investigate the origins of Covid-19. Canadian cities, including Toronto, are braced for further disruptions this weekend as protests against vaccine mandates spread from the capital of Ottawa. Brazil has registered 1,308 new Covid-19 deaths over the last 24 hours, the country’s health ministry said on Saturday. It is the highest number of fatalities since July 29 last year. The country also recorded 197,442 new Covid cases, Reuters reports. You can follow the latest Covid developments in Australia in our blog here: The front page of tomorrow’s Observer newspaper: Canadian cities, including the financial hub of Toronto, faced disruption on Saturday as protests against vaccine mandates spread from the capital of Ottawa, raising fears of clashes with counter-protesters. About 500 healthcare workers and supporters rallied in downtown Toronto, near the site of the planned trucker convoy demonstrations, according to an eyewitness. Several Toronto healthcare workers said they received advice from their hospitals to not wear hospital scrubs in public in light of the protest. Police said this was not their advice. “The notion that we have to somehow skunk around or be afraid of who we are and what were doing, I think, is offensive and regrettable and, I think, a sad commentary on our society,” emergency room doctor Raghu Venugopal told Reuters. Some protest vehicles arrived in Quebec City for a planned protest, coinciding with the city’s annual winter carnival. Some US Republicans have vowed to investigate GoFundMe’s decision to take down a page accepting donations in support of protesting truck drivers in Canada. West Virginia and Louisiana’s attorney generals were among those who called on constituents to let them know if they had been a donor. The website has already said it would refund all donations, Reuters reports. The Freedom Convoy 2022 began as a movement against a Canadian vaccine requirement for cross-border truckers, but has turned into a rallying point against public health measures in Canada. GoFundMe said in a tweet that it had revised its original plan on how to handle funds already donated to support the truck driver protest, saying that all donations would be refunded. “This refund will happen automatically, you do not need to submit a request. Donors can expect to see refunds within 7-10 business days,” GoFundMe said in its tweet. In the already Covid-stretched hospitals of northern New South Wales, Australia, health workers are struggling with another growing pressure caused by the pandemic. House prices have soared in Byron Bay and surrounding areas since Covid lockdowns and work-from-home inspired many to flee the city for a sea or tree change. And while the impacts on buyers or renters in the area have been well documented, hospital workers say it’s having far-reaching effects on the community’s health. A report has found that around 20 Covid patients in the UK are being admitted to intensive care units each day as Omicron fails to cause serious illness among most vaccinated people. The study by the Intensive Care National Audit and Research Centre put the number of admissions to ICU of patients with Covid at 19 on January 23. About 400 people were being admitted daily at the peak of the second wave in January last year, The Sunday Times reported. Pakistan prime minister, Imran Khan, has a message for Turkey’s president and his wife who have tested positive for Covid-19. France has reported 104,974 coronavirus deaths in hospital, up by 170. It has also reported that 3,606 people are in intensive care units with Covid-19, down by 12, Reuters reports. Here are some further details on fifty members of Iran’s 290-seat parliament contracting Covid as the Omicron variant spreads unabated across the country. Senior MP Alireza Salimi, speaking to YJC, a news agency linked to Iran’s state TV, said this week’s parliamentary session would be held in accordance with health regulations. Parliament was suspended for two weeks last April due to an outbreak among MPs. In the early days of the pandemic, several lawmakers died from the virus. Some further data from Italy. Patients in hospital with Covid-19 - not including those in intensive care - stood at 18,615 on Saturday, down from 19,000 a day earlier, Reuters reports. There were 104 new admissions to intensive care units, down from 114 on Friday. The total number of intensive care patients fell to 1,411 from a previous 1,440. Some 846,480 tests for Covid-19 were carried out in the past day, compared with a previous 884,893, the health ministry said. Italy reported 93,157 Covid-19 cases on Saturday, down from 99,522 the day before, the health ministry said. The number of deaths decreased to 375 from 433, Reuters reports. Italy has registered 148,542 deaths linked to Covid-19, the second-highest toll in Europe after Britain and the ninth highest in the world. The country has reported 11.54 million cases to date. Russia will ease some of its Covid-19 restrictions from Sunday, the consumer health watchdog announced, despite reporting a record daily number of cases as the Omicron variant spreads across the country. The number of daily infections has been surging since January. But the highly transmissible Omicron variant has not led to a significant increase in deaths, and the Kremlin has recently dismissed concerns about the risk of new lockdowns. According to the latest order from the consumer health watchdog, from Sunday people will no longer need to self-isolate after contacting those infected with the virus, Reuters reports. In Moscow, schools and nurseries may end isolation requirements for pupils from next week, the capital’s coronavirus task force said. Florida governor Ron DeSantis has criticised website GoFundMe after $9 million in donations were sent to support protesting truckdrivers in Canada. He pledged to investigate what he called “deceptive practices” by the website. GoFundMe took down the so-called Freedom Convoy’s page on Friday, saying it violated its terms of service. It said donors had two weeks to request a refund, then remaining funds would be disbursed to “credible and established charities.” DeSantis, a Republican, said he would work with Florida Attorney General Ashley Moody to investigate. He tweeted: “(T)hese donors should be given a refund.” A further 259 people have died in the UK within 28 days of testing positive for Covid-19, bringing the total to 158,243, the government said. The figures now include deaths in England following possible reinfections of Covid-19, which is why there has been a jump in the cumulative total and why the daily figure is higher than recently. There were 60,578 cases of Covid-19 reported in the UK which includes reinfections in England and Northern Ireland that are more than 90 days after a previous positive test. Here is MP Nadine Dorries’ awkward interview on the controversy around gatherings held in Downing Street in the UK during lockdown. Here’s a summary of events so far: Tory MP Stephen Hammond has said he is “considering very carefully this weekend” whether he still has confidence in the prime minister and it “certainly looks like” the beginning of the end for Johnson Culture secretary Nadine Dorries insisted the prime minister tells the truth “to the best of his knowledge” and suggested those calling for his resignation were Remainers. She added that health secretary Sajid Javid had told her “he is 100% behind the prime minister” New Labour MP Christian Wakeford has called on Conservative MPs to submit letters of no confidence in the prime minister, saying they “owe it to the country” The US death toll from Covid-19 has hit 900,000 Turkish president Recep Tayyip Erdoğan has tested positive for Covid-19 Russia reported a record daily number of Covid-19 cases with new daily cases of 177,282. The government coronavirus task force also reported 714 deaths. South Korea reported more than 30,000 daily Covid-19 infections for the first time Hong Kong reported a record 351 daily cases of coronavirus Japan’s daily Covid-19 cases have exceeded 100,000, marking a new high, public broadcaster NHK reported About 50 of Iran’s 290 parliamentarians have contracted Covid-19, a senior MP has said Compulsory vaccination for over-18s came into force in Austria today The head of the World Health Organization (WHO) has said he discussed with the Chinese premier, Li Keqiang, the need for stronger collaboration to investigate the origins of Covid-19 Canadian cities, including Toronto, are braced for further disruptions this weekend as protests against vaccine mandates spread from the capital of Ottawa James Tapper writes: The Covid booster campaign has stalled, and declining trust in the prime minister is part of the problem, say scientists. Only 26,875 people in England had a third dose or booster on 1 February, the latest complete figures available, and 6 million people are at least six weeks overdue for their shot. Behavioural scientists, including government advisers, and public health leaders say the huge drop in take-up in just one month is fuelled by the widespread belief that Boris Johnson flouted his own Covid rules. Read the full report here. Canadian cities, including Toronto, are braced for further disruptions this weekend as protests against vaccine mandates spread from the capital of Ottawa, Reuters reports. The so-called “Freedom Convoy” began as a movement against a vaccine requirement for cross-border truckers, but has turned into a rallying point against public health measures. Protesters have shut down downtown Ottawa for the past eight days, with some participants waving Confederate or Nazi flags and others saying they wanted to dissolve Canada’s government. Toronto police said they would have a ramped-up presence in the city over the weekend due to anticipated protests. GoFundMe said it had cancelled the Freedom Convoy 2022 fundraiser, citing police reports of violence. In a statement, it said it will “automatically refund all contributions directly”. The head of the World Health Organization (WHO) has said he discussed with the Chinese premier, Li Keqiang, the need for stronger collaboration to investigate the origins of Covid-19. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus has previously pressed China to be more forthcoming with data and information related to the origin of the virus, reports Reuters. “Pleased to meet with Premier Li Keqiang,” Tedros tweeted on Saturday. “We discussed Covid-19 and the need for an aggressive effort on vaccine equity this year to vaccinate 70% of all populations,” he said. “We also discussed the need for stronger collaboration on Covid-19 virus origins, rooted in science and evidence,” he added. Last year, the WHO established the Scientific Advisory Group on the Origins of Novel Pathogens and called on China to supply raw data to help any new investigation. But China declined, citing patient privacy rules. China has consistently denied allegations the virus was leaked from a specialist laboratory in the city of Wuhan, where Covid-19 was first identified at the end of 2019. A joint study by China and the WHO published last year concluded the most likely hypothesis was that the virus jumped from bats to humans via an intermediate animal. Turkish president Recep Tayyip Erdoğan has tested positive for Covid-19, he said on Saturday. “Today my wife and I tested positive for Covid-19 with mild symptoms. Thankfully, we’re experiencing slight symptoms that we have learned is the omicron variant,” he tweeted. “We are on duty. We will continue to work at home. We look forward to your prayers.” Erdoğan, 67, made the announcement after appearing via videolink at a tunnel-opening ceremony from Istanbul, having cancelled his appearance in person, citing bad weather, AP reports. The president showed no signs of illness in his televised appearance. Turkey has seen record levels of Covid-19 cases in recent days, with 111,157 cases reported on Friday. Deaths are also rising in the country, with 248 virus-related fatalities reported on Friday, a level not seen since October. South Korea on Saturday reported more than 30,000 daily Covid-19 infections for the first time, as the Korea Disease Control and Prevention Agency logged a record 36,362 new Covid-19 infections. The latest figure is a dramatic increase from the previous daily record of 27,443 reported on Friday. The government extended social distancing rules on Friday for two weeks until 20 February, including a 9pm curfew for restaurants, bars and gyms, as infections with Omicron continue to soar. The prime minister, Kim Boo-kyum, said extending the restrictions, which were due to end on Sunday, was necessary to slow the spread of the variant amid fears the lunar new year holiday may have fuelled infections. Health authorities have warned that daily infections could possibly reach 100,000 in coming weeks, the Korea Herald reported. About 50 of Iran’s 290 parliamentarians have contracted Covid-19, a senior MP has said. Alireza Salimi, speaking to YJC, a news agency linked to Iran’s state TV, said this week’s parliamentary session would be held in accordance with health regulations. Parliament was suspended for two weeks last April due to an outbreak among MPs, Reuters reports. In the early days of the pandemic, several lawmakers died from the virus. Iran has experienced a sharp rise in cases and in recent days reported an average of more than 30,000 new infections daily. On Saturday however, the health ministry reported 23,130 fresh cases. More than 50 million people of the country’s 85 million strong population have received two doses of the vaccine, and more than 19 million have received three doses. Iran has logged more than 6.5 million infections and more than 132,500 coronavirus-related deaths since the pandemic began. Hello, I’m Jedidajah Otte and I’ll be taking over for the next hour. You can get in touch on Twitter @JedySays if there’s anything you think is worth flagging. Tory MP for Wimbledon Stephen Hammond has said he is “considering very carefully this weekend” whether he still has confidence in the Prime Minister and it “certainly looks like” the beginning of the end, PA reports. He told BBC Radio 4’s Week In Westminster he would be “reflecting on the events of the week, reflecting on the fact that my constituents and I and almost all of the country obeyed rules, and there seems to be a group of people who haven’t.” He said he had not yet put a letter into Sir Graham Brady, but added: I think I’m making it very clear to you that I am considering very carefully over the weekend, what are the next steps. I think all Conservative colleagues, all of whom I know, are in it for trying to do the best for their constituents, and the country will be wrestling with their consciences this weekend. Asked whether it was “the beginning of the end” for the PM, he said: “It certainly looks like that at the moment. He added: “It looks very difficult for the Prime Minister from here.” Hammond also disagreed with culture secretary Nadine Dorries’ characterisation that those who wanted the PM to go were Remainers or had always opposed Boris Johnson. “This is predictable rubbish from a predictable source,” he said. “If you look at where the letters are coming from, I don’t understand how anyone could stand up that claim, and so I think probably the Secretary of State needs to think again.” He said that the no-confidence letters declared so far were from “all wings of the party and none” and that the suggestion there was a Remainer plot was “complete nonsense”. I know of no coordinated plot and if I were the whips’ office that would worry me even more because I think quite rightly individuals are wrestling with their conscience, deciding what to do, and the fact that it’s individuals doing it means it’s much less easy for the whips or Boris’s friends to put in a counter operation. Japan’s daily Covid-19 cases have exceeded 100,000, marking a new high, public broadcaster NHK reported. Most regions in Japan are now under infection control measures to try to slow the spread of the Omicron variant which has been driving the rise in cases. Malaysia reported 9,117 new Covid-19 infections on Saturday, the highest daily figure in four months, reports Reuters. The new cases bring the total number of infections since the start of the pandemic to 2,904,131. Malaysia has also reported over 32,000 deaths. In a Facebook post on Friday, Noor Hisham Abdullah the director-general of health said: Although the number of cases is expected to rise in the next couple of days and weeks, due to the high transmissibility of Omicron variant, it causes a less severe form of the disease in those who have had full vaccination and taken their booster shot. About 97.9% of Malaysia’s adult population has received two doses of the vaccine, while 52.3% have also received the booster shot. About 88.7% of 12- to 17-year-olds have also received two doses. This week Malaysia began vaccinations for 5- to 11-year-olds. More from Nadine Dorries. She has insisted the prime minister tells the truth “to the best of his knowledge” based on advice given to him by aides. When asked about claims made by Boris Johnson about the number of people in work, she told the BBC: “He will have been given by advisers and researchers the fact that there were more people in work than there were at the beginning of the pandemic, not on the payroll.” She said: So did he tell the truth when he quoted that? Yes, he told the truth as it was given to him.” Dorries added: “The prime minister does tell the truth.” I can personally tell you that the prime minister, when he stands at the despatch box and makes quotes like the one you just quoted, is because the researchers and his advisers will have given him that quote, and that’s ... and he was truthful, to the best of his knowledge, when he made that quote,” she said. From today, Austrians over the age of 18 must be vaccinated against Covid-19, unless they are exempt, or face the possibility of a heavy fine, an unprecedented move in the European Union, reports Agence-France Presse. The new measure, adopted on 20 January by Austria’s parliament, was signed into law by the president, Alexander Van der Bellen, on Friday. The government’s tougher approach has been met with criticism within the country. Meanwhile, in neighbouring Germany, a similar law championed by the chancellor, Olaf Scholz, was debated last month in the Bundestag, but has not made progress because of divisions on the issue. Hong Kong reported 351 cases of coronavirus on Saturday, a record daily high since the outbreak of the pandemic, reports Reuters. This adds further pressure on the government’s “dynamic zero-Covid” strategy as other major cities opt to live with the virus. Health secretary, Sophia Chan, said she expects cases to rise “exponentially” following the lunar new year holiday because of an increase in family and social gatherings. She appealed for people to “stay at home” and urged people, especially the elderly, to get vaccinated. About 160 of the latest cases had no clear source and were still being investigated, authorities said. On Friday, Hong Kong reported 131 positive cases, compared with 142 on Thursday. The previous daily record was 164 cases in late January. In total, Hong Kong has recorded 213 Covid-19 deaths and around 15,000 cases since early 2020, according to the government. It added that on Friday two pet cats had tested positive for coronavirus and urged pet owners to avoid kissing animals. More comments from culture secretary Nadine Dorries, this time on whether the health secretary, Sajid Javid, was still behind Boris Johnson. She said Javid was “quite shocked” at how his comments about Johnson’s allegation about Sr Keir Starmer and Jimmy Savile had been reported. She told Sky News: “I spoke to Sajid Javid last night and he reassured me that he is 100% behind the prime minister. In fact, I think he’s quite shocked at how his comments have been interpreted.” She said: “What you’re reporting about Sajid Javid turning his back on the prime minister is not true.” New Labour MP Christian Wakeford has said Boris Johnson’s reaction to the investigation into parties held across Whitehall during coronavirus restrictions had only strengthened his view that he was right to leave the Conservatives, PA reports. The Bury South MP, who defected from the Tories last month, also called on Conservative MPs to submit letters of no confidence in the prime minister, saying they “owe it to the country”. He told The House magazine that in the run-up to his decision, there “had obviously been quite a few moments where [the Tories] had been incredibly annoying”. He said: “They were reeling out minister after minister to defend the indefensible. It was unedifying. I was slowly coming to the realisation that the party I had been in for 18 years had changed and I had changed.” “Boris Johnson isn’t suitable to be a leader, let alone a prime minister,” he said. “It all just reinforces that the decision I made ... was actually the right one.” He continued: “For those who’ve written letters but have not submitted them, I say: if not now, when?” “They owe it to the country and to themselves to actually bring it forward, to make sure that he’s replaced. The longer it goes on, the more damage is caused.” Former minister Dr Liam Fox has said he has not submitted a letter of no confidence in Boris Johnson, PA reports. Speaking to BBC R4’s Today programme, the Conservative MP for North Somerset said: “It’s very clear in the system we have in the Conservative party that not even the 15% threshold has been reached where members of the parliamentary party are unhappy with the prime minister. “We have a mechanism to deal with that. If I had been unhappy with the prime minister, I would have put a letter in to Sir Graham Brady, which I have not done today.” He added that he is “waiting to see what comes out of” the full Sue Gray report into the “partygate” saga in Downing Street. “I think that all the whole issue round whether rules were broken in Downing Street in 2020 now needs to be resolved by what the police are investigating. “We didn’t get the full coverage of what Sue Gray had said and I think we need to get all this information.” He added: “I’m waiting to see what comes out of the report.” It comes as Nick Gibb, the MP for Bognor Regis and Littlehampton, became the latest MP calling on the PM to resign. He said his constituents were “furious about the double standards” and said the prime minister had been “inaccurate” in his statements to the Commons. Gibb said he has submitted a letter of no confidence to the chairman of the 1922 Committee, Sir Graham Brady. Writing in the Daily Telegraph, he said: “My constituents are furious about the double standards – imposing harsh and, to my mind, necessary restrictions as we and the world sought to defend ourselves against this new and deadly virus, while at the same time flagrantly disregarding those rules within the fortress of Downing Street.” Nine letters of no confidence in Johnson have been publicly submitted, but the actual number is expected to be higher. You can read more on the Nick Gibb story here The culture secretary, Nadine Dorries, said Boris Johnson was “very positive” when she had communicated with him in the last 24 hours, PA reports. She said those speaking out against the prime minister were “the same names that we continually keep (hearing) cropping up” and were in “safe seats”. She told BBC Breakfast: “What I would say is that the prime minister, when he appeared for the [19]22 Committee last week, promised to change and I think anybody who picks up a newspaper or reads a newspaper, sees a television news bulletin, can see that a huge amount of change is underway at present, particularly in No 10.” She also told Times Radio of those critical of Johnson: “There are a small number of voices, whether they are people who were ardent supporters of remain, who see this as their last opportunity to reverse Brexit.” Asked whether the moves against Johnson were a “remainer plot”, Dorries said: “There are a number of reasons actually, it’s not just one, but that certainly is at play with a group.” She said it was “important that people don’t get hung up” on a “small number” of MPs. Dorries suggested those in marginal seats were “working damn hard and they want Boris Johnson in place”. People in the UK who broke Covid rules and were fined react to the government’s partygate, in piece by Gaby Hinsliff. She speaks to among others, Chloé Gardiner. There were three carloads of police in the end,” says Gardiner, a 23-year-old care assistant from the small town of Portstewart in Northern Ireland. “And there were only four of us.” It was hardly a wild party, she says – they were just hanging out, listening to music and posting the odd picture to social media – and she doesn’t know who reported them; they weren’t being loud, and they have no close neighbours. They were fined £200 each for breaching Covid regulations, deducted automatically in her case from her wages. Gardiner, who works two jobs, says money went from both pay packets, and she is still trying to recoup £100 she thinks was wrongly deducted in the confusion. .... By last December, police in England and Wales had issued 118,963 fines for breaking Covid regulations – anything from meeting one friend when socialising was banned, through to staging illegal raves, with fines ranging from £100 for minor infractions to £10,000 for the most egregious, and sometimes more in cases of late payment. In Northern Ireland, police issued more than 8,000 fines over the year to March 2021, and Scottish police handed out more than 12,843 in the year to August 2021. New Zealand reported a record 243 new Covid-19 daily cases on Saturday, as officials warned more cases of the highly transmissible Omicron variant were expected, reports Reuters. Covid response minister Chris Hipkins said: “I urge people not to panic but to plan for that. “The best thing you can do to prevent illness is to get vaccinated and get your booster.” Russia reported a record daily number of Covid-19 cases on Saturday as the Omicron coronavirus variant continued to spread, authorities said. New daily cases jumped to 177,282, from 168,201 a day earlier. The government coronavirus task force also reported 714 deaths. Three woodlands are to be created in Wales in memory of those who have died from coronavirus during the pandemic, PA reports. The first two woodlands will be planted on part of the National Trust Cymru’s Erddig estate in Wrexham, and at a site at Brownhill in the Tywi Valley in Carmarthenshire. A memorial woodland is also expected to be grown in south-east Wales, although a location has not yet been chosen. The US death toll from Covid-19 hit 900,000 on Friday, less than two months after eclipsing 800,000, reports the Associated Press. The two-year total, as compiled by Johns Hopkins University, is greater than the population of Indianapolis, San Francisco, or Charlotte, North Carolina. Dr Ashish K Jha, dean of the Brown University School of Public Health said: “It is an astronomically high number. If you had told most Americans two years ago as this pandemic was getting going that 900,000 Americans would die over the next few years, I think most people would not have believed it.” He added that most of the deaths happened after the vaccine gained authorisation. “We got the medical science right. We failed on the social science. We failed on how to help people get vaccinated, to combat disinformation, to not politicise this,” Jha said. “Those are the places where we have failed as America.” In a statement on Friday night, the president, Joe Biden, lamented the grim milestone and acknowledged the “emotional, physical, and psychological weight of this pandemic” urging people to get vaccinated.Chris Eubank Jr moved closer to a meaningful fight on the world stage when he knocked down Liam Williams four times on his way to a wide and decisive victory on points in their middleweight bout over 12 rounds in Cardiff on Saturday night. Despite a fervent crowd’s vociferous support for Williams, who grew up in the Rhondda Valley, just over 20 miles from Cardiff, Eubank’s sharp left hand quelled the animosity. Williams came out fast, looking to back up Eubank as booming chants of “Liam, Liam, Liam” echoed around the heaving arena. The Welshman looked confident, even smirking at his reviled opponent before, in Eubank’s corner near the end of round one, he walked straight into a sharp straight left hand. Williams was knocked down, looking as surprised as he was hurt. The pattern of the fight had been set and in round two Williams went down again after he was tagged by a Eubank jab, right cross and a left hook. Roy Jones Jr, the great former world champion who now trains Eubank, urged his fighter to “take your time” and stay patient. Eubank listened and cruised through the third, only drawing the ire of the referee after he tagged Williams once the bell rang. A more legitimate punch, another straight left, sent Williams back to the familiar territory of the canvas for another count of eight in round four. Those three knockdowns should have sealed a conclusive end but Williams has immense grit and courage and he refused to buckle. He was helped by the fact that, through the middle rounds, Eubank spent more time taunting Williams and the crowd rather than concentrating on the basics which had allowed him to dominate the fight until then. Williams kept coming forward and he was encouraged further by Eubank’s wasteful showboating. He landed a few decent shots and by the ninth round his hopeful supporters were roaring him on in pursuit of the stoppage he desperately needed. Williams had won a number of rounds but his face told the true story of the fight. A purple swelling under his right eye seemed to trouble him as he blinked repeatedly. Williams still shouted defiantly at Eubank when the bell for the tenth round sounded. But he went down again in the eleventh – even though it looked more like a push than an effective punch. At the start of the twelfth and last round, the referee applauded both men and they at least tapped gloves in a sign of mutual respect. Williams tried hard but the four knockdowns had been decisive. An increasingly bitter build-up to the fight had ratcheted up the intensity as both Williams and Eubank stressed their dislike for each other. Williams, who understands the sombre risks of boxing after seeing tragedy in the ring on two separate occasions, spoke with surprising stupidity on Friday when he said: “Eubank makes my skin crawl. I want to kill him.” Eubank punished him for his crass comments. Williams operates at a level below the world’s best middleweight boxers but he does not deserve to become just a hand-picked opponent, and stepping stone for much younger fighters on the rise. After 28 fights, and this fourth shattering defeat it could be time for Williams to look towards a different life beyond the ropes. For Eubank Jr, however, bigger fights now await. He knows that, at world title level, he will face fighters far more accomplished and deadly than the valiant Williams. But, at least for a while longer, the Eubank show rolls on and the combination of a 32-2 record, his familiar name and trademark fast mouth add a slick gloss to this clear victory. On the undercard, Claressa Shields, the former double Olympic champion, retained her WBA, WBC and IBF world middleweight titles with a dominant performance against Ema Kozin from Slovenia. Kozin was unbeaten after 22 fights but as soon as she stepped into the ring against Shields, who calls herself the GWOAT – Greatest Woman of All Time – the disparity in quality was obvious. Shields hurt Kozin early in the second round and, full of menacing intent and throwing punishing combinations, she moved through the gears with ominous ease. Kozin, however, was brave and clung on until the final bell of a painfully one-sided contest. Shields will be back in the UK later this year when she faces Savannah Marshall, the outstanding WBO champion from Hartlepool, and the only woman to have ever beaten her in a boxing ring. They were amateurs then but, after the American left the ring having dismantled Kozin in Cardiff, Shields and Marshall exchanged feisty words. They are destined for a compelling fight that will elevate women’s boxing this summer. Caroline Dubois, who beat Vaida Masiokaite from Lithuania convincingly on points in her professional debut, was thrilled to be fighting just before Shields – a fighter she reveres. She boxed with assurance, fast hand speed and some poise to win all six rounds. Her 34-year-old opponent was happy to avoid a stoppage and did nothing to trouble Dubois. It was an encouraging start for the highly-touted Olympian and, at the age of 21, Dubois can enjoy this impressively easy win before harder tests emerge as she moves up the lightweight ranks. But one of the most promising careers in British boxing is now under way.