The battery technology startup Britishvolt and its backer, the FTSE 100 metals and mining firm Glencore, have announced plans to build a plant capable of recycling lithium-ion batteries used in cars and electronic devices. The two firms plan to use 100% renewable energy to recycle batteries at Britannia Refined Metals, owned by Glencore, at a site in Northfleet in Kent that was previously home to the UK’s largest coal-fired power station. Once up and running, with the opening planned for 2023, the plant will be capable of recycling a minimum of 10,000 tonnes of lithium-ion batteries a year, equivalent to 50,000 electric car batteries. The plant will be able to process batteries from cars and portable electronic devices, as well as processing scrap from Britishvolt’s planned “gigafactory” in Blyth, Northumberland, transported to Kent by barge to limit carbon emissions. The government said last month that it would invest £100m in Britishvolt to help jumpstart the car battery manufacturer’s plans to build the facility, which it says will be able to produce 300,000 battery packs for electric cars each year. Britishvolt said the investment, via the Automotive Transformation Fund, would enable long-term partnership with the fund managers Tritax and abrdn to deliver £1.7bn in private funding for the construction of the shell and core of the gigafactory. “Recycling is key to a successful energy transition and has always been a major part of Britishvolt business model,” said Timon Orlob, the chief operating officer of Britishvolt. “We’ve been looking for the perfect partner to help kickstart a UK battery recycling industry and FTSE 100-listed Glencore has expert historical experience in recycling.” He said the joint venture would help create a “truly sustainable battery value chain, create jobs and develop new battery recycling technologies. “Both Britishvolt and Glencore are fully committed to reducing carbon across the supply chain.” According to Faraday Institution, a battery research body, there are no substantial recycling facilities for lithium-ion battery packs in the UK, leading to manufacturers exporting used batteries to European facilities instead. Greenpeace data suggests that about 12.85m tonnes of EV lithium-ion batteries will go offline between 2021 and 2030. Britishvolt is still in the early phase of its plans to build a gigafactory that it says could start production in 2024, helping kickstart a battery manufacturing revolution as the UK aims to cut emissions. Glencore has previously come in for criticism over its environmental record, given its role in the global extraction and trade of minerals and fossil fuels. In December, it defended plans to build a coalmine in Queensland, Australia, after telling the federal government more than a dozen threatened species could be on the site. It has also faced scrutiny over sulphur dioxide emissions in Zambia. But in recent years, it has been at pains to burnish its green credentials, predicting that its carbon footprint would shrink by almost a third by 2035.Donald Trump considered issuing blanket pardons for those who participated in the Capitol insurrection before he left office, according to a new report. Asked yesterday about the former president’s comments, Senate minority leader Mitch McConnell said he would not support shortening any of the insurrectionists’ prison sentences. Joe Biden said the deployment of approximately 3,000 US troops to parts of Eastern Europe is “totally consistent” with what he had told Russia’s president Vladimir Putin earlier. “There is one aggressor here, that aggressor is Russia,” the White House reiterated in the media briefing via press secretary Jen Psaki, arguing the US, as part of NATO, was bolstering Ukraine’s resistance to Russian advances, not provoking Putin. The US president pledged that ending cancer is a “White House priority”, promising to bring a sense of urgency in the administration’s “moonshot” program to the fight against the disease. Biden announced a number of new initiatives including a newly created “cancer cabinet” which will include 18 federal departments, offices, and agencies. – Guardian staff Mississippi’s governor Tate Reeves signed a bill legalizing marijuana for people with some medical conditions. The Republican governor was initially noncommittal on whether he would sign the bill. From the AP: The bill says patients could buy up to to 3.5 grams of cannabis per day, up to six days a week. That is about 3 ounces per month. The bill also sets taxes on production and sale of cannabis, and it specifies that plants must be grown indoors under controlled conditions. The bill had enough support to override a veto had Reeves decided not to support it. Robert Reich: Trump and his enablers unwittingly offer Democrats their best hope in the midterms. For the Guardian’s opinions sections, Reich writes: The midterm elections are just over nine months away. What will Democrats run on? What will Republicans run on? One hint came at a Houston-area Trump rally Saturday night. “If I run and if I win,” the former guy said, referring to 2024, “we will treat those people from January 6th fairly.” He then added, “and if it requires pardons, we will give them pardons, because they are being treated so unfairly.” Trump went on to demand “the biggest protest we have ever had” if federal prosecutors in Washington or in New York and Atlanta, where cases against him are moving forward, “do anything wrong or illegal”. He then called the federal prosecutors “vicious, horrible people” who are “not after me, they’re after you”. Trump’s hint of pardons for those who attacked the Capitol could affect the criminal prosecution of hundreds now facing conspiracy, obstruction and assault charges, which carry sentences that could put them away for years. If they think Trump will pardon them, they might be less willing to negotiate with prosecutors and accept plea deals. His comments could also be interpreted as a call for violence if various legal cases against him lead to indictments. But if Trump keeps at it – and of course he will – he’ll help the Democrats in the upcoming midterm elections by reminding the public of the attempted coup he and his Republican co-conspirators tried to pull off between the 2020 election and January 6. That would make the midterm election less of a referendum on Biden than on the Republican party. (Don’t get me wrong. I think Biden is doing a good job, given the hand he was dealt. But Republicans are doing an even better job battering him – as his sinking poll numbers show.) Read more: A jury found that neither former US senate candidate Roy Moore, nor the woman who accused him of molesting her when she was 14, defamed the other. The AP reports: In allegations that roiled the 2017 Senate race in Alabama, Leigh Corfman said Moore sexually touched her in 1979 when she was a teen and he was a 32-year-old assistant district attorney. Corfman filed suit alleging Moore defamed her by branding her a liar when he denied the accusations. Moore countersued, claiming Corfman injured his reputation with false allegations meant to hurt him politically. The jury deliberated for about three hours before ruling that neither party had prevailed in their claim against the other. Moore said afterward that the decision was vindication for him and a “very heavy burden” had been lifted. “There is no other way to interpret this but a victory,” Moore said, with his wife, Kayla, standing beside him. “I’ve always said these allegations were false and malicious. I mean that today. I’ll say that today very clearly. There were meant to overturn a very successful election in 2017 to the United States Senate and they did exactly that,” Moore said. Corfman’s attorneys rubbed her back seemingly to comfort her after the verdict was read. Corfman attorney Neil Roman said the decision was not what they had hoped for but noted that jurors must have given credibility to her claim because they didn’t rule Corfman defamed Moore when she told the Washington Post he molested her. “This is not a victory for Roy Moore. It is not a vindication of him. Although we are disappointed that the jury did not find that Mr Moore’s statements about Leigh rose to the level of defamation, we are gratified that the jury necessarily found Leigh was telling the truth about her experiences with Mr Moore in 1979,” Roman said. New Mexico Democratic Senator Ben Ray Lujàn is going to be away from the US Senate for an expected four to six weeks after suffering a stroke, according to multiple reports. Staff announced last week that Lujàn had been taken ill and had been hospitalized after suffering a stroke, but that he is expected to make a full recovery. With the evenly-split Senate, such an absence also risks Democrats’ already-delayed legislative agenda falling further behind, the Hill reports, noting that Democrats will also need Lujàn back in the chamber to confirm whomever Joe Biden nominates to fill the vacancy that will be left on the Supreme Court upon the retirement of Justice Stephen Breyer - unless the nominee can attract some GOP support. “All of us are hopeful and optimistic that he will be back to his old self before long,” Senate majority leader Chuck Schumer said and the Hill reported. Fox congressional reporter Chad Pergram notes on Twitter that: “There is no remote voting in the Senate. So, this could put on ice any 50-50 measure in a divided Senate.” He also points out that: “It also means that any effort to rekindle Build Back Better is dead until at least the middle of March. Not that it was going anywhere quickly.” Biden is expected to nominate a new supreme court judge soon and has pledged to pick a Black woman. There is a lively slate of stunningly talented and experienced contenders being chewed over pundits. Hello again, live blog readers, your US east coast bloggers are handing over coverage now to our colleague on the west coast, Maanvi Singh. She’ll take you through some of the developments for the next while. Here’s where things stand: Donald Trump considered issuing blanket pardons for those who participated in the Capitol insurrection before he left office, according to a new report. Joe Biden said the deployment of approximately 3,000 US troops to parts of Eastern Europe is “totally consistent” with what he had told Russia’s president Vladimir Putin earlier. The US president pledged that ending cancer is a “White House priority,” promising to bring a sense of urgency in the administration’s “moonshot” programe to the fight against the disease. “There is one aggressor here, that aggressor is Russia”, the White House reiterated in the media briefing via press sec Jen Psaki, arguing the US, as part of NATO, was bolstering Ukraine’s resistance to Russian advances, not provoking Putin. A former high-ranking Department of Justice official appeared earlier today before the special congressional committee investigating the January 6, 2021, assault on the US Capitol. The purpose of Jeffrey Bossert Clark’s appearance was to be asked questions about his bid to bolster Donald Trump’s false claims of election fraud. Reuters further reports: Jeffrey Bossert Clark was spotted entering a room inside a US House of Representatives office building where the select committee investigating the Jan 6 attack takes its depositions. A committee spokesman declined to comment. Clark is among a growing list of Trump supporters who have balked at requests to cooperate with the investigation, though the panel has scored some legal victories over Trump’s efforts to keep certain government records under wraps. The National Archives said it would be providing some of former Vice President Mike Pence’s records to the committee, in a letter that appeared on the Archives’ website. The committee has so far interviewed about 400 witnesses, issued more than 60 subpoenas and obtained more than 50,000 pages of records. Clark, who served as the acting head of the Justice Department’s Civil Division, drafted a Dec. 28, 2020, letter to Georgia state lawmakers that falsely claimed the agency had found “significant concerns that may have impacted the outcome of the election in multiple States, including the State of Georgia.” The draft letter urged state legislators to convene a special session to overturn the election results there. Clark tried to persuade former Acting Attorney General Jeff Rosen and former Acting Deputy Attorney General Rich Donoghue to send the letter, but they refused. Rosen and Donoghue later told U.S. Senate investigators that Clark also privately met with Trump to lobby the then-president to oust Rosen so Clark could be installed as acting attorney general, paving the way for him to send the letter and launch voter fraud investigations. Clark in November declined to answer the committee’s questions about his legal advice to Trump, saying such discussions were privileged. The panel voted on Dec. 1, 2021, to seek contempt of Congress charges against Clark, but it has not sought a vote of the full House after Clark’s attorney said his client intends to invoke his right against self-incrimination, protected by the Fifth Amendment of the U.S. Constitution. Another Capitol rioter has admitted his role in the deadly insurrection in Washington by supporters of Donald Trump on January 6, 2021, as they attempted to disrupt congressional proceedings and stop the certification of Joe Biden’s presidential election victory. The man is a New York City judge’s son who referred to himself as a “caveman” eager to protest Trump’s election loss. He pleaded guilty earlier today to charges he stormed the US Capitol that day. The Associated Press takes up the story: Aaron Mostofsky was seen inside the Capitol wearing a fur costume and a bulletproof police vest that he was accused of stealing during the mayhem. He also gave a video interview inside the building, telling the New York Post he was there “to express my opinion as a free American that this election was stolen.” Mostofsky, 35, pleaded guilty to charges of civil disorder, theft of government property, and entering and remaining in a restricted building or grounds. Mostofsky is scheduled to be sentenced May 6. His father is Steven Mostofsky, a state court judge in Brooklyn. A message seeking comment was left with a court spokesperson. Aaron Mostofsky’s unusual garb made him stand out from the crowd of camouflage-wearing, flag-waving rioters. At one point, he was photographed sitting on a bench near the Senate chamber holding a stick and the riot shield, which he said he picked up off the floor. According to prosecutors, Mostofsky took a bus from New York to Washington and joined protesters in overwhelming a police line and storming the Capitol. Along the way, he picked up and put on the bulletproof vest, valued at $1,905, and the riot shield, worth $265, prosecutors said. Before the protest, Mostofsky messaged another demonstrator that he could be found at the protest by looking for “a caveman.” More than 730 people have been charged with federal crimes related to the Capitol riot. More than 200 of them have pleaded guilty, mostly to misdemeanors punishable by a maximum of six months imprisonment. Mostofsky is one of about two dozen rioters to plead guilty to a felony. More than 90 riot defendants have been sentenced. Senator Lindsey Graham, one of Donald Trump’s congressional allies, also criticized the former president for suggesting issuing pardons to Capitol insurrectionists. In an interview Sunday, Graham said he thought the idea was “inappropriate” because it could encourage similar political violence in the future. In response to Graham’s comments, Trump attacked him as a “RINO,” meaning “Republican in name only”. “Lindsey Graham’s wrong. I mean, Lindsey’s a nice guy, but he’s a RINO. Lindsey’s wrong,” Trump said in a Newsmax interview last night. But Graham is sticking by his comments, saying in a new statement, “All Americans are entitled to have a speedy trial and their day in court, but those who actively engage in violence for whatever political cause must be held accountable and not be forgiven.” Donald Trump’s suggestion of issuing pardons to those who attacked the Capitol on January 6 has even sparked some pushback from Republican lawmakers. Asked yesterday about the former president’s comments, Senate minority leader Mitch McConnell said he would not support shortening any of the insurrectionists’ prison sentences. “What we saw here on January 6 was an effort to prevent the peaceful transfer of power from one administration to another, which had never happened before in our country,” McConnell said. The Republican leader noted that at least 165 people have already pleaded to criminal behavior in connection to the insurrection. According to Politico’s database, more than 725 alleged insurrectionists have been arrested, and at least 87 have already been sentenced, although only 38 have received prison time. “My view is, I would not be in favor of shortening any of the sentences for any of the people who pleaded guilty to crimes,” McConnell said. Donald Trump considered issuing blanket pardons for those who participated in the Capitol insurrection before he left office, according to a new report. Politico reports: Between Jan. 6 and Joe Biden’s inauguration on Jan. 20, Trump made three calls to one adviser to discuss the idea. ‘Do you think I should pardon them? Do you think it’s a good idea? Do you think I have the power to do it?’ Trump told the person, who summarized their conversations. Another adviser to the former president said Trump asked questions about how participants in the riot might be charged criminally, and how a uniform pardon could provide them protection going forward. ‘Is it everybody that had a Trump sign or everybody who walked into the Capitol’ who could be pardoned? Trump asked, according to that adviser. ‘He said, ‘Some people think I should pardon them.’ He thought if he could do it, these people would never have to testify or be deposed.’ The report comes days after Trump floated the idea of pardoning insurrectionists if he wins the White House again, as the former president teases a potential 2024 campaign. “If I run and if I win, we will treat those people from January 6 fairly,” Trump said at a Saturday rally in Conroe, Texas. “We will treat them fairly. And if it requires pardons, we will give them pardons because they are being treated so unfairly.” Biden has commented on the deployment of approximately 3,000 troops to parts of Eastern Europe, saying that the move was “totally consistent” with what he had told Russia’s president Vladimir Putin earlier. As Biden was leaving a White House event, presumably the “cancer moonshot” program relaunch, Biden answered a question from a CNN White House reporter about the deployment to support NATO allies, saying that the that the decision was “totally consistent with what I told Putin in the beginning.” “As long as he is acting aggressively we’re going to make sure we can reassure our NATO allies and Eastern Europe that we’re there and Article Five is a sacred obligation,” said Biden. During his speech relaunching the “cancer moonshot” program, Biden pledged that ending cancer is a “White House priority,” promising to bring a sense of urgency to the fight against cancer. Following statements from Jill Biden and vice president Kamala Harris, Biden gave an emphatic speech about the impact of cancer, the number two cause of death in the US after heart disease, pledging “bold” action. “We can end cancer as we know it,” said Biden. “Let there be no doubt, this is a presidential White House priority, period.” Under the relaunch of the “cancer moonshot” program, Biden announced a number of new initiatives including: A newly created “cancer cabinet” which will include 18 federal departments, offices, and agencies such as the Department of Health and Human Services, Veteran Affairs, and other departments. Calling on congress to fund ARPA-H program; the White House previously requested $6.5bn for the program in its 2022 fiscal budget. Calling on scientists and medical experts to share data related to cancer and make drugs more affordable. “This will be bipartisan. This will bring the country together, and frankly, other nations,” said Biden. Biden also touched upon addressing health inequities when it comes to cancer prevention and screening, an issue the “cancer moonshot” program will address. Biden also encouraged those listening to get their routine cancer screenings, citing that Americans missed more than 9 million cancer screenings due to the Covid-19 pandemic. Biden closed by saying: “Go spread the faith guys. We can do this.” David Smith, the Guardian’s Washington bureau chief, is live tweeting from the White House’s East room where the relaunch of Biden’s “cancer moonshot” program is taking place. Smith also captured a moment of levity at the event: Joe Biden’s introduction of himself. The relaunch of Biden’s “cancer moonshot” program has just begun, with Joe Biden set to speak later on. The relaunch of the cancer prevention program is a revival of an Obama-era health initiative that Biden oversaw in the final years of Obama’s presidency. The “cancer moonshot” program will focus on prevention, screening, and other health objectives with the goal of cutting cancer deaths by half across 25 years. First lady Jill Biden is currently speaking, opening up the program’s relaunch with a speech about the widespread impact of cancer, including on herself and Joe Biden. “Cancer changes everyone it touches and, in some ways, it touches us all,” said Jill. “For Joe and me, it has stolen our joy. It left us broken in our grief. But through that pain, we found purpose.” Stay tuned for more remarks as the event continues. Joe Biden and Kamala Harris are due to talk publicly in Washington shortly about “moonshot” US efforts to prevent cancer, so do stay tuned. It’s been a lively day so far and there’s much more to come. Here’s where things stand: White House press secretary Jen Psaki has reiterated that the move to send additional US troops to eastern Europe is in response to Russian aggression, not designed as an aggressive move by the US. She called Russia the aggressor. Joe Biden has approved sending 3,000 troops to parts of Eastern Europe to bolster allies against a possible Russian invasion of Ukraine, confirmed Pentagon spokesman John F. Kirby. US soldiers who refuse to get a Covid-19 vaccination will be immediately discharged, the US army stated earlier today. House Majority Leader Steny Hoyer confirms that a deal to fund the federal government will be reached before a potential shutdown. Alexander Vindman filed a federal lawsuit against allies and aides of Donald Trump’s allies and aides, accusing them of witness intimidation and retaliation following his subpoena during Trump’s first impeachment trial. Joe Biden and Kamala Harris will relaunch the “cancer moonshot” program, a long-term cancer prevention initiative that then-vice president Biden began in the final days of the Obama presidency. White House press secretary Jen Psaki has reiterated that the move to send additional US troops to eastern Europe to shore up Ukrainian resistance to Russia is not designed to provoke Russia’s Vladimir Putin. The Guardian’s Washington bureau chief David Smith is at the media briefing today and has tweeted some of what Psaki said. Psaki said: “There is one aggressor here - that aggressor is Russia...They are the ones threatening to invade a sovereign country.” She’s calling Russia’s stance in massing military might on the border with Ukraine “escalatory” behavior. But the White House appears to be distancing itself from earlier predicting that an invasion of Ukraine by Russia appeared to be imminent. The White House press briefing just concluded. White House press secretary Jen Psaki is briefing right now. She’s talking further about planned US troop deployments to NATO’s eastern flank to bolster Ukraine’s preparedness in facing massed Russian military might at its border. “They are not going to Ukraine to fight,” Psaki said, attempting to clarify the mission, in response to questions from reporters about what they’ll be doing. US troops are being sent from the Fort Bragg base to Poland and Germany, while some US troops already in Germany will shift to Romania, the Pentagon has announced. However, the troops are “ready for every contingency”, but the main point it “to reassure our allies,” Psaki said. “There is no question you look at President Putin’s actions and they have been escalatory, not de-escalatory,” she added, to a subsequent question from reporters in the White House briefing room. Today, Biden has approved sending 3,000 troops to parts of Eastern Europe to bolster allies against a possible Russian invasion of Ukraine, confirmed Pentagon spokesman John F. Kirby. Around 2,000 troops will be sent from Fort Bragg, North Carolina to parts of Poland and Germany this week while approximately 1,000 troops currently based in Germany will be sent to Romania, assuring NATO allies that the US will protect them amid Russia adding around 100,000 troops along Ukraine’s border. Biden and the NATO secretary general Jens Stoltenberg have made it clear that no NATO combat troops would be going into Ukraine, although there are a small number of military advisers there. “These are not permanent moves,” said Kirby, noting increased buildup from Russian despite the US urging deescalation. “Its important that we send a strong signal to Mr. Putin and the world that NATO matters,” said Kirby during today’s press conference. “We are making it clear that we are going to be prepared to defend out NATO allies if it comes to that.” US soldiers who refuse to get a Covid-19 vaccination will be immediately discharged, said the US army today. Citing vaccinations as key to maintaining combat readiness, the US army said the order applies to all regular Army soldiers, cadets, and active-duty Army reserve members, unless they have an already approved or pending exemption. “Army readiness depends on soldiers who are prepared to train, deploy, fight and win our nation’s wars,” said Army Secretary Christine Wormuth. “Unvaccinated soldiers present risk to the force and jeopardize readiness.” The majority of Army service members have received at least one dose of the Covid-19 vaccine, reported Reuters. The Army is the latest branch to begin discharges over vaccination compliance, following an order by the Pentagon that all service members were required to get vaccinated in August 2021. The Air Force branch began discharging service members in 2021 who did not receive Covid-19 vaccination. House Majority Leader Steny Hoyer confirms that a deal to fund the federal government will be reached before a potential shutdown, adding that the House may come back earlier from recess if needed. While speaking to reporters via Zoom during his weekly pen and pad sessions after testing positive for Covid-19 (“As you can see, I’m still operational,” remarked Hoyer to reporters, referring to his Covid diagnosis), Hoyer spoke on the government funding deadline, saying, “We will act prior to that time to ensure that the government does not shut down.” Hoyer also added that the House, which is set to take a recess during the middle of next week, may be cut short to pass a deal. Congress is at risk of missing the funding deadline, with a deal required by February 18th to avoid a government shutdown. Trump also called Senator Lindsey Graham of South Carolina a RINO, ‘Republican Only In Name,’ for not supporting pardons for those involved in the January 6th Capitol attack, reports Politico. In an interview with Newsmax, Trump was asked about Graham being against presidential pardons for January 6th participants. Trump responded in his usual long-winded fashion: “Lindsey Graham’s wrong. I mean Lindsey’s a nice guy, but he’s a RINO ... Lindsey Graham doesn’t know what the hell he’s talking about if he says that.” Trump doubled down on his suggestion that January 6th insurrectionists were being unfairly “prosecuted” and that their proposed punishments were disproportionate. Trump’s comments followed Graham’s appearance on CBS’ “Face the Nation,” where he said granting pardons would be “inappropriate.” “I don’t want to reinforce that defiling the Capitol was OK,” said Graham. “I don’t want to do anything that would make this more likely in the future.” Alexander Vindman, the retired lieutenant colonel suing several of Trump’s closest allies and aides over witness intimidation and retaliation, announced his lawsuit via Twitter, sharing a link to an op-ed he wrote explaining his decision. “I filed a suit against Donald Trump Jr, Rudy Giuliani, Dan Scavino and others for witness intimidation and retaliation,” tweeted Vindman earlier today. Vindman also announced that Donald Trump, Fox News, and Ingraham Angle, a host on Fox News. Below is a tweet containing the actual suit that Vindman filed, laying out the witness intimidation conspiracy that Vindman says painted him as “disloyal to the United States”, engaged in “espionage,” and as an insubordinate “leftist,” ultimately ruining his military career as Vindman’s active military duty left him unable to defend himself. In other news, Alexander Vindman, a retired US Army lieutenant colonel, filed a federal lawsuit today against several of former president Donald Trump’s allies and aides, accusing them of witness intimidation and retaliation following his subpoena during Trump’s first impeachment trial. In a complaint filed in a federal DC. court today against Donald Trump, Jr., Rudolph Giuliani, Julia Hahn, and Daniel Scavino, Jr, Vindman said that following his witness testimony in Trump’s impeachment trial, Trump, his close aides, and key media figures conspired to portray Vindman as disloyal to America, ultimately hurting his military career and pushing him into an early retirement. In 2019, Vindman, who worked for the National Security Council as an Ukraine expert, heard a phone call between Trump and Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky. Vindman heard Trump asking the Ukrianian president to pursue an investigation into then-former vice president Joe Biden and his son. Vindman reported the phone call to internal channels and was asked, months later, to testify in the initial impeachment trial for Trump. “We can’t have a functional government or healthy democracy if witnesses can’t testify, and if federal officials can’t do their jobs, without fear of payback,” wrote Vindman in an op-ed published today for USA Today. “I filed this lawsuit because I believe in the active role all citizens must play in upholding our democracy … I hope this lawsuit will shed more light on the abuses that are chipping away at our democracy and eventually bring a measure of justice to those who are responsible.” Ahead of a relaunch of the Obama-era “cancer moonshot” program, here’s a look back to 2016, when then-president Barack Obama announced that the US would be the country to find a cure for cancer, written by Scott Bixby for the Guardian: Barack Obama has channeled John Kennedy’s space race with the Russians to pledge a new “moonshot”, led by vice-president Joe Biden at “mission control”, for the United States to win a new global health race and find a cure for cancer. “Last year, vice-president Biden said that with a new moonshot, America can cure cancer,” Obama said during a standout new policy moment during his final State of the Union address on Tuesday, referencing Biden’s remarks in announcing he would not run for president. “Last month, he worked with this Congress to give scientists at the National Institutes of Health the strongest resources they’ve had in over a decade. “Tonight, I’m announcing a new national effort to get it done. And because he’s gone to the mat for all of us on so many issues over the past 40 years, I’m putting Joe in charge of Mission Control. For the loved ones we’ve all lost, for the family we can still save, let’s make America the country that cures cancer once and for all.” ... Inspired and led by Biden, who lost his eldest son, Beau, to brain cancer last year, the White House’s bold pledge follows the path laid forward by the vice-president when he declined to run to replace Obama in the White House. “I’m going to spend the next 15 months in this office pushing as hard as I can to accomplish this,” Biden said from the White House Rose Garden in October. “Because I know there are Democrats and Republicans on the Hill who share our passion, our passion to silence this deadly disease.” “If I could have been anything, I would have wanted to be the president that ended cancer,” Biden added. “Because it’s possible.” Read the full article here. Today, Biden will be relaunching an Obama-era cancer prevention program, “ending cancer as we know it today” with a set of new long-term goals including reducing the cancer death rate by 50% across the next 25 years. The reviving of the “Cancer Moonshot” program, an initiative that Biden oversaw during the final moments of the Obama presidency, will allow Biden to focus on new long term objectives that Biden was unable to complete as a then-vice president. “Now you can start messaging, prevention and screening, nutrition, a focus on disparities,” said a source familiar with the project and its relaunch to Politico. Cancer prevention is a cause close to Biden following the death of his son Beau, 46, from brain cancer in 2015. The program’s revival will not include any additional financial commitments, despite the Moonshot program only being budgeted for one more year under the 21st Century Cures Act, according to Politico. The relaunch event will take place at 1.30pm ET with an event in the White House’s East Room. Second gentleman Doug Emhoff will also be in attendance. Good morning, US politics live blog readers! It’s Gloria Oladipo from the New York office on the blog. Here’s what’s coming up today: Joe Biden will relaunch his “Cancer Moonshot” program with an event in the White House’s East Room at 1.30pm eastern time, co-hosted by Kamala Harris and Jill Biden. “Cancer Moonshot” is a long form cancer prevention initiative he began in the final days of the Obama presidency as a then-vice president. In addition to prevention, the program will also focus on screening, coordination, and health disparities, according to a source familiar with the project. Tensions remain high between the US and Russia over a possible Ukraine invasion, with Putin saying on Tuesday during a news conference that the US and Nato have “ignored” Russia’s security concerns over Ukraine. West Virginia senator Joe Manchin, one of two senators blocking Biden’s Build Back Better bill, called the social spending package “dead” on Tuesday, raising fears that Biden’s domestic agenda could be permanently stalled. On Tuesday, Pzfier asked the US to allow children under the age of five to receive extra-low doses of its Covid vaccine, potentially allowing younger Americans to become vaccinated by March.That’s all from the Guardian’s live coverage of the coronavirus pandemic for today. Please join us a little later for a new live feed where we will continue to cover the coronavirus crisis. You can also keep up with the top headlines here. I leave you with a summary of the latest developments from the past 24 hours: New Zealand has announced it will reopen its border to visitors in stages, after its earlier plans to do so were derailed by Omicron. The country’s borders have been closed, apart from a short-lived travel bubble with Australia, for nearly two years. Serbia’s state prosecutors on Wednesday rejected suggestions that Novak Djokovic used a fake positive test for Covid-19 to try to enter Australia and compete in the Australian Open. In the UK, Conservative MP Mark Jenkinson has sparked a backlash this morning after arguing on ITV that breaching Covid rules is equivalent to parking on a double-yellow line. Italy will soon announce a timetable to roll back its Covid curbs, prime minister Mario Draghi said today. It comes as the surge in cases fuelled by the highly contagious Omicron variant started to show signs of slowing. Germany has recorded over 10 million total Covid cases, after detecting 208,498 new infections in the past 24 hours. Ministers said they hope to lift restrictions in March. Police in Ottawa, Canada, have seen signs that guns have been brought into a truckers’ protest against vaccine mandates that has paralysed the Canadian capital, the police chief said. The chairman of The Ivors Academy has called for “major reform” so musicians are treated with “dignity and respect” amid criticism of Spotify over Covid misinformation on the platform. The US Virgin Islands has lifted a requirement that visitors present a negative Covid test taken no more than 72 hours ahead of their trip. UK Covid infections have stopped falling, with levels holding steady or climbing, the ONS said. For England one in 20 people had Covid in the week ending 29 January. Russia broke its record Covid tally, with 141,883 new infections over the past 24 hours, Reuters reports. In Japan, Tokyo detected a record-breaking 21,576 new cases, topping the previous record of 17,631, as the country battles Omicron. France will begin to lift some restrictions today, including mandatory outdoor mask-wearing. In the US, Pfizer and BioNTech are seeking approval to inoculate children under five, the last group of Americans still ineligible for vaccines against Covid. Lithuania will scrap its Covid certificate needed to enter public spaces from Saturday, saying they are ineffectual to stopping the spread of Omicron, despite a near-peak wave. Exposure to a single nasal droplet is sufficient to become infected with Covid-19, according to a landmark trial in which healthy volunteers were intentionally given a dose of the virus. Czechs will no longer have to submit vaccination certificates at restaurants, cultural and sports events from next week despite record high coronavirus infections, the prime minister has said, according to AFP. Since November 2021, only vaccinated Czechs and those who have had Covid-19 in the last six months have been allowed access to bars, restaurants, hotels and other services. “The government will cancel the requirement to show a vaccination certificate or proof of recovery when entering restaurants, services, cultural, sports and similar events as of February 9,” prime minister Petr Fiala told reporters. He added Czechs would still have to wear face masks indoors and the number of participants in mass events would be limited. An EU member of 10.7 million people, the Czech Republic reported a record-high daily caseload of 57,195 infections on Tuesday as the highly contagious Omicron strain prevails in the country. The increase brought the total tally of confirmed cases since the Covid-19 outbreak in early 2020 to 3.1 million with over 37,000 deaths. But only 2,653 people were in hospital with the illness on Tuesday, far less than during a peak of more than 9,500 in March 2021. The Czech Republic in early 2021 and again last autumn topped AFP’s global tally of Covid-19 infections and deaths per capita. Long Covid can last anywhere from four weeks to months – although definitions vary – and, while it presents differently based on developmental stage, doctors say it can affect virtually any age, even infants. In a piece for Guardian US, Hallie Golden explores what is happening to the increasing number of children who are reporting symptoms of long Covid across the country. “There did not seem to be a pattern to her symptoms,” said Javanese Hailey, a middle and high school math teacher whose 9-year-old daughter Haley Bryson reported severe stomach pains among other symptoms. “Some days were worse than others. Some days she couldn’t even get out of the bed because her stomach hurt so much.” Read more here: Hello, this is Helen Livingstone taking over from Tom Ambrose. To start with, the US army says it will immediately discharge soldiers who refuse to get a Covid-19 vaccine, maintaining the move is critical to maintain combat readiness. The army’s order applies to regular army soldiers, active-duty army reservists and cadets unless they have approved or pending exemptions, it said in a statement. The discharge order is the latest from a US military branch removing unvaccinated service members amid the pandemic after the Pentagon made the vaccine mandatory for all service members in August 2021. Read more here: Here is a round-up of the latest Covid headlines from the day: New Zealand has announced it will reopen its border to visitors in stages, after its earlier plans to do so were derailed by Omicron. The country’s borders have been closed, apart from a short-lived travel bubble with Australia, for nearly two years. Serbia’s state prosecutors on Wednesday rejected suggestions that Novak Djokovic used a fake positive test for Covid-19 to try to enter Australia and compete in the Australian Open. Italy will soon announce a timetable to roll back its Covid curbs, prime minister Mario Draghi said today. It comes as the surge in cases fuelled by the highly contagious Omicron variant started to show signs of slowing. Germany has recorded over 10 million total Covid cases, after detecting 208,498 new infections in the past 24 hours. Ministers said they hope to lift restrictions in March. Police in Ottawa, Canada, have seen signs that guns have been brought into a truckers’ protest against vaccine mandates that has paralysed the Canadian capital, the police chief said. The chairman of The Ivors Academy has called for “major reform” so musicians are treated with “dignity and respect” amid criticism of Spotify over Covid misinformation on the platform. The US Virgin Islands has lifted a requirement that visitors present a negative Covid test taken no more than 72 hours ahead of their trip. UK Covid infections have stopped falling, with levels holding steady or climbing, the ONS said. For England one in 20 people had Covid in the week ending 29 January. Russia broke its record Covid tally, with 141,883 new infections over the past 24 hours, Reuters reports. In Japan, Tokyo detected a record-breaking 21,576 new cases, topping the previous record of 17,631, as the country battles Omicron. France will begin to lift some restrictions today, including mandatory outdoor mask-wearing. In the US, Pfizer and BioNTech are seeking approval to inoculate children under five, the last group of Americans still ineligible for vaccines against Covid. Lithuania will scrap its Covid certificate needed to enter public spaces from Saturday, saying they are ineffectual to stopping the spread of Omicron, despite a near-peak wave. That’s it from me, Tom Ambrose, but my colleague Helen Livingstone will be along shortly to continue bringing you all the latest Covid news. Goodbye for now. New Zealand has announced it will reopen its border to visitors in stages, after its earlier plans to do so were derailed by Omicron. The country’s borders have been closed, apart from a short-lived travel bubble with Australia, for nearly two years. “With Omicron’s arrival, we pushed that change in border settings out – to give ourselves the chance to roll out boosters – a chance most other countries never had,” prime minister Jacinda Ardern said on Thursday. “With our community better protected we must turn to the importance of reconnection. Families and friends need to reunite. Our businesses need skills to grow. Exporters need to travel to make new connections.” Fully vaccinated New Zealanders and other eligible travellers from Australia will be able to enter New Zealand without staying in quarantine, known as MIQ, from Sunday 27 February. Two weeks later, they can come from all other countries. From 12 April, 5,000 international students, and other eligible temporary visa holders will be allowed to enter. Sometime before July, the border opens to Australians and other travellers who do not require a visa to enter New Zealand. All other international visitors will be allowed to enter New Zealand from October. Vaccinated travellers will be allowed to self-isolate for 10 days, while all non-vaccinated travellers will still be required to enter MIQ. Police in Ottawa, Canada, have seen signs that guns have been brought into a truckers’ protest against vaccine mandates that has paralysed the Canadian capital, the police chief said. “We have had an indication around firearms coming into this jurisdiction as part of this demonstration as much as a week and a half ago,” chief Peter Sloly told a briefing. He said there was evidence of “a significant element from the United States in the funding and organising” of the protest. Dozens of truck drivers protesting about Covid vaccine mandates have blocked central routes in the city for six days. Residents have been getting angrier at perceived inaction by the police, who have largely stood to one side. The protesters say they have no intention of leaving until the government scraps the vaccine mandates. Police have declined to end the protest, citing the risk of aggravating tensions. They say they are investigating reports of criminal offences, including hate crimes and desecration of public property, and have made three arrests so far. “We’re looking at every single option, including military aid,” Sloly said. “Mixing them into a population in the downtown core in a highly volatile demonstration ... may mitigate some risks and may create and escalate a whole bunch of other risks.” The chairman of The Ivors Academy has called for “major reform” so musicians are treated with “dignity and respect” amid criticism of Spotify over Covid misinformation on the platform. Prominent musicians including Neil Young, Joni Mitchell and Graham Nash, as well as the Duke and Duchess of Sussex, have criticised the streaming giant over its decision to continue hosting the popular Joe Rogan podcast. The presenter has sparked outrage for repeatedly spreading Covid conspiracy theories and for promoting the use of ivermectin to treat Covid symptoms - an anti-parasitic medicine which treats humans and, in some formulations, is used on horses and has not been proven to be effective for treating coronavirus. Ivors Academy chairman Tom Gray, of the Mercury Prize-winning band Gomez, said companies should not assume musicians consent to their material appearing alongside misinformation. He said in a statement to the PA news agency: The balance of power in music is shifting to where it should be - to fans, artists, songwriters and composers. No company, no matter how big, can ignore that or assume that musicians will be OK with their music appearing alongside misinformation. If Spotify and the major labels haven’t already noticed, lots of artists are very unhappy. There needs to be major reform so that songwriters and musicians get properly paid for their work and are treated with dignity and respect. The government are listening and committed to reform, I hope the industry is too. The US Virgin Islands has lifted a requirement that visitors present a negative Covid test taken no more than 72 hours ahead of their trip. Lieutenant governor Tregenza Roach said travellers can now show either proof of vaccination or a negative test taken within five days of their date of travel. He also said the government will award $250 to children ages 5 to 17 who live in the US territory if they get their second vaccine dose by mid-March, the Associated Press reported. Roach noted that only 23% of youth in the US Virgin Islands is vaccinated. “It is a healthy start, but nowhere near where we need to be,” he said. The three-island territory of more than 106,000 people has reported more than 14,900 confirmed cases and more than 100 deaths. Serbia’s state prosecutors on Wednesday rejected suggestions that Novak Djokovic used a fake positive test for Covid-19 to try to enter Australia and compete in the Australian Open. The prosecution office said in a statement that it had received a request for criminal proceedings against unnamed individuals who allegedly forged two PCR certificates, which were later used by Djokovic to apply for a medical exemption from vaccination when entering Australia. “The prosecution acted according to the regulations, checks were performed, and it was determined that Novak Djokovic was tested several times and that the certificates on the test results from 16 December 2021 and 22 December 2021 are valid,” the statement said. Outlets including Der Spiegel and the BBC have reported discrepancies in the serial numbers of the tests Serbian authorities administered to Djokovic ahead of his trip to Australia, suggesting possible irregularities in the way they were issued. Hello. Tom Ambrose here. I’ll be bringing you all the latest Covid news from around the world over the next couple of hours. Let’s begin with the news that Italy will soon announce a timetable to roll back its Covid curbs, prime minister Mario Draghi said today. It comes as the surge in cases fuelled by the highly contagious Omicron variant started to show signs of slowing, Reuters reported. Italy has recorded more than 147,000 deaths linked to coronavirus and 11.23 million cases since the pandemic set in two years ago. Many restrictions, including those on transport, bars and restaurants, have already been eased for the vaccinated, while tough curbs remain in place for those who are not inoculated. Mask wearing is mandatory outdoors. “In the coming weeks, we will continue on this path of reopening. Based on scientific evidence... we will announce a timetable for lifting the current restrictions,” Draghi was quoted as saying by his office at a cabinet meeting. The government’s vaccination campaign has been broadly successful, with more than 80% of people having received two jabs, while more than 57% have received a third booster dose. Here’s a round-up of today’s Covid headlines from the UK and around the world. Germany has recorded over 10 million total Covid cases, after detecting 208,498 new infections in the past 24 hours. Ministers said they hope to lift restrictions in March. Russia broke its record Covid tally, with 141,883 new infections over the past 24 hours, Reuters reports. UK Covid infections have stopped falling, with levels holding steady or climbing, the ONS said. For England one in 20 people had Covid in the week ending 29 January. Also the UK, Conservative MP Mark Jenkinson sparked a backlash after arguing breaching Covid rules is equivalent to parking on a double-yellow line. UK prime minister Boris Johnson was criticised by Labour’s Keir Starmer over £8.7bn wasted on unusable PPE, which official figures revealed on Monday. In Japan, Tokyo detected a record-breaking 21,576 new cases, topping the previous record of 17,631, as the country battles Omicron. France will begin to lift some restrictions today, including mandatory outdoor mask-wearing. In the US, Pfizer and BioNTech are seeking approval to inoculate children under five, the last group of Americans still ineligible for vaccines against Covid. Tonga has gone into lockdown after recording two Covid cases among port workers helping distribute international aid in the wake of the volcanic eruption and tsunami that devastated the Pacific country last month. Lithuania will scrap its Covid certificate needed to enter public spaces from Saturday, saying they are ineffectual to stopping the spread of Omicron, despite a near-peak wave. Exposure to a single nasal droplet is sufficient to become infected with Covid, according to a landmark Imperial College London trial. Poland reported near-peak Covid infections of 56,051 as the Omicron wave sweeps the country. Likewise, Bulgaria detected near-peak cases of 11,143 as the European Union’s least-vaccinated country sees infections climb. China reported 63 new Covid cases, down slightly from 66 a day earlier, and no new fatalities. That’s all from me, Jem Bartholomew, here in London for today. I’ll be back tomorrow. Drop me a message via email or on Twitter with tips for then. Bye for now. Exposure to a single nasal droplet is sufficient to become infected with Covid-19, according to a landmark trial in which healthy volunteers were intentionally given a dose of the virus. The trial, the first to have monitored people during the entire course of infection, also found that people typically develop symptoms very quickly – on average, within two days of encountering the virus – and are most infectious five days into the infection. The study was carried out using a strain of the virus before the Alpha, Delta and Omicron variants emerged. The trial’s chief investigator, Prof Christopher Chiu, of Imperial College London, said: “Our study reveals some very interesting clinical insights, particularly around the short incubation period of the virus, extremely high viral shedding from the nose, as well as the utility of lateral flow tests, with potential implications for public health.” The findings, published on Springer Nature’s pre-print server, and which have not yet been peer-reviewed, detail the outcomes in 36 healthy, young participants with no immunity to the virus. The volunteers were monitored at a specialist unit at the Royal Free hospital in London, and experienced no severe symptoms. Read the full story here. Covid infections have stopped falling in the UK, with levels holding steady or climbing, according to the Office for National Statistics (ONS). About 2.6 million people or one in 20 in England had Covid in the week ending 29 January, the ONS said, unchanged for a third straight week. In Wales, around one in 20 people had Covid last week, climbing from one in 30. Northern Ireland has seen a week-on-week rise, from one in 20 people to one in 15. In Scotland, the ONS describes the trend as “uncertain” with around one in 30 people estimated to have had Covid last week, unchanged from the previous week. In the US, Pfizer and BioNTech are seeking approval to inoculate children under 5, the last group of Americans still ineligible for vaccines against Covid. They will need approval from the Food and Drug Administration and Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The FDA’s independent advisers will meet on 15 February to discuss the application and the shots, containing just one-tenth of the dose given to adults, could be available to this population of 19 million in the US by the end of the month. My colleague Melody Schreiber has this report. The Biden administration has been trying to speed the authorization of Covid-19 shots for children, contending vaccinations are critical for opening schools and daycare centers and keeping them open, and for freeing parents from childcare duties so they can go back to work. Many parents have been pushing for an expansion of shots to toddlers and preschoolers. While children are much less likely to be hospitalized and die from Covid than adults, children’s hospitals have seen record-high admissions during the surge of the Omicron variant, especially in children who are not yet vaccinated. Infants under a year old are most vulnerable of all children to severe illness. Families, and even children themselves, say they have been eagerly awaiting this news. So do caregivers, teachers and others who work with young kids – as well as those who employ parents, who have struggled to find steady childcare. “As a mom of two kids under five, I’m extremely excited. But as an epidemiologist and public health member, I have a ton of questions,” said Katelyn Jetelina, an infectious disease epidemiologist with UTHealth School of Public Health in Dallas. Read the full story here. Lithuania will scrap its Covid certificate needed to enter indoor public spaces from Saturday. The certificates were in effect at shops, in-person services, restaurants and entertainment venues, but Lithuania concluded their effectiveness is limited under Omicron. Instead, venues will face capacity limits. “With the spread of the much more contagious Omicron variant, both the unvaccinated and vaccinated or recovered people are at risk of infection,” according to a document proposed by the Health Ministry, reported by public broadcaster LRT. “As a result, the effectiveness of Covid certificates as a means of limiting Covid spread is significantly diminished.” The health ministry did not ruling out the certificates in future waves. “It would be really good if we never have to return to this measure,” prime minister Ingrida Simonyte said. Lithuania is experiencing surging cases, clocking its highest ever daily confirmed tally on Saturday at 12,517 cases. A further 12,278 infections were reported on Wednesday. Lithuania has the world’s 67th highest death toll from Covid-related causes, at almost 8,000 deaths, compared with only the 124nd highest population globally, at about 2.8 million people. Malaysia logged 5,736 new Covid cases in the past 24 hours, the New Straits Times reports, a 78% climb on the 3,229 infections detected on Wednesday two weeks ago. Malaysia’s last wave peaked in late-summer, but Omicron is seeing new cases rise. Yet health minister Khairy Jamaluddin said on Monday there’s “no need to panic” as the country is now better prepared to deal with a new wave, due to its booster vaccine programme. “More than a month ago, I said that we expect Omicron to become dominant here as it has elsewhere and that when it did, cases would rise. That’s why we sped up our booster programme,” he said. “We are now seeing the predicted quick rise in cases. However, there is no need to panic. There is a strong indication of decoupling between severe outcomes and cases.” Uganda’s nightlife kicked back into gear this week after the government shut down bars and nightclubs almost two years ago. Reuters has this dispatch from Kampala after nightlife roared back to life on Monday: “Of course Uganda is the life of a party, if you do not party you are not a Ugandan,” said Vera Muryengye, a consultant, as she sipped a drink. “It’s the end of the month, you get your money, get your salary, put the money into circulation. That’s it, that’s Uganda.” The East African country has one of the world’s youngest populations and Kampala had a reputation regionally - pre-pandemic - for a good night out. President Yoweri Museveni cited rising vaccination rates when he announced in December that bars and nightclubs would be allowed to reopen in late January. The government argued the tough rules stemmed the spread of the virus and helped keep the number of Covid-19 deaths low. The country has so far recorded around 162,000 cases of Covid-19 and about 3,500 deaths. Raymond Karemera, head of marketing at Nomad Bar and Grill in a neighbourhood of Kampala that is often likened to Las Vegas, said many bars struggled to avoid bankruptcy as they continued to pay security and electricity expenses while closed. “It was a very horrible time for us,” he said. At the UK’s prime minister’s questions, Labour leader Keir Starmer attacked Boris Johnson over the £8.7 billion spent on written off, unusable PPE, which was revealed by official figures on Monday. “I am proud of what this government and this country did in securing record quantities of PPE in record time,” Johnson replied. Starmer said the Conservatives were the party of “eye-watering waste,” and said that Johnson would have to improve his answering when he’s probed by police in party investigations. Germany could relax Covid-19 restrictions in the spring, the government’s justice minister has said. “I hope that we can phase out many protective measures in March”, Marco Buschmann told Rheinische Post newspaper. However, the liberal politician said, a lack of new variants and a drop in infection rates was a prerequisite for such a step. Mask-wearing is still mandatory on public transport, at schools and many indoor public spaces in Germany. Access to restaurants, cafes or bars is restricted to those who have been vaccinated or recently recovered from the virus and can show a recent negative test, or those with a booster shot. Nightclubs remain closed. Virologist Christian Drosten, a leading coronavirus expert who advises the government, has warned of rushing towards an exit from restrictions. Germany had a disadvantage compared to countries like Denmark, Drosten said on his podcast for broadcaster NDR, as it has a relatively high percentage of older people who remain unvaccinated. Germany has recorded 208,498 new Covid cases in the past 24 hours, a 50% jump on the 139,000 infections on Wednesday two weeks ago – taking the country’s total tally to over 10 million. In the UK, almost one in five disabled people fear they will never return to normal life following the Covid pandemic, an Office for National Statistics (ONS) survey suggests. From 4,700 responses across 15 December to 3 January, 18% of disabled people said they do not think life will ever get back to normal – compared with 11% for non-disabled people. It comes after clinically vulnerable people fear the ending of restrictions as government messaging shifts to “living with the virus”. The survey also found 40% of disabled people reported feeling lonely often, always or some of the time, compared with 18% of non-disabled people. ‘I don’t want to die’ — really powerful UK report here from my colleague Lucy Webster on the shielders who fear the end of Covid restrictions. She spoke to three people affected. Heather Cawte, 60, York: The worst part has been the unending fear. Some friends think I’m overly cautious, but my doctor told me that, with my lungs, Covid would almost certainly kill me. I don’t want to die. So every time I do see someone, even though they’re tested and wearing masks, I spend the next week anxious and scared. I can’t see how I will ever be able to stop shielding. I’m 60 now, and I’ve just accepted that this is how life is going to be. Alan Benson, 53, Richmond-upon-Thames, London: The official lockdown was easier, because there was so much online. Some things are still online – I’ve been doing virtual cheese tastings! – which makes them much more accessible, but lots of things have gone back to in-person. I’m lucky that a lot of my friends are also shielding, so there’s that camaraderie, and I’ve made new friends on social media. But there’s still people who try to persuade me to go to the pub. They don’t understand that we’re still scared. Jess Thom, 41, Peckham, south London: The more society opens up, the more my world shrinks. When people were wearing masks, socially distancing, and reducing their contacts, I could take the calculated risk of going swimming to help manage my chronic pain. Now, with Omicron being allowed to rage through the population, I’ve been advised not to do even that. Seeing as I want to stay alive to see my niece grow up, I’m having to sacrifice my long-term health because some don’t want to wear a mask. Read the full story here. In the UK, Conservative MP Mark Jenkinson has sparked a backlash this morning after arguing on ITV that breaching Covid rules is equivalent to parking on a double-yellow line. Dr Zubaida Haque, the executive director of the Equality Trust and an Independent Sage member, said on Twitter that “over 176,000 covid deaths - many without loved ones present. 3.7million vulnerable people STILL shielding. And &gt;1.3million with #LongCovid. How is that equivalent to parking on a double yellow line?” Poland detected 56,051 fresh Covid infections in the past 24 hours, Polskie Radio reports, an 83% surge on the 30,588 cases confirmed on Wednesday two weeks ago. That’s near Poland’s peak of over 57,000 daily cases – recorded on Thursday last week – as Omicron surges across the country. Health minister Adam Niedzielski warned cases could exceed 60,000, and even approach 140,000 by mid-February. A further 318 people died from virus-related causes, a 15% climb on the 276 deaths reported on Wednesday last week. Public sector employees are working from home until at least the end of February, and prime minister Mateusz Morawiecki says authorities are working to expand hospital beds available to Covid patients. Poland’s Covid death toll is now more than 105,000, the 15th highest in the world. (Poland has the 38th highest population globally.) Bulgaria reported 11,143 new Covid cases in the past 24 hours, state broadcaster BNT reports, a 10% rise on the 10,160 reported on Wednesday two weeks ago. That’s near the country’s peak of over 12,000 confirmed cases last week, as Bulgaria remains in the grips of the Omicron wave. A further 87 people died from Covid-related causes, BNT reports, with the seven-day average at 77 deaths a day. The country’s death toll is 33,405, the 28th highest globally. (Bulgaria has the world’s 107th largest population.) It has the lowest vaccination rate in the European Union. Slovakia reported a 20,224 rise in Covid cases in the past 24 hours, Reuters reports, a 23% jump on the 16,402 new cases on Wednesday last week. According to Reuters, that makes it Slovakia’s highest ever daily tally. (The country reported 23,702 cases on 1 February but only 7,192 cases on 31 January, according to data compiled by Johns Hopkins University, meaning Tuesday’s spike is likely to include Monday’s figures.) Like other countries across Europe, the country of 5.5 million people is being battered by the highly infectious Omicron variant. The health ministry said about 61% of cases were from unvaccinated people. In Japan, the capital city Tokyo detected a record-breaking 21,576 new cases in the past 24 hours, national broadcaster NHK reports, topping the previous record of 17,631. Omicron is surging across Japan. A total of 81,677 infections were detected in the past 24 hours, the Japan Times reports, a 97% jump on the 41,370 cases lodged on Wednesday two weeks ago. Chief cabinet secretary Hirokazu Matsuno said on Wednesday the government is not planning to declare a state of emergency but remains vigilant – despite the hospital beds reserved for Covid patients topping 50%, which officials formerly said would prompt the state-of-emergency declaration. A further 70 people died from Covid-related causes in the past 24 hours, the Japan Times reports, almost four times the 15 deaths recorded two weeks ago. Germany recorded 208,498 new Covid cases in the past 24 hours, a 50% jump on the 139,000 infections on Wednesday two weeks ago – taking the country’s total tally to over 10 million. Germany’s Omicron wave, which saw the country lodge a record 228,608 cases last Wednesday, shows no signs of stopping. Health minister Karl Lauterbach said he expects cases to peak in mid-February around 400,000 a day. A further 196 people died from Covid-related causes in the past 24 hours, 17% down on 236 two weeks ago. Germany’s death toll is over 118,000, the world’s 14th highest. (Germany has the 19th highest population.) Ukraine recorded 35,014 new Covid cases in the past 24 hours, local media Ukrinform reports, a jump of 166% on the 13,143 infections detected on Wednesday two weeks ago. A further 204 people died from Covid-related causes, 15% up on the 177 deaths two weeks ago. Ukraine, alongside tensions with Russia and troop build-ups on its borders, is experiencing near-peak cases driven by the Omicron variant. The country’s death toll is 100,599, the 16th highest in the world. (Ukraine has the 35th largest population worldwide.) Ukraine broke its daily Covid tally for the pandemic on Saturday, with 38,171 infections, according to data compiled by Johns Hopkins University. A trial that deliberately infected people with Covid was found to be safe in healthy young adults, one of the companies running the study said. The project – run by Open Orphan with Imperial College London, the UK government vaccine taskforce and hVIVO – was the world’s first human challenge trial in which volunteers were deliberately exposed to Covid. Reuters reports the details: The data supports the safety of this model which could theoretically provide a “plug and play” platform for testing therapies and vaccines using the original Covid-19 strain as well as variants of the virus, Open Orphan, which carried out the study, said in a statement. The trial infected 36 healthy male and female volunteers aged 18- to 29 years with the original Sars-CoV-2 strain of the virus and closely monitored them in a controlled quarantined setting. They will be followed up for 12 months after discharge from the quarantine facility. No serious adverse events occurred, and the human challenge study model was shown to be safe and well tolerated in healthy young adults, the company said. Russia detected 141,883 new infections over the past 24 hours, Reuters reports, a 323% increase on the 33,571 Covid cases recorded on Wednesday two weeks ago. That’s Russia’s highest tally of the pandemic so far, as Russia has repeatedly broken its daily record every day for the past week. Russian cases are surging to unprecedented levels amid the highlyinfectious Omicron variant. Yesterday saw a record-breaking 125,836 infections detected. The country’s labour ministry recommended work-from-home if possible, and a growing number of regions are imposing restrictions despite the Kremlin’s avoidance of a national lockdown so far. A further 678 people died form Covid-related causes in the past 24 hours, Reuters reports, down slightly from 684 deaths recorded two weeks ago today. Russia has the world’s second-highest death toll, behind the US, according to a Reuters tally, with more than 700,000 people dying. Excess deaths are close to 1 million, Moscow Times’s analysis shows. This is Jem Bartholomew in London taking charge of the global blog for the next few hours. Do get in touch via email or Twitter with tips from around the world. The US actor Sharon Stone said Joe Rogan is “risking people’s lives with his idiocy”, as the row over the podcast host’s platforming of Covid misinformation grows. “Covid is not an opinion-based situation and Mr Rogan thinking that his opinion or disclaimer for the lives he personally has affected and caused losses of – it’s not an opinion,” Stone told TMZ. Her comments come after the musicians Neil Young and Joni Mitchell criticised Rogan – and pulled their music from the streaming giant Spotify – following Rogan’s interviews with guests promoting Covid misinformation. Spotify, which pays Rogan a reported $100m for his flagship podcast, was drawn into the row and criticised for failing to moderate potentially dangerous misinformation. (Spotify added content warnings in response to criticism.) “Infectious diseases are science and they are fact-based situations so the pretence that these are opinions is dangerous,” Stone added. “He should put a disclaimer that he’s an asshole and that his behaviour is dangerous and affecting people’s lives and deaths.” An update on the Covid situation at the Beijing Winter Games: 11 Olympics-related personnel have been hospitalised since 23 January, out of a total 232 positive cases, Brian McCloskey, chair of the Beijing 2022 medical expert panel, said on Wednesday. None of the hospitalised individuals were in serious condition and the overall daily figure would start to drop once the number of participants arriving begins to decrease, McCloskey said. The Czech Republic reported 57,195 new Covid-19 infections on Tuesday, its highest daily tally since the coronavirus pandemic started, amid the spread of the Omicron variant, health ministry data showed. The ministry also reported 9,775 cases of suspected reinfections in the country of 10.7 million. Hospital admissions were steady at 2,653, the ministry said on Wednesday, well below previous peaks. Our reporters in India, Aakash Hassan and Hannah Ellis-Petersen, have investigated claims that people are being registered as double-vaccinated without receiving both doses of a Covid vaccine. Workers described how easy it was to falsely register second vaccine doses for people who did not attend appointments, by using personal records from their first dose and opting to bypass a code sent to their mobile phone. “There is no technical glitch,” said Aditya, a health worker from Uttar Pradesh, who requested that only his first name was used owing to fear of reprisal. “The issue is the unprecedented pressure on us to increase the number of vaccinated people.” Read the full story here. The Covid hospitalisation rate in Australia fell to its lowest in nearly three weeks on Wednesday, Reuters reports, while a steady rate of daily infections raised hopes the worst of an outbreak fuelled by the Omicron variant may have passed. Hospital cases fell to about 4,600 on Wednesday, with all states seeing a dip in admission numbers, after a peak of nearly 5,400 a week ago. “We’ve seen the peaks of Omicron, I think, come through in (New South Wales and Victoria),” prime minister Scott Morrison, who is under pressure over his handling of the Omicron wave, told a media briefing. There have been more cases in the Winter Olympics ‘closed loop’ bubble as the torch relay begins. Thirty new Covid-19 infections were detected among Olympic Games-related personnel on 1 February, the organising committee of the Beijing 2022 Winter Olympics said on Wednesday. Fifteen were among new airport arrivals, it said on the Games’ official website, with 17 in the “closed loop” bubble that separates all event personnel from the public. It comes as a Covid-shortened Olympic torch relay began on Wednesday. Chinese basketball great and Olympian Yao Ming was among the first to carry the flame on a journey that will last just three days due to Covid-19 curbs, Reuters reported. The relay will be far more modest than the globe-spanning event ahead of Beijing’s 2008 Summer Games. Because of Covid, only selected members of the public will witness the torch relay. Wednesday’s event began under clear blue skies in Beijing when Chinese vice premier Jan Zheng lit a torch from a cauldron in the shape of traditional ritual vessel known as a zun, then handed it to 80-year-old Luo Zhihuan, who as a speed skater was China’s first winter sports world champion. China has reported a slight rise in Covid cases: 63 confirmed coronavirus cases for 1 February, down slightly from 66 a day earlier, the country’s health authority said on Wednesday. There were no new fatalities, leaving the death toll unchanged at 4,636. Tonga has gone into lockdown after recording two Covid-19 cases among port workers helping distribute international aid in the wake of the volcanic eruption and tsunami that devastated the Pacific country last month. The cases seem to confirm fears among Tongan officials that the arrival of aid could bring an outbreak of the virus, which could represent a bigger danger to Tonga than the tsunami. The prime minister, Siaosi Sovaleni, said the lockdown, which began at 6pm on Wednesday, will be open-ended, but will last for at least 48 hours, at which point it will be reviewed. Tonga is still reeling from the eruption of the undersea Hunga Tonga-Hunga Ha’apai volcano on 15 January, which sent gas 20km into the air, prompted a tsunami, with waves reaching 15 metres (49ft), and blanketed the country in ash. Read the full story from our Pacific editor Kate Lyons here. France will begin to lift some Covid-19 restrictions on Wednesday, including mandatory outdoor mask-wearing, Agence France-Presse reports. Audience capacity limits for concert halls, sporting matches and other events will also be removed, and although homeworking will no longer be mandated it will still be recommended. The move begins a two-part relaxation of curbs announced at the end of January - despite the country hitting record levels of daily cases last month - and comes as England and Denmark also eased their restrictions. France “will be able to lift most of the restrictions taken to curb the epidemic in February” thanks to the new vaccination pass, which replaced the health pass, prime minister Jean Castex said in January. The second stage of the curb-lifting will see nightclubs, shut since December, reopen on 16 February and standing areas will again be allowed at concerts, sporting events and bars. Paris has not made the easing of restrictions conditional on the progress of the health situation. Authorities view the threat of the Omicron variant as limited and less dangerous than previous strains of the virus, even though it is more contagious. An average of 322,256 cases were recorded over the previous seven days, according to latest figures, compared with 366,179 a week ago. Hello and welcome to the Guardian’s live coverage of the coronavirus pandemic with me, Virginia Harrison. France will begin lifting coronavirus restrictions including mandatory outdoor mask-wearing on Wednesday in a bid to ease citizens’ daily lives, dividing opinion as the country only last month reported record Covid-19 infections. Tonga has entered a lockdown after recording two Covid-19 cases among port workers helping distribute international aid in the wake of the volcanic eruption and tsunami that devastated the Pacific country last month. Here’s what else has been happening over the past 24 hours: The WHO has said the BA.2 sub-variant of Omicron, sometimes known as a “stealth” subvariant, is starting to outcompete BA.1. The BA.2 sub-variant has now been detected in 57 countries and accounted for more than half of all sequenced Omicron cases, the UN agency said. The UK prime minister Boris Johnson attended a leaving do for a No 10 aide during the strict post-Christmas lockdown, which is now under police investigation, the Guardian has learned. Prosecco is alleged to have been drunk by some staff, with Johnson understood to have given a speech thanking the official for their work and staying for around five minutes. In the US children under five, the last group of Americans still ineligible for vaccines against Covid-19, may soon receive emergency authorisation for the shots, but getting all children vaccinated remains a serious challenge. The Covid pandemic has “destroyed morale” among school leaders in England, who feel they have been scapegoated for government failures during the crisis instead of being hailed as heroes for their role on the frontline, MPs will be told in a briefing on Wednedsay. China reported 63 confirmed coronavirus cases for 1 February, down slightly from 66 a day earlier, the country’s health authority said on Wednesday. Meantime, at the Winter Olympics in Beijing, 32 new Covid infections were detected among Games-related personnel on 1 February. Seventeen were in the “closed loop” bubble that separates all event workers from the public. Health workers on the frontline of the Covid vaccination programme in India say people are being officially registered as double vaccinated without receiving both doses because of pressure to meet government targets. Australia recorded 69 Covid deaths as the country continued to battle the spread of the Omicron variant with worrying outbreaks in some remote communities. Two years into the pandemic in Japan, some residents in former tourist hotspot Kyoto admit that they have learned to embrace life without foreign visitorsA Brisbane Christian school says it will withdraw its demand that families sign anti-gay and anti-trans enrolment contracts prior to the new school year. The decision comes before a meeting with the Queensland schools accreditation board. While Citipointe Christian College says it “deeply regrets” that the contracts made students feel discriminated against, the principal says the school has the right to maintain its ethos and the “freedom to continue to provide an education based on our shared beliefs”. Those beliefs – and the statement parents were asked to sign – are taken from the school’s governing body, the International Network of Churches, and its formal “statement of faith”. It includes statements that homosexual acts were “immoral” and “offensive to God” and that transgender people would not be recognised. The withdrawal of the contract comes after the prime minister, Scott Morrison, said he “did not agree with” the school’s use of the document. Teachers have told Guardian Australia that the school principal, Brian Mulheran, this week had repeatedly doubled down on his decision to implement the contract. He released a video statement to parents on Tuesday defending the contracts and then gave families a two-week extension to sign. The decision was made before a scheduled meeting of the state government’s statutory accreditation board, which assesses eligibility for government funding and monitors compliance with the Education Act. The board has received a discrimination complaint about the contract. It is also understood that dozens of students and families had already chosen to withdraw and have enrolled at the local state school. Lawyers and others had said the contract was a clear breach of the Queensland anti-discrimination act. The state human rights commissioner, Scott McDougall, said organisations could not “contract out” their responsibilities under the act. In a letter to families Mulheran said the school would work with the community to update the enrolment contract, but that no families would now be asked to sign the existing one. A statement posted on the college website said the school would “continue to ensure that families are provided with information that is necessary to make informed choices about … our approach to teaching”. “We deeply regret that some students feel that they would be discriminated against because of their sexuality or gender identity, and I apologise to them and their families on behalf of the college,” Mulheran said. “As stated previously, the college does not and will not discriminate against any student because of their sexuality or gender identity. It is central to our faith that being gay or transgender in no way diminishes a person’s humanity or dignity in God’s eyes. “It is also deeply distressing that some of our students have been vilified in the community simply for their religious beliefs or because they attend the college.” Mulheran said society “gives freedom to people to be a part of groups with shared beliefs”. “Citipointe has the freedom to maintain its Christian ethos and this is an essential part of Christian education and choice for parents. As a college established for religious purposes, we will continue to provide an education based on our shared beliefs.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The Queensland education minister, Grace Grace, said she welcomed the decision and had called for it on a number of occasions. “In the interests of the mental health of students, staff, carers and parents I hope they abandon it completely and nothing like it ever surfaces again,” Grace said.I’m the disabled guy on several committees, advising governments what to do to keep people with disabilities safe from Covid-19. I know there are good people who have been working very hard on the policy responses, but it’s time to call it out – governments, both state and federal, and all these committees, are failing disabled people. I haven’t always felt this way, and back in 2020 I was satisfied by the proactive approach that governments were taking. Listening to advice from the council that I chair and with the support of our minister at the time, the Victorian government established the disability liaison officer program that funded staff across hospitals throughout Victoria to help vaccinate people with disabilities. This program continues to do good work, including providing disabled people with access to a limited supply of rapid antigen tests and helping disabled people with Covid to navigate the hospital system. Following our advice, Victoria also set up the call-to-test service that enables disabled people, who are unable to leave their house, to access PCR tests at home. And the federal government had a plan to prioritise the vaccination of people with disabilities. In the early days, these committees were achieving things, and it felt like the government was listening and taking action. But in March 2021, as the royal commission report showed, the vaccination of disabled people was deprioritised. I was expecting disabled people living in residential settings to be at the front of the queue, but no. Ten months on, the latest figures show vaccination rates of disabled people still fall 10% behind the rest of the population and the booster program for people is failing. And now we’ve had Omicron ripping through our nation, causing mayhem for disabled people who rely on others for daily assistance. January has been a nightmare – battling to get our hands on RATs and N95/P2 masks, rearranging shifts because staff have tested positive, and playing the “who hasn’t got Covid” shuffle. Trying to do the staff roster in January has been a game of figuring out who is least likely to kill me. My lungs aren’t strong enough to blow out a candle and the possibility of dying from this virus is real. So whenever I hear the governments – and I use the term in plural deliberately – telling me I need to live with Covid, I’m filled with anger and frustration. I’m trying to, but you’re not making it easy. Despite the hard work and strong advocacy, the absence of proactive government policy measures stack the odds against people like me. There are a lot of things that governments could have done and should be doing to help keep disabled people safe. Every disability worker should have access to a RAT before every shift and N95 masks should be available and mandatory for all disability workers providing close personal care. We need to improve ventilation in disability care settings and address the serious workforce shortages. We must increase efforts to fully vaccinate and deliver boosters to people with disabilities across the country – and boosters must be mandatory for all disability workers. If we want disabled people to live with this virus in the community, we need governments to take action and put in place evidence-based measures. They must listen to and act on what advocates and health experts are calling for. All of these things are achievable, and if I don’t die, I hope to see them happening. If I do die however, I blame the governments. • Dr George Taleporos is chairperson of the Victorian Disability Advisory Council and host of the podcast Reasonable and Necessary. You can find him on TwitterThe Belgian skeleton racer Kim Meylemans has been freed from an isolation facility in Beijing following a plea for help in a tearful video posted on Instagram. Meylemans confirmed that she now felt “safe” at the Olympic village after the Belgian Olympic Committee and the IOC stepped in when they learned she had wrongly been taken by ambulance to a second government facility and was told she would have to isolate for 14 more days due to Covid-19 concerns. The Belgian tested positive for the virus upon her arrival in China, which meant she had to enter isolation and return several negative tests before being cleared to move into the Yanqing Olympic village. She thought that was happening on Wednesday and boarded an ambulance for what she assumed was a ride to the village. “But the ambulance went to another facility,” Meylemans said in an Instagram post that quickly captured attention and raised questions about how her mental health was being affected by the saga. In a video update on Wednesday evening Meylemans, 25, added: “At 11.35pm there was a knock on my door and I was escorted to the Olympic village. I’m now in a wing that’s just isolation, but at least I’m back in the village. I feel safe and I’ll be able to train a little better here. “It seems like the video and the efforts of my Olympic Committee have really paid off.” Meylemans was 14th in her debut Olympics at Pyeongchang in 2018, but is expected to be more of a contender at the Beijing Games. She has one medal from World Cup races this season, a bronze, and was no worse than sixth in five of the final six races on the circuit this season. “Relieved to hear that Kim Meylemans is now in the Olympic village,” International Olympic Committee spokesman Christian Klaue tweeted. “We are glad that all the efforts led to the successful resolution of this situation.” Meylemans will now stay in an isolated room and still needs seven days of testing before she can be released from that wing. However she should be able to begin practice for the women’s skeleton, which starts next week, before the competition begins on 12 February. Earlier Rob Koehler, the director general of Global Athlete, an organisation geared to helping athletes, called Meylemans’ treatment “totally unacceptable”. “She should never have to endure these conditions,” he added. “The IOC is failing athlete rights.”Christian groups have accused Scott Morrison of “betraying” the intent of the Coalition’s religious discrimination bill by announcing an amendment that would prevent students being expelled for their sexuality or gender. Morrison made the surprise announcement on Brisbane radio on Thursday morning in a bid to distance the federal government from Citipointe Christian College’s attempt to get families to sign an anti-gay and anti-trans enrolment contract. The school has now withdrawn the contracts. Morrison pledged in October 2018 he would prevent LGBTQ+ students from being expelled but the reform was never implemented because it would still have allowed religious schools to discriminate against LGBTQ+ students in other ways. A group of four moderate Liberals had demanded an exemption allowing religious schools to discriminate be removed from the Sex Discrimination Act at the same time as the religious discrimination bill was passed. But the attorney general, Michaelia Cash, subsequently appeared to renege on that purported deal, telling Christian lobby group FamilyVoice in mid-December that changes to protect LGBTQ+ students would have to wait for 12 months and a review. As recently as Wednesday evening, the assistant attorney general, Amanda Stoker, had said amendments to protect children would be dealt with separately to the religious bill. But on Thursday, Morrison told B105.3 radio that he did not support Citipointe’s attempt to get families to sign statements that homosexual acts were “immoral” and “offensive to God” and that transgender people would not be recognised. “My kids go to a Christian school, I wouldn’t want my school doing that either,” Morrison said. “The bill we’re going to be taking through the parliament, we will have an amendment that will deal with that to ensure kids cannot be discriminated against on that basis. I’ve been saying that for years. That’s always been my view.” Morrison added that schools “should be able to teach kids” consistently with their faith – whether they be Christian, Muslim or Jewish. He said the religious discrimination bill would protect Australians “whether they have a faith or they don’t”. Guardian Australia understands Morrison told Liberal moderates and wrote to the opposition leader, Anthony Albanese, in early December stating he would introduce the amendment that would change the SDA. “In keeping with my second reading speech, where I stated that there is no place in our education system for any form of discrimination against a student on the basis of the sexuality of gender identity, the government will move an amendment to remove the provisions of the [SDA] which were included in 2013 which limited the protections provided under this Act,” Morrison wrote to Albanese on 1 December. FamilyVoice reacted with fury on Thursday, with spokesperson Greg Bondar telling Guardian Australia the proposed amendment was “inconsistent” with Cash’s commitment to the group. “Scott Morrison has betrayed the foundation of the religious discrimination bill,” he said. “Morrison has fallen into the same trap as Bill Shorten in 2019, ignoring the voice of the Christian community.” Bondar also complained about Citipointe’s backdown, defending the school for “simply wanting to uphold scientific truth and the Christian worldview of human sexuality”. “This is a sad day for all Australians and particularly faith schools as it has put religious freedom and free speech at risk,” he said. The Australian Christian Lobby and Christian Schools Australia have both previously threatened to withdraw their support for the religious discrimination bill if amendments regarding LGBTQ+ students were added. National LGBTQ+ rights organisation, Equality Australia, cautiously welcomed the commitment but still called for the bill to be scrapped. Ghassan Kassisieh, the legal director at Equality Australia, said the proposed reform was “long overdue and better protections must apply to both teachers and students”. “But the Morrison government’s religious discrimination bill will invite exactly this type of practice in employment across faith-based organisations, from schools, aged-care services, emergency accommodation and hospitals,” he said. “The prime minister may be putting out one small fire, but [the bill] will unleash a firestorm of discrimination in religious organisations against anyone that holds a different belief from their faith-based employer – even when they can faithfully do the job that is required of them.” Just Equal spokesperson Rodney Croome said an amendment to the SDA would be pointless because the religious discrimination bill broadened the scope for faith schools to discriminate against LGBTQ+ students and teachers on the grounds of religious belief. “As the actions by Citipointe Christian College clearly show, there are faith-schools camouflaging discrimination against LGBTIQ+ students by invoking religious beliefs rather than discriminating directly on the grounds of sexuality or gender identity,” he said. The text of the proposed amendment is yet to be released and Morrison has not committed to preventing teachers being fired for their sexuality – despite claiming in November it had also “always” been his view they should not. On Friday, two parliamentary inquiries into the religious discrimination bill are due to report before a short parliamentary sitting in which Labor support would probably be required to pass the proposed legislation. In both committees, the Coalition and Labor are collaborating with the aim of writing a joint report, but Labor could go further in expressing significant concerns about the statements of belief clause and expanded hiring and firing powers over teachers. The Greens oppose the bill.Japan is set to reform a 19th century law that automatically registers a woman’s ex-husband as the father of a child born within 300 days of their divorce. A government panel this week recommended amending the rule, along with another clause in the law that prevents women from remarrying for 100 days after a divorce on the grounds that the paternity of a child born soon after would be unclear. However, the proposed change would apply only to women who remarried. A baby born to a woman who remained single after the divorce would still be assumed under the law to be the child of her ex-husband. Because children born within the 300-day window are classified as being the offspring of a former husband, some women do not register the birth of their child on the family register, or koseki. Women who leave abusive husbands are more likely to want to avoid the child being registered as the offspring of the abuser. The koseki system has roots that date back to the 6th century and not being registered in effect leaves people without nationality and makes it difficult to establish their identity for a range of official processes, including taxation and benefits. There are known to be at least 800 unregistered people in Japan, though the true figure is likely to be higher. The panel has also recommended allowing mothers and children to challenge paternity claims; at present only fathers can do so. Under the existing law, a baby born at least 200 days after marriage is assumed to be the child of a woman’s current husband. The rules are part of the Civil Code, a comprehensive body of laws passed in 1896, a few decades after the Meiji Restoration. Japan had recently ended centuries of semi-isolation, was rushing to adapt western technology, laws and customs, and was keen to present itself to the world as modern nation. No changes have been made to the paternity laws of the Civil Code in the more than 120 years since, despite the advances in DNA that have allowed paternity to be reliably established. The UN’s Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women has repeatedly criticised the Japanese paternity law. Similar laws in Spain were repealed in 1981 and in South Korea in 2005.The Turkish president and wild card of Nato diplomacy, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, will fly to Kyiv on Thursday to offer himself again in the role of mediator between Ukraine and the Russian president Vladimir Putin. He will be joining the flock of overseas leaders lending their support to Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy and is expected to sign a free-trade deal. With Turkey’s Nato membership often under challenge, partly due to its decision to buy the Russian-made S-400 air-defence system, Erdoğan faces a difficult balancing act in showing continued strong diplomatic support for Ukraine while not damaging his complex long-term relations with Moscow. In a sign of the visit’s importance, Jake Sullivan, US national security adviser, and Ibrahim Kalin, chief adviser to the president of Turkey, spoke on Tuesday about their commitment to “deter further Russian aggression against Ukraine”, according to a White House statement. The Erdoğan mediation proposal has not yet been picked up by Russia. The US is trying to minimise the number of interlocutors with Putin and the Russian leader seems to believe the best way to solve the Ukraine conflict is through direct bilateral talks with the White House, rather than via any third party. Putin criticised Turkey last year when it sold its Bayraktar TB2 drones to the Ukrainian army. The highly effective weapons could be used against Russian soldiers supporting the rebel-held area of Donetsk in eastern Ukraine. The sale led to an official complaint from the Russian foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, that Turkey was feeding militarist tendencies. The drones have been credited with tipping the balance towards Azerbaijan in its war over the disputed Nagorno-Karabakh enclave with Armenia in late 2020. In practice, Ukraine has used its drones rarely and the precise number sold to the country is unclear. In a recent interview with Al-Monitor, Lt Col Yuri Ignati, spokesperson for the Ukrainian air force, lavished praise on the drones and said his country could not get enough of them. One of Erdoğan’s sons-in-law has a stake in the private sector firm that produces the drones. Iliya Kuva from the Ukrainian Institute of the Future said: “The drones have a pretty huge psychological and political impact on Ukrainian public opinion since Turkey is seen as the country that provides weapons that are modern and good enough to maintain a military balance with Russian forces in the east.” The offer of drones was part of a wider broadening of ties between the two countries including a long-negotiated free-trade deal. On the other hand, Ukrainian politicians have been angered by TurkStream, a gas pipeline inaugurated in 2020. The pipeline takes gas from Russia to Turkey via the Black Sea in a manner that weakens Ukraine’s role as a transit country for Russian gas, in the same way that Nord Stream 2 will if Germany declares it has passed regulatory hurdles. In a bid to reassure Moscow before Erdoğan’s visit, the Turkish defence minister, Hulusi Akar, stressed Ankara’s commitment to the 1936 Montreux Convention, the treaty that strictly restricts Nato forces’ access to the Black Sea through the Bosphorus. The convention regulates maritime traffic through Turkey’s Bosphorus and Dardanelles straits – the link between the Mediterranean and Black seas. Its status is not academic in the event of a conflict. During the confrontation in Georgia, Turkey refused to let US warships into the Black Sea as part of US moves to deter Russia. However, Nato will be monitoring the visit to ensure that Erdoğan does not break ranks over the alliance’s absolute rejection of Putin’s demands for Nato to pull back its borders. Turkey’s turbulent relations with Moscow in Libya and Syria show two countries often in direct conflict but not eager to see relations break down, let alone spill into direct military action. Turkey has been supportive of the Tatar community in Russian-occupied Crimea, but did not join sanctions against Russia in the wake of the 2014 invasion. Turkic Muslim Tatars were a majority until Stalin forced them out and millions resettled in Turkey. Russia has usurped Crimea and “things cannot go on with a mentality of occupation”, Erdoğan said on 17 January.A serving SAS soldier has told a federal court hearing that fellow troops were openly hostile to Ben Roberts-Smith and believed the gallantry that earned him the Victoria Cross may have been “falsified”. A former comrade of Roberts-Smith, a still-serving SAS soldier anonymised in court as Person 41, has given two days of evidence about serving alongside the VC recipient in Afghanistan. He said he witnessed Roberts-Smith order a subordinate soldier to execute an unarmed elderly Afghan man allegedly found hiding in a tunnel during a raid, and also saw Roberts-Smith “frog-march” another unarmed Afghan man, who had a prosthetic leg, outside the same compound before throwing him to the ground and shooting him dead with a machine gun. Person 41 said he believed Roberts-Smith was a competent and brave soldier who could be relied upon to have his comrades’ backs. But he told the court on Thursday there were “haters” within the SAS regiment who thought Roberts-Smith was “arrogant”, “thought he was better than everyone else” and was undeserving of his numerous decorations. Roberts-Smith is suing the Age, the Sydney Morning Herald and the Canberra Times for defamation over a series of reports he alleges are defamatory and portray him as committing war crimes, including murder. The newspapers are pleading a defence of truth. Roberts Smith denies any wrongdoing. Person 41 said two other soldiers, known by the court as Person 7 and Person 42, did not believe Roberts-Smith deserved his Victoria Cross, the Australian military’s highest honour. Roberts-Smith was awarded the VC for storming two enemy machine gun posts during a raid at Tizak, in Afghanistan’s Kandahar province in 2010. Person 41 told the court that Person 7’s dislike of Roberts-Smith stemmed from a disbelief over the action. “It always centred around the fact that Person 7 believed ‘RS’ [Roberts-Smith] wasn’t deserving of the Victoria Cross and the events leading up to that were falsified,” he told the court. Person 41 told the court another soldier, Person 42, believed the events that led to Roberts-Smith’s VC “may have been falsified”. “I believe it was along the lines of his arrogance and he thought he was better than everyone else.” Roberts-Smith has previously told the court the Victoria Cross “put a target on my back”. He said he was “white-anted” by other soldiers jealous of his success as a soldier. On Tuesday, Person 41 detailed before the court the deaths of two men during a raid on a compound known as Whiskey 108 in the village of Kakarak, a known insurgent stronghold, in Uruzgan province, on 12 April 2009. This occurred the year before Roberts-Smith’s VC action. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Person 41 said, as the compound was being “cleared” by a number of SAS platoons, Roberts-Smith and another soldier, Person 4, borrowed a suppressor from him. He then saw the two soldiers walk over to a captive, unarmed elderly Afghan man, kneeling next to the entrance to a concealed tunnel, where the man had been found hiding. He said Roberts-Smith walked the man about 2 metres until he was in front of Person 4, “then kicked him in the back of the legs behind the knees until he was kneeling down … RS pointed to the Afghan and said to Person 4 ‘shoot him’”. Later in the same raid, Person 41 said he was outside the walled compound when he saw Roberts-Smith “frog-marching” another Afghan man away from the compound entrance. “He [Roberts-Smith] had his machine gun in his right arm, holding it up, and sort of frog-marching the Afghan by the scruff of the neck with his left arm. “I turned to face ‘RS’ to see what was happening. He then proceeded to throw the Afghan male down on to the ground. The Afghan male landed on his back. ‘RS’ then reached down and grabbed him by the shoulder and flipped him on to his stomach. Then I observed him lower his machine gun and shoot approximately three to five rounds into the back of the Afghan male.” “After he’d done that, he looked up and saw me standing there, and looked at me and said ‘are we all cool, we good?’ And I just replied, ‘yeah mate, no worries’.” Person 41 learned later that this man was disabled, and had a prosthetic leg. Under cross-examination on Wednesday, Person 41 defended his evidence. Arthur Moses SC, acting for Roberts-Smith, put to Person 41 his testimony was not true. “You’re lying aren’t you?” “No.” Moses put it to Person 41 of the alleged murder of the elderly Afghan: “it didn’t happen”. “It did happen and I know what I saw.” Moses said the murder of the disabled man shot outside the compound “did not happen”. “It did happen.” “You’re not able to tell the difference between fact and fiction are you?” “That’s incorrect.” Person 41 said it was more than a decade after the event, in 2020, before he told anybody what he had witnessed at Whiskey 108, because he feared being ostracised and for his career in the regiment. He said disclosing the events could have led to him being returned to Australia with “everybody knowing you’d dobbed in, so to speak”. Person 41 admitted to drinking from the prosthetic leg souvenired from Whiskey 108 by another soldier, and which was used as a drinking vessel at the Australian soldiers’ unofficial bar on base, the Fat Ladies Arms. He said he was now ashamed of having done so.A chill is blowing through Chinese civil society as activists, journalists and academics report receiving police warnings and censorship of their social media platforms in recent weeks as Beijing prepares to host the Winter Olympics beginning on Friday. In mid-January, the Beijing-based human rights activist Hu Jia said in a tweet that China’s state security apparatus was summoning activists around the country to question them and warn them to stay silent. The author Zhang Yihe and prominent journalist Gao Yu said they had lost some or all of their access to WeChat, China’s dominant social media platform. Academics including Guo Yuhua, the outspoken Tsinghua University sociologist, and He Weifang, the Peking University law professor, reported similar issues. Ahead of the Games, authorities also detained two prominent human rights activists: the lawyer Xie Yang and writer Yang Maodong. They are held on suspicion of “inciting state subversion”. A third rights lawyer, Tang Jitian, went missing in December en route to an EU human rights day event in Beijing. Such behaviour by China’s government may be a regular ritual for any big event, analysts and activists say, but the 2022 Winter Olympics will be the most tightly managed international event China has held in the last few years. “There’s nothing really unexpected about this,” said Wang Yaqiu, a senior China researcher at Human Rights Watch, who added that China’s Communist party was worried that online criticism by Chinese citizens could ruin “the facade of the perfect Games”. Although not unexpected, Beijing’s approach to this year’s Games is even stricter than when it hosted the Olympics in 2008, when Wang was a university student. “Back then we could criticise the Olympics; now nobody can say anything,” she said, adding that she had seen a noticeable uptick in Chinese citizens complaining about their social media posts disappearing. Hu agreed with Wang. “Right now, as far as sensitive terms inside China go, ‘Winter Olympics’ is second only to ‘Xi Jinping’,” Hu said. “No criticism by citizens is being permitted.” International criticism of the Games is the highest since the 2014 Winter Games, which were held in the Russian city of Sochi. Russia’s suppression of LGBT rights drew condemnation, and the International Olympic Committee (IOC) spoke up at the time. This year, the IOC has not had a critical word for Beijing. Its president, Thomas Bach, is accused by critics of helping China’s efforts to silence the tennis star Peng Shuai, who disappeared in November last year after accusing a top Communist official of sexual assault. Bach spoke to Peng via video link after a global outcry and the release of short videos purportedly of Peng going about daily life that appeared to be staged. Afterwards, he repeated her reassurances that she was fine, despite questions about her freedom that remain unanswered. “At least during Sochi the IOC spoke up for LGBT rights,” Wang said. “Now they’re part of the Chinese government’s propaganda machine.” Dick Pound, a senior IOC official, has described accusations that the organisation is aiding the Communist party’s propaganda efforts as “silly”. Hu, who was imprisoned for his activism during the 2008 Games, said he was disappointed by what he views as IOC complicity in Chinese human rights abuses and the Communist party’s legitimacy. That disappointment was amplified by the fact that a previous Olympics had helped push neighbouring South Korea from dictatorship to democracy. Seoul hosted the 1988 Games. “I was locked up for three-and-a-half years in 2008 – at that time I hoped the Olympic spirit of openness, equality and peace would drive the democratisation of China the way it did in South Korea in 1988,” Hu said. Instead, the legitimacy and prestige of the 2008 Beijing Games emboldened the Communist party, which has cracked down on dissent in Xinjiang, Tibet and Hong Kong since then. “The human rights abuses associated with the Beijing Winter Olympics are far worse than those connected to the Games 14 years ago,” Hu said.Rooks and jackdaws come and go with the night, rising and falling in black skeins over the house. They arrive at dusk, with a rush of wings beating the air, and leave before dawn, clattering and cawing. They roost during darkness in the crest of a nearby wood. Numbers have slowly increased since November and there must be nearly 1,000 birds there now. It’s easy to tell the two species apart by both appearance and sound. Adult rooks have a bald, greyish-white patch at the base of their large bills, which makes them look like medieval plague doctors wearing beaked masks. Jackdaws are smaller and have a distinctive silvery sheen over the back of their heads and necks, as if wearing a scarf. Close up, you can see their pearly eyes: unsettlingly pale with stark, seed-black pupils. Their calls are different: Jackdaws make a sharp “tchak”, like woodblocks being struck smartly together, while rooks have a salty-soft rasping cry. During the day, they split into foraging parties and spread out over the vale, picking over the fields for insects or the first green blades of corn. The jackdaws have an exasperating tendency to pull straw off thatched roofs in search of hibernating beetles. As evening falls, raucous gangs gather in the big oaks beside the road. When the trees are full, the birds take flight to the wood, leaving their perches free for the next incoming group. This process of aggregation lasts about 40 minutes, although there are always some latecomers who skip the tree collections and fly low and fast direct to the roost. Once in the wood, they will rise up in a cloud and swirl above the trees, voices clamouring, before the final settling. The mixed roost is a winter arrangement and there are already signs that it is beginning to break up. Jackdaw pairs are already investigating nest sites away from the wood and the rooks are drifting back to the rookery trees. The rooks will lay their eggs this month and the jackdaws towards the end of March. They won’t start congregating this way again until the dark nights return in the autumn. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiary“The purpose of a system is what it does” is a concept coined by the cybernetician Anthony Stafford Beer. It describes how the intentions of a system’s creators, or even the perceived primary functions of a system, don’t always have a causal relationship with how the system behaves or is interacted with in the system’s lifecycle. Beer’s idiom has implications for not just technological systems, but the way in which we can understand failings in social service systems, justice systems etc. However, it is important to note that technology rarely exists within a socioeconomic vacuum; political, social and economic factors influence the ways in which technology is integrated into other systems. Technological systems aren’t mutually exclusive from justice systems, cultural factors and so on. We see poignant examples of Beer’s idiom in the ways machine learning, facial recognition technology and cameras have been adopted by the justice system here in Australia, with technologies such as Clearview AI, which allows those with an account to scan a photo of an unknown person and locate additional images and identifying information about them from across the internet, raising ethical questions of individual privacy. The rhetoric of course is that the police need to access these technologies to be able to keep citizens safe from some amorphous danger. However, another unrelated incident occurred in Queensland where the police accessed and shared the private details of a domestic violence victim in their database with the victim’s abusive partner. This example is just one of many highlighting how the rhetoric or intention of keeping us safe isn’t necessarily the output of these systems. Could the argument be made that the inherent properties and functions of technologies themselves be the reason systems can be used for purposes other than the stated intentions? The story of the AK-47 assault rifle comes to mind: a rifle designed for resiliency in many different climates and environments and one that is relatively easy to construct and mass produce. An engineering masterpiece. The inventor, Mikhail Kalashnikov, himself stated that he felt remorse for the way in which terrorist groups had adopted the weapon as he intended it as a tool for defence. However, the major divergence from most consumer-level digital technologies here is obvious: weapons are made to kill, maim or intimidate. These aren’t “side-effects” of the technology. Is there a responsibility then on corporations and engineers to be considerate of the socioeconomic and geopolitical contexts in which their product is designed, developed and distributed? I only have more questions for these questions, but I think the inverse of the issue is possible: an Indigi-futurism/cyberpunk disruption. Indigenous futurism is a subgenre of science fiction that explores possibilities through speculative histories and/or futures of Indigenous people. It critiques projections of Indigenous people as lacking the will or capacity to understand and use technology and explores what ideas like decolonisation might look like for Indigenous communities when applied. Cyberpunk is similarly a genre of science fiction set in dystopic futures with corporations blurring the boundary between business and government. It also describes technologies such as artificial intelligence and cybernetic augmentation (machine parts that complement human biological functions) as ubiquitous in everyday society, and usually has some characters or groups who form some form of resistance to these imposed systems of control. Indigenous people already exist in the dystopias of science fiction literature, or at least in their prototypes. Indigenous people have been (and continue to be) the first to experience dystopic government/corporate overreach, from the testing of nuclear and biological weapons through to being the test subjects for cruel social and cultural upheaval programs such as the stolen generations, the Northern Territory intervention, and countless other occurrences of sacred site destruction and land dispossession. Beer’s idiom persists in these examples, as there has always been a moral justification, no matter how flimsy, made for these actions. How often have we heard “it was for their own good”, or when public sentiment has shifted to acceptance “it was bad, but they had good intentions”? The inverse of these systems emerges from these histories, from the tension of those systems imposed upon us, and the systems that are borne from our over 60,000 years of surviving in some of the harshest conditions on the planet. We should be concerned about the ways in which technologies are being adopted for nefarious purposes. Technologies such as the blockchain, cryptocurrencies and non-fungible tokens come with considerable economic risks, scammers and environmental costs. Additionally, artificial intelligence and machine learning technologies are being used by police forces for facial recognition to identify protestors at marches and many other ethically dubious purposes. However, I hold maybe a naïve optimism for Indigi-futurism and the ways in which we can cyberpunk these systems. We can hide our heads in the sand or pass on responsibility for glacial-speed policy responses to respective governing bodies, or we can hack these systems and adapt them to create economic development opportunities, new modes of artistic expression or even further the cause of Indigenous self-determination. Combining these systems with our culture’s 60,000 years of knowledge – we might even be able to save the planet. • Matt Heffernan is a Luritja technologist from central Australia who has worked in various sectors from government to not for profits and private industry. He is currently a master of applied cybernetics student at the Australian National UniversityAn anti-virus mask that only covers the nose and can continue to be worn while eating and drinking is on sale in South Korea. The “kosk”, a combination of ko, the Korean word for nose, and mask, has been released by a company called Atman and sells for 9,800 won ($8.13; £5.99) for a box of 10 on online retailer Coupang. It consists of two pieces, one of which can be removed to leave the mouth uncovered. Meanwhile, three resusable “Copper Antivirus Nose Masks” which only cover the nose at all times are available in different colours for 2,000 won ($1.65; £1.22) from Spar Clone Fabric, also on Coupang. The masks are designed to be worn under a regular mask that covers the mouth, which can be removed when dining out or drinking with other people. The unusual masks have attracted a lot of attention online. “Are they also selling teapots made from chocolate?” asked one tweeter, while another commented, “Next level stupidity!”. Another Twitter user suggested: “No different to the people who wear their masks below their nose.” Still, some studies have suggested that the nose is the easiest route for the coronavirus to enter the body, so wearing a nose mask may not be as ridiculous as it looks. Professor Catherine Bennett, chair in epidemiology within Deakin University’s Institute for Health Transformation in Australia, told Nine News that masks that only cover the nose were a “strange idea’” but would be “better than nothing”. “It probably makes a marginal difference,” she said. Coronavirus cases in South Korea hit a record 22,907 on Thursday after topping 20,000 for the first time on Wednesday, driven by the spread of the Omicron variant. However, the east Asian nation has registered a relatively low 6,812 deaths since the beginning of the pandemic. That represents a death rate per million of 133, compared to 2,300 per million in the UK and 2,747 in the US.In the first months of the UK’s spring 2020 lockdown, Jennifer Doyle, a teacher and single mother, was at a low point. “I was in a bit of a hole, struggling to cope on my own and focusing only on the negatives of my life,” says the 39-year-old. “Then – during a Zoom quiz, of course – my friend said I should look into manifestation to help. I did – and my energy totally shifted. I started thinking about what I wanted from life, rather than what was wrong with it.” Doyle was not alone. In early July 2020, Google Trends reported a peak in searches for “manifestation”, which is often described as a way of willing your goals into existence. In the past 22 months, the website Life Coach Directory has seen a 450% rise in potential clients searching for manifestation techniques. On TikTok, the hashtag #manifestation has 13.9bn views. It is part of the huge wellness market, which is worth about £1.1bn. I too spent the past two years raking up existential questions in response to the world’s chaos (and my impending 30th birthday). What am I doing with my life? When will I next be able to afford a holiday? Faced with another year of broken resolutions, impending deadlines and chasing late invoices, I decided to investigate manifestation further, to see if I could find some answers – and perhaps attract some good stuff to myself. A life of wealth and leisure is the first thing that springs to mind to manifest, but how manageable is that? “Manifestation can be a slippery fish to work with,” says the psychotherapist Dr Denise Fournier. “In pragmatic terms, it is the practice of translating something from thought and idea into a tangible reality. It is a nuanced way of using intention to create an image of a goal you want to achieve and then cultivating discipline and actions that keep you oriented towards that goal.” This loose definition means manifestation can align with any number of life coaching and sports psychology principles, from visualisation and intention to self-control and self-belief. No wonder those of us stuck at home and faced with the uncertainty of the Covid world were attracted to its methods of self-improvement. “Life is always happening, but when you add intention the result is more likely to happen in your favour,” Fournier says. “It’s positive thinking,” agrees Doyle. “I always had impostor syndrome, but manifestation has helped me believe more in my life and its possibility. I break my goals down and put action into them until I start to notice things popping up.” Each morning, she writes down 10 things for which she is grateful, before spending time visualising her goals, then writing her next steps in her journal. *** I decide to narrow my goal of “wealth and leisure” into something more achievable, so that I can visualise it. One of my long-held dreams is to become an author. I finished writing a novel last year, but have been dithering about sending it to agents and publishers. Now, I decide to take a leaf out of Doyle’s book and make a daily visualisation practice to become a published author. I start setting myself “actionable steps”, or tasks: editing the text, selecting agents, sending out emails. I find myself beginning each morning picturing myself wearing tweed jackets and grandly declining an OBE for services to literature, while my days are surrounded by sheets of paper and scraps of notes for edits and pitches. This is starting to feel a lot like work and a lot less like magical thinking. The popular idea of manifestation – a way of dreaming something into reality – stems largely from the 2006 book and film The Secret by the TV executive Rhonda Byrne. In it, Byrne outlines her “law of attraction” – that if you ask the universe for something and believe in its reality, you will receive it. Positive thinking attracts positive results, claims Byrne as she suggests historical figures such as Winston Churchill, Albert Einstein and even Jesus Christ used these principles in their lives. The book has sold more than 35m copies and attracted a legion of celebrity fans. Jim Carrey believes he manifested a $10m payday, Oprah Winfrey her role in The Color Purple. The Secret also has its share of detractors. In her 2009 book, Bright-Sided, Barbara Ehrenreich wrote that The Secret was part of a wellness trend that had led the US public to become self-interested and detached from political reality. The scientists Christopher F Chabris and Daniel J Simons argued in a 2010 essay that The Secret used jargon and selective history to produce an “illusion of knowledge”. The writer Mark Manson has called it “a playbook for entitlement and self-absorption”. Today’s manifesters, however, have moved away from spiritual energy. Doyle started manifesting with The Manifestation Collective, a UK-based online community run by Victoria Jackson. “The Secret is what first got me interested in manifestation, when I was working as a magazine editor,” she says. “But it can lead you into thinking that if you are having a bad year, you will manifest only bad things into your life, which I don’t think is true.” Rather, she says, “manifesting is about changing your thoughts, which in turn will affect your actions and then become habits and behaviours. It’s about letting go of the limiting belief that we can’t achieve certain things.” Raised in a working-class household in Leeds, Jackson believes manifestation helped her overcome messages that she had internalised concerning what she could achieve in her work and life. “I manifested leaving my job to set up my own business and being able to work while travelling the world,” she says. “It’s about focusing on what feels good, rather than what looks good, then being incredibly specific about your goals. We’re trying to keep them at the forefront of your mind to always work towards.” Amman Ahmed, a 34-year-old entrepreneur, also believes manifesting helped him transcend his limiting beliefs. “I grew up in an environment where working in a call centre was the norm,” he says. “In 2008, I got an internship at HP [Hewlett-Packard] and I thought I had made it, but when I discovered manifestation I realised I could do so much more than just be on the corporate ladder; I could build my life the way I wanted to.” Ahmed has since founded a multimillion-pound company, Relax My Dog, which produces music and videos for pets. “When I walked to work each morning, I was always visualising my goals,” he says. “I used to joke that I was a millionaire, but temporarily broke. You really have to live in the 3D reality of what you want to achieve and change how you think. It made me realise I wanted a certain lifestyle first and then I worked backwards on how to get there.” But doesn’t constantly focusing on your own gain breed a materialistic worldview or even narcissism? “Success can become an addiction and you have to question when it serves you and when it doesn’t,” Ahmed says. He is now reading up on meditation and ways to maintain his contentment. “Manifestation can be like therapy – consciously doing an inventory of yourself and always asking: “Why?” when it comes to behavioural patterns,” he says. “Sometimes you might have searched enough.” This constant self-assessment sounds difficult. Fournier says it can be. “It can get prickly drilling down into people’s learned behaviours, and often the things they wanted to manifest initially change,” she says. I ask her how I might help along my own manifesting. “You need to look at how you are standing in the way of your fulfilment, then explore that.” She says my goals are likely to come to fruition if I connect with my vision and “show up in my own life” – in other words, put the work in. Her response hits a nerve. Soon I am sweating and sifting through my subconscious. Am I too scared of rejection and failure to commit to trying for what I want? If my book doesn’t get published, does that mean manifesting doesn’t work – or that I am a bad writer? “If you think whatever you do is miraculously manifested, it sets us up to be disappointed when we don’t get what we want,” Fournier says. “It can also mean that we judge others who aren’t manifesting and we can ignore systemic global and contextual problems. For instance, it’s really myopic and dangerous to think people who are in poverty aren’t manifesting themselves out of it. Manifesting is merely setting intentions for your life. It’s not about placing value judgments on yourself if you don’t succeed.” Is there any science to back up the idea? In her 2019 book The Source, the neuroscientist Tara Swart wrote about neuroplasticity – the brain’s capacity to be shaped by its environment. “If we don’t take responsibility for this, then our brains are moulded by outside experiences, which can be good or bad,” Swart says. “If we focus attention on what we want to change, deliberately practise new desired behaviours and are held accountable, we can change behaviour patterns.” Alongside the manifestation company To Be Magnetic, Swart has created a method of “neural manifestation” that purports to reprogram subconscious limiting beliefs using “neuroscience, psychology, epigenetics and energetics”. If merely thinking about how I was standing in my own way made me sweat, the idea of reprogramming my subconscious sounds cultish. But another neuroscientist offers a note of caution about the use of scientific terminology. “There is a danger to using terms like epigenetics – the science of cell development, turning genes on and off to create a cellular memory,” says Dr Kevin Mitchell, an associate professor of genetics and neuroscience at Trinity College Dublin. It lends an aura of respectability to something that he describes as “woo-woo”. “The idea of a cellular memory can be conflated with psychological memory – and neuroplasticity can be broadened to encompass any changes in behaviour. Genes only influence our personality, rather than determine it,” he says. “The only positives of manifestation I see are in becoming more aware of our behaviours and paying attention to them, like in mindfulness. Habits can change, but it takes effort and determination – there is no magic of the universe at play.” Dr Caroline Hexdall, a psychologist who specialises in mindfulness, agrees. “Manifestation is attractive because it feels like something you can do to bring about happiness and success, but it’s when we accept the struggle that things change,” she says. It seems manifestation can mean anything to anyone – a euphemistic term for the daunting process of self-awareness and accountability. “Some people prefer the language of spirituality and others positive psychology,” says Alana Leggett, a life coach at the Life Coach Directory. “Since it’s such a broad term, you can mould manifestation to fit the person and their belief system so that it works with them. It mainly builds self-confidence and focus, since it’s really hard to be accountable and consistent in making changes – just look at how many people make and break their new year resolutions.” This makes sense: during the fortnight I have been manifesting, I have felt my confidence about my creativity grow. Just setting the intention to work on my book has led to a renewed sense of enthusiasm that has nudged away fear at its possible failure. The boost in confidence and focus has also worked for Doyle. She spent the past 18 months writing and self-publishing a children’s book and has met a new partner. “I wasn’t open to meeting a boyfriend, but manifesting helped me believe that there would be someone out there for me,” she says. “We soon met online and now we’re having a baby in August. It’s perfect.” Whether her recent gains have been down to luck, manifestation or a combination of both, Doyle sees no downsides to continuing to envisage a better future for her new family. “If something makes you feel happier and you’re not harming others, why not continue?” she says. “Since I’ve been manifesting, my life has completely turned around and I don’t think I’ll stop.” I have not been so successful; I have received no responses to my flurry of book emails. Visualising has been fun and helped me to realise that I can hope for more from my life (as well as realising that tweed is not my look), but I can’t help feel uneasy at a practice that appears so insular and self-centred. I worry that if I continue with this laser-like focus, I will lose sight of the other, more fleeting, joys of life: laughing with loved ones, dancing drunkenly, reading for its own sake and simply living. Perhaps we can be happy with these things, rather than always chasing our own goals. Only time will tell if my manifestation bears fruit – and I am not ready to give up completely. So, if any agents or publishers are reading this, well, my email address is in my Twitter bio …Severe floods and other extreme weather have cost Europe about half a trillion euros in the past four decades, with Germany, France and Italy the worst-hit countries. Between 90,000 and 142,000 deaths were attributed to weather and climate-related events over the period 1980 to 2020, the overwhelming majority of them from heatwaves. The data, published by the European Environment Agency on Thursday, does not show a clear trend of increase in losses over the decades from the impact of the climate crisis. This is because the economic impacts tend to be concentrated in a few major events – more than 60% of the economic losses came from just 3% of the weather events over the period – and these can strike anywhere and cause vastly different results. Wouter Vanneuville, of the EEA, one of the lead authors of the study, said: “There is no clear pattern for the most extreme events – they are still random, to a large extent. But adaptation is ongoing and is having an impact.” He said the fact that losses were not clearly increasing should not make people complacent, but underlined the importance of adapting infrastructure and making preparations for extreme weather, which is likely to become more frequent and intense as the climate crisis progresses and temperatures increase. “The reason we don’t see a trend is not that climate change is not real, but because a lot of actions are going on against climate change. More and more countries are implementing adaptation strategies,” he said. Countries should invest further in adaptation, he said, as progress on protecting against the effects of the climate crisis varied widely across Europe. “Even if we reach net zero emissions before 2050, adaptation will still be needed to keep the impacts limited,” he said. The UK has opted out of membership of the EEA, Europe’s environmental watchdog, since Brexit, though other non-EU states such as Norway and Switzerland are members, and the EEA data covers 32 countries of which five are non-EU. However, the UK was a member for the period studied, and its losses were calculated at about €57bn over the period, equivalent to close to €1,000 per person, with 3,500 deaths. About 70% of the economic losses were insured, the highest value of any of the countries. The worst economic damage was caused by “hydrological” events – largely floods – which accounted for up to 44% of the losses, closely followed by damage from “meteorological” events – mainly storms – which amounted to up to 39%, depending on the dataset used. The EEA collated the data on economic losses from insurers and other commercial sources which had slightly different methodologies, giving a spread of estimates for the losses over the period of between €450bn and €520bn depending on the datasets used. Just under a quarter (23%) of losses over the period were insured, though these rates varied widely among countries, with more than half of losses insured in Denmark and the Netherlands, and only about 1% in Lithuania and Romania. Switzerland, Slovenia and France had the highest losses per capita over the period, and the highest losses relative to area were in Switzerland, Germany and Italy.Britons are braced for the Bank of England to increase interest rates on Thursday as the central bank seeks to tackle price pressures that have pushed annual inflation to a 30-year high of 5.4%. Most City economists said the majority of members on the Bank’s rate-setting committee would increase the base rate from 0.25% to 0.5%, with the likelihood that at least two more increases would follow during 2022. On the eve of the Bank’s decision, 29 economists from 45 respondents to a survey by Reuters predicted that the monetary policy committee (MPC) would go ahead with a rise, while 16 forecast that rates were likely to remain on hold. High-street lenders are expected to increase the cost of variable-rate mortgages immediately after the vote, adding to the cost of living crisis facing many of those borrowing to buy a home. Rents are also likely to increase as landlords pass on the cost of borrowing to tenants, though savers will enjoy a long-awaited rise in the interest paid on deposit accounts. A separate survey by the data compiler IHS Markit found that 49% of households – a record high – believe that Threadneedle Street policymakers will impose at least one rate rise in the next three months. IHS Markit said it was clear that the MPC’s surprise vote in December to increase the base rate from 0.1% to 0.25%, and to signal three rate rises to 1% this year, had filtered through to the public. Chris Williamson, the chief business economist at IHS Markit, said: “UK households have grown increasingly certain of the Bank of England hiking interest rates for a second meeting in succession, with expectations of tighter policy having spiked higher since last October as inflation worries took hold.” He said recent surveys of business activity had shown the economy was “displaying encouraging resilience in the face of the Omicron [coronavirus] wave”, while employment agencies had reported that wage growth rose sharply as employers competed to attract staff amid widespread labour shortages. “With the Omicron wave already ebbing and virus containment measures eased, there’s a good chance that the pace of economic growth will accelerate in coming months, which will likely add to speculation that further rate hikes are on the table as we head into spring,” said Williamson. Pressure on the Bank has grown after a surge in the price of energy, secondhand cars, food and household goods that pushed the consumer prices index (CPI) to 5.4% in December and the retail prices index (RPI), which is used for wage bargaining, to 7%. The Bank aims to keep inflation at 2% over a two- to three-year period. High demand for goods during a succession of lockdowns, combined with shortages caused by Covid-related delays made worse by hold-ups at UK ports due to Brexit, has pushed up prices. Grocery prices rose 3.8% over the four weeks to 23 January compared with the same period last year, according to the market research company Kantar. It said prices were rising fastest for fresh beef and poultry, savoury snacks, crisps, skincare and cat food, offset by falls in the price of fresh bacon, vitamins and beer. Industry figures showed that a broader measure of shop price inflation almost doubled in January to the highest level for nearly a decade, pushed up by the spiralling cost of furniture and flooring. Annual inflation of goods bought from retailers rose to 1.5% last month from 0.8% in December, according to the latest data from the British Retail Consortium trade body and the market research company NielsenIQ, which is the highest level since December 2012. The energy regulator is expected to increase the price cap on gas and electricity by more than 50% to reach almost £2,000 a year on Thursday, up from an average of £1,277 this winter, to reflect record high gas prices caused by a global crisis in supply.LBC’s left-leaning mid-morning presenter James O’Brien now has more listeners than breakfast show host Nick Ferrari, in the latest indication that British radio listening habits have changed substantially during the pandemic. For decades the breakfast show slot has been the highest-profile programme on almost every radio station, usually garnering the most listeners. Audiences traditionally increased as people turned on the radio when they got up in the morning and continued listening if they drove to work in a car, only to fall away after 8am as they turned up at work. Yet the substantial increase in working from home during the pandemic, increased listening on the move via smartphones and the popularity of presenters with particularly strong personal followings are now upending this longstanding industry rule – with audiences peaking much later in the morning. The change is particularly symbolic at LBC, which over the last decade has transformed itself from a London-only station known for phone-in shows into a national speech radio station with consistently rising ratings. Official RAJAR listener figures, released on Thursday, show that Ferrari, the longstanding breakfast show host known for his bruising tabloid style, now reaches 1.295m listeners for his 7am-10am programme. By comparison, O’Brien has edged narrowly ahead with 1.307m listeners for his lengthy critiques of Boris Johnson’s government during his 10am to 1pm slot. Elsewhere, the listening figures for the final three months of 2021 show the audiences for major national BBC radio stations remained largely flat. Radio 2 remains the most popular station in the country with almost 15m listeners a week, while Zoë Ball has slightly rebuilt the audience for her Radio 2 breakfast show to 7.5m listeners – still the most popular breakfast show in the country but attracting fewer listeners than Ken Bruce in the station’s mid-morning slot. Yet commercial radio stations continue to gain ground on the BBC, with advertising-supported outlets already substantially outperforming the public broadcaster among listeners aged under 45. At the same time, the number of younger listeners using streaming apps on their phones to listen to radio has continued to increase rapidly. As a result, the BBC is increasingly trying to future-proof its audience by pushing audio listeners towards its BBC Sounds app, and is putting episodes of popular shows such as Desert Islands Discs exclusively on the app for four weeks after broadcast. Rupert Murdoch’s TimesRadio, the upmarket speech radio station launched last summer, was one of the biggest losers as it shed a fifth of its audience since the previous quarter and dipped to 502,000 listeners a week. It was overtaken by its more bellicose sister station talkRadio, which now attracts a record audience, aided by debates about whether it is possible to grow concrete. In commercial music radio, Heart remained the biggest brand with 10.2m listeners across its stations, while the Chris Moyles-fronted Radio X grew its audience substantially to 2.1m listeners a week. The national Hits network, the national contemporary chart music network, lost 8% of its audience to reach 5.6m listeners. Radio audience research was suspended for most of the pandemic due to lockdown restrictions, meaning there are no comparable year-on-year figures. Most of the listening figures are collected by members of the public keeping diaries of their listening, although some data is now collected through a mobile phone app that monitors background noise and checks if it is a radio station. • This article was updated on 3 February 2022 to correct when the BBC is putting episodes of some shows, including Desert Island Discs, online; an earlier version said this was happening pre-broadcast. The description of the Hits network has been changed.In the beginning it felt like a particularly overzealous PR campaign. When the actor Julia Fox posted a picture of her and her new partner in matching leather outfits on her Instagram story last week captioned “Juliye”, it felt less like the confirmation of a relationship and more like an asset in a film release schedule. “You’re either born a muse, or you’re not,” stated Julia Fox in her latest, apparently bi-weekly column about the new relationship in Interview Magazine. “I’ve always been someone’s muse.” Fox is the latest muse, and also girlfriend, of Kanye West – or Ye, as he now prefers to be called. But the line between relationship and art project has been consistently blurred since the pair met on New Year’s Eve in Miami, where they had an “instant connection”. Fox is technically an interview subject in these Interview Magazine columns, yet it is clear that she’s the one calling the shots. “I’ll send pictures, I’ll tell you stories. And you’ll publish them … let’s call it ‘This Week in Fox News,” she tells an unnamed Interview journalist. The resulting column, indeed titled Fox News, feels like a merchandisable asset of their burgeoning relationship. Fox is Ye’s first girlfriend since separating from Kim Kardashian last year. The new couple have been photographed in a series of high-profile, staged photoshoots. One saw them canoodling and trying on clothes in a hotel suite surrounded by assistants, another saw Fox dressed in an all-black custom leather outfit with echoes of her past as a professional dominatrix as she lay across a dinner table while Kanye pretends he is about to tuck in to her with a knife and fork. They have since been photographed wearing increasingly outlandish matching outfits everywhere from New York to LA to Paris Fashion week, where they made their red carpet debut at Kenzo in coordinated denim ensembles, accessorized with black gloves, and Julia’s trademark Black Swan-extra eye makeup, which looks as though she went to a child’s summer fete and asked for “a Batman”, but is actually applied by Ye himself. What to make of this whirlwind romance, one month on from when the pair first met? Is it a genuine and unexpected intimate collaboration, or is the whole thing a performance art piece about celebrity divorce sponsored by Balenciaga and Interview Magazine? Julia Fox’s first major brush with mainstream fame came in 2019 when she was cast in her debut film, Uncut Gems, by the sibling directors Benny and Josh Safdie, who she had met nearly a decade prior at SoHo cafe Jack’s Wife Freda. The film, a high-stress rollercoaster following a charismatic jeweler and gambling addict played by Adam Sandler, and set in New York’s Diamond District, saw Julia playing a version of herself, a magnetic go-getter with an unwavering trust in her erratic partner that borders on the devotional. “Being independent, resilient, being a hustler, having a ride-or-die mentality, and overall just being really cute,” she responded in a 2020 interview when asked what qualities she shared with her on-screen character. Her arrival on screen as Adam Sandler’s mistress was an explosion of a first performance, and earned her a nomination for the breakthrough actor award at the 2019 Gotham awards. But before that, Fox had already lived many lives: as a teenage dominatrix, a glamorous downtown party girl and club kid, successful knitwear designer, model, exhibiting painter and photographer. Fox told Office magazine this month that “people don’t take you seriously if you’re a creative and also a sex worker” and believes that until now she has missed out on opportunities and endorsements. Friends of Fox often describe her as having a magnetic personality. Josh Safdie told the New York Times about casting Fox in Uncut Gems, “I remember stumbling into her universe through a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend … and at first, you couldn’t quite figure out the type of person that she was, and it was very, very alluring. It was exciting. She was constantly redefining who you thought you were talking to.” The author Cat Marnell, told the Cut that Fox was “a legitimate sorceress. She’s the Michael Jordan of vixens … she’s devastating, like a hurricane.” Fox, who is now sober, also struggled with heroin and pill addiction during her teenage years, and mined her tumultuous experiences to create and self-publish two art books about abuse, addiction and sex work. In 2017, she held a funeral for herself to celebrate the end of a chapter in her impossibly varied life – in the form of an art exhibition titled RIP Julia Fox that featured silk canvases painted in her own blood. When asked if it was difficult to reinvent herself as an auteur, Fox responded: “I hadn’t planned on it at all. It just kind of happened organically,” echoing the words she would use five years later to describe dating her famous boyfriend. She also has her Spotify podcast Forbidden Fruits – co-hosted by veteran LA party girl Niki Takesh – where once again the main topic of discussion is Julia herself (as well as “the issues that the world is too afraid to touch”) with help from guests that can include anyone from Real Housewives stars to former cult members. She has also used the platform to candidly discuss her blossoming relationship with Ye on her own terms. “It’s really such a Gemini/Aquarius connection. It’s very inspirational … what’s really exciting about him is that any idea can become a reality, anything is possible, any dream is possible and I love that.” Although, pushed on what some of these ideas and realities are, their excitingness is debatable. She says she has decided that her “latest vibe” is “canceling cancel culture and putting an end to this black-and-white thinking” because “people shouldn’t be defined by their darkest moment” – which sounds like a noble cause until you realize the column is running alongside photos of Fox with Marilyn Manson, whose “darkest moments” include allegations of psychological, physical and sexual abuse against more than 16 women. Although many were initially confused at the “left field” pairing of Ye and the relatively unknown Fox, it seems the two have more in common than first thought: a penchant for dressing up in ridiculous clothes, the narcissistic mindset necessary to become famous in the first place, and no qualms about partying with convicted abusers. They also seem to share an interest in life as performance art, presenting their own daily undertakings as entertainment and blurring the line between reality and reality TV. On her podcast she declared: “All the people that [West and I] have in common have texted me and been like, ‘Oh my God, this makes so much sense.’”Kate Garraway’s Life Stories 9pm, ITV Taking over from Piers Morgan for the deep and meaningful chat series, the much more affable Kate Garraway is sure to inspire some watercooler moments with her 60-minute celebrity interviews. First up, Charlotte Church – the child prodigy singing sensation, who has lived under fame’s spotlight since she was just 11. Also in the hot seat this series: Bake Off winner Nadiya Hussain and former footballer John Barnes. Hollie Richardson Go Veggie and Vegan with Matt Tebbutt 7pm, Channel 5 This admirably simple-to-follow series – recorded before Tebbutt’s recent brush with appendicitis – demonstrates that “living life on the veg” does not mean sacrificing flavour. Tonight, the likable host proselytises for the palate-enlivening effects of homemade chilli oil, before extolling the virtues of the humble butternut squash. Graeme Virtue Dragons’ Den 8pm, BBC One It’s game night for the nation’s favourite panel of entrepreneurs. The showcased businesses include a pirate-themed escape room, a bouncy ball that creates music as you play with it and, for no apparent reason, an oral cosmetics business. Has no one told the programme-makers that you shouldn’t play around with dental hygiene? Alexi Duggins Mary Beard’s Forbidden Art 9pm, BBC Two When a wealthy banker donated a generous donation of sculptures to the British Museum in 1865, it created an awkward moment – it was a collection of phallic votive statues, politely accepted, but never to go on public display. In her new two-parter, classicist Beard rediscovers such taboos in the art world, starting with the theme of “vile bodies” (watch out for the live vomit). HR The Apprentice 9pm, BBC One The increasingly tired but still guiltily amusing business schadenfreude-fest continues to make mugs of its participants. Tonight, a creative task of the sort that can be relied upon to elicit sniggers: the contenders have to develop, brand and market a video game. Cue pitch mishaps and scorn from Lord Sugar. Phil Harrison And Just Like That … 9pm, Sky Comedy And just like that, it’s the end of a binge that made Sex and the City fans cringe. In fairness, most fans warmed to the series as it gradually bettered (two words: kitchen sex). Big’s shock death reset everything in the opening episode, and the series has seen Carrie navigate grief – is closure even possible for this finale? HR Live sport Premier League Darts 7pm, Sky Sports Main Event. First night of the 2022 tournament, won last year by Welsh player Jonny Clayton , from Motorpoint Arena Cardiff.The hundreds of bush fires that hit southern Australia on 7 February 2009 felt, according to witnesses, apocalyptic. It was already hellishly hot that day: 46.4C in Melbourne. As the fires erupted, day turned to night, flaming embers the size of pillows rained down, burning birds fell from the trees and the ash-filled air grew so hot that breathing it, one survivor said, was like “sucking on a hairdryer”. More than 2,000 homes burned down, and 173 people died. New South Wales’s fire chief, visiting Melbourne days later, encountered “shocked, demoralised” firefighters, racked by “feelings of powerlessness”. Australians call the event Black Saturday – a scorched hole in the national diary. There, it contends with Red Tuesday, Ash Wednesday, Black Thursday, Black Friday and Black Sunday on Australia’s calendar of conflagration. But recently it has been surpassed – they all have – by the Black Summer, the cataclysmic 2019-20 fire season that killed hundreds with its smoke and burned an area the size of Ireland. A study estimated that the bushfires destroyed or displaced 3 billion animals; its stunned lead author couldn’t think of any fire worldwide that had killed nearly so many. This will keep happening. As the planet heats, combustible landscapes will dry and ignite. Less fire-prone lands, such as Greenland, will start catching fire, too. Environmentalists now urge us to imagine the whole world aflame. If our old picture of climate breakdown was a melting glacier, our new one is a wildfire. Its message is simple and urgent: the higher we crank up the heat, the more everything will burn – call this the “thermostat model”. With headlines reporting enormous fires from Sacramento to Siberia, it’s easy to feel that we’re already on the brink of a devastating global conflagration. The truth, though, is stranger. Satellites allow researchers to monitor wildfires around the world. And when they do, they don’t see a planet igniting. Rather, they see one where fires are going out, and quickly. Fire has a long and productive place in human history, but there’s now less of it around than at any point since antiquity. We’re driving fire from the land and from our daily lives, where it was once a constant presence. What used to be a harmonious relationship between humanity and fire has become a hostile one. Fewer fires burn today, but the ones left are formidable. Our pyroscape has become deranged, with fire taking on new shapes, visiting new places and consuming new fuels. The results are as confounding as they are unsettling, and our instincts are poor guides. Although we often hear about fires where rich people reside, such as in Australia’s south and the US west, fires kill the most – by far – in places where poor people live, like south-east Asia and sub-Saharan Africa. The deadliest fires aren’t the largest and most spectacular ones, but the smaller, regular ones that are rarely reported by global media. They kill by smoke rather than flame, and their main cause isn’t global heating. Many are kindled by corporate-driven land clearance. None of these conclusions should be particularly comforting. What they suggest, rather, is that fire is more complex than the thermostat model suggests. It’s shaped by how we grow our food and place our settlements as much as it is by how we fuel our cars. Addressing our fire problem will thus require more than managing the rising temperatures of recent years – though that’s still essential. It will also require us to confront a longer history that, since the Industrial Revolution, has thrown our relationship with fire out of whack. Our rapid economic growth has taken fire from old places and carried it to new ones. The climate crisis has unbalanced things further. Today’s unpredictable fires are a complex product of our economy and ecology. They’re just not ones we’ve prepared ourselves for. * * * Humans didn’t “start the fire”, the noted pyrohistorian William Martin Joel has argued. “It was always burning, since the world’s been turning.” The Joel Hypothesis, we now know, is only half right. People didn’t invent fire – that part is true. But, surprisingly, it’s a relatively recent phenomenon. For something like the first nine-tenths of Earth’s history, a stretch of around 4bn years, the planet was an unburnable rock. Fire requires fuel, oxygen and a spark. Lightning, volcanoes and even tumbling rocks can provide ignition, but without vegetation and oxygen, nothing will burn. It was only after cyanobacteria pumped the atmosphere full of oxygen and mosses and stemmed plants spread over land, which they did around 450m years ago, that the world’s first fire broke out. That wasn’t just the first fire on Earth, but also the only fire within trillions of miles. The sun, despite appearances, isn’t aflame; its heat and light come from nuclear fusion, not combustion. (“Don’t think of the sun as a giant campfire,” advises physicist Scott Baird, but as “a giant hydrogen bomb”.) We know of no other planet, even outside the solar system, where fire exists. Fire flourishes where life does, and the two depend on each other. There are pyrophilous (“fire-loving”) plants and animals that organise their lives around fire, such as the beetles that lay eggs in burned trees or pine cones that need flames to release their seeds. More than individual species, whole ecosystems depend on fire to clear space. In many habitats, fire is “as fundamental to sustaining plants and animals” as sun and rain are, a 2005 scientific survey found. The most successful pyrophilous species is Homo sapiens. Early humans used fire for light, warmth, social gatherings and protection from predators. Fire lets us absorb nutrients quickly through cooking, rather than spending hours chewing every day as our primate cousins do. Chimpanzees, orangutans and gorillas all eat raw food, and they all have much smaller brains. The caloric boost of cooking underwrites our large, resource-heavy brains. Simply put: no fire, no us. No us in an evolutionary sense, and no us in a historical one, too. Every known human society has used fire. Our ancestors didn’t just dispel darkness and prepare food with it, they shaped their environments: repelling pests, flushing out game and making clearings. With spears, they could hunt individual animals; with firesticks, they could alter whole landscapes. It’s easy to think of our forebears, using their torches to set forest fires, as vandals, but it’s more accurate to see them as gardeners. Fire let people domesticate spaces by opening pathways, creating meadows and beating back the wilderness. The ancient Romans referred to a clearing burned in the woods as a lucus, a sacred grove where the light came through – it shares a root with “lucid”. People also set their surroundings alight to protect themselves against wildfires; doing so let them regularly burn away fuels that, if left to accumulate, might feed a hard-to-control blaze. Thus did “fires of choice”, in the words of the anthropologist Henry Lewis, replace “fires of chance”. What must it have been like to use fire this way? Victor Steffensen sheds some light in his recent book Fire Country: How Indigenous Fire Management Could Help Save Australia. In it, he tells of two brothers, Poppy Musgrave and Tommy George, Aboriginal elders and the last speakers of the Awu Laya language. The pair grew up in the era of the stolen generations, the long stretch from the early 20th century to the 70s when Australian authorities forced vast numbers of Aboriginal children to assimilate by removing them from their parents and communities. Musgrave and George dodged that fate by hiding from the police in mailbags. By evading capture, the brothers served, until their deaths, as key repositories for an imperilled culture. Not only did they carry their language into the 21st century, they also carried firesticks. “The old people used to burn the country all the time,” Musgrave told Steffensen. For Musgrave and George, fire wasn’t destructive, but purifying. Thick vegetation, the sort others might interpret as lush or abundant, elicited howls of frustration from them. The overgrown country, in their view, was “sick” and “suffering”. “We need to burn it,” they exclaimed, to make it healthy. The name in English for someone who starts fires is arsonist. It’s telling that there’s no familiar word for someone who carefully tends a landscape with flame. But Steffensen’s book shows this to be as venerable a calling as any other. It bulges with wisdom relayed by the brothers: when and how to light boxwood country afire so nearby ecosystems remain intact, which gum trees to burn and which to leave be. Australia, where Aboriginal people once travelled with firebrands and kindled the brush as they walked, offers a prominent example of firestick farming. But there’s every reason to suppose that the practice was global. From the 16th century onwards, Europeans encountering the peoples of Africa, Asia, the Americas and the Pacific reported seeing intentionally set fires in all those places. This shouldn’t have been surprising; Europeans had nurtured their own lands by burning them, too. * * * The history of humanity is the history of fire, but you wouldn’t know that from seeing how people live today. Fire – natural and human-made – has been banished from view, to the point where we regard its return with great apprehension. Some of that fear makes sense. For centuries, cities had been built largely of organic materials – wood and thatch were common – and burned easily. London’s 1666 fire, which destroyed more than 13,000 structures, is famous, but it wasn’t anomalous. A fire perhaps 20 times that size had levelled Constantinople six years earlier. Europeans extinguished those “astonishingly frequent” fires, the historian Eric Jones argues, by switching to flame-resistant material. The “brick frontier”, as Jones calls it, spread through Europe in the 17th and 18th centuries, and soon elsewhere. As brick, concrete and eventually steel structures replaced wooden ones, urban blazes grew rare. But Europeans fireproofed more than just their cities. Their inventions also drove fire from daily life. Steam technologies moved burning from hearths to boilers. Electricity provided energy, light and heat cleanly and quietly, with no indication of its origins. Our lifestyles today depend on combustion, in that more than five-sixths of global energy comes from burning fossil fuels. But aside from the tightly controlled flame of a stovetop gas burner or the occasional candle or cigarette, many of us can go weeks without seeing fire. Is that a problem? It might have been to the ancients, many of whom worshipped fire gods. And yet the dominant mindset of modernity has been one of intense pyrophobia. The Enlightenment, as its name suggests, prized illumination. But it did so as “light without heat”, the philosopher Michael Marder has observed. As western technologies banished flames, western thinkers came to see firestick farming as dangerously primitive. Or, perhaps, just dangerous. European scientific forestry, which emerged in the 18th century and spread around the world, took as its mission the extirpation of fire. “Only YOU can prevent forest fires” was the message the US Forest Service drilled into children starting in the 1940s through its famed mascot Smokey Bear. But should forest fires – which occur naturally and have been profitably kindled by humans for millennia – be prevented? Forestry officials wouldn’t entertain that question seriously until the late 20th century. Until then, they sought to snuff out flames everywhere. Today, forest managers have backed off their suppression strategy and are coming to appreciate cultural burning. (An Australian university granted the Aboriginal elders Poppy Musgrave and Tommy George honorary doctorates before they died in 2006 and 2016.) But the widespread fear of fire remains. This is surely why environmentalists latch on to images of wildfires. There’s nothing unnatural, novel or even necessarily worrisome about a forest burning. But we are children of the Enlightenment, and fire terrifies us. * * * Infernos blaze hot on our screens. And yet overall, as scientists have repeatedly noted, the amount of land burning yearly is going down. By a lot. Between 1998 and 2015, it decreased by a quarter, according to a 2017 study in the journal Science. Even flame-addled California, where fires have increased in the past two decades, is still markedly less fiery than it once was. Stephen Pyne, a brilliant chronicler of fire’s history, estimates that before Europeans arrived in California, fires, natural and anthropogenic, burned twice the area that they now do. This counterintuitive finding – the global decrease in fires – isn’t good news. The main reason fires are dwindling is that humanity is expanding. Sprawling settlements and industrial farms act as firebreaks in the savannas of South America and Africa and the grasslands of the Asian steppe. Livestock consume vegetation that otherwise might feed big burns. “A shift toward more capital-intensive agriculture has led to fewer and smaller fires,” the authors of the 2017 Science study concluded. And that decrease – especially in flame-reliant landscapes in sub-Saharan Africa and northern Australia – outweighs the uptick in headline-grabbing megafires. It might seem that extinguishing wildfires has made the world safer. But what it has really done is made the fires stranger. Where flame grows rare, biomass that would normally have regularly burned instead piles up as kindling. Decades of fire suppression is enough to build timebombs, and the supercharged blazes that do break out are more severe and harder to control. This is what the US now experiences every year: overall, the number of its fires is shrinking, while their size and the cost of fighting them are growing. Purposeful burning can relieve the dangerous accumulation of fuel loads, but, without the intimate knowledge of a landscape that comes with centuries of tending it, it can also go badly awry. In 2000, a prescribed burn in a federally protected area of New Mexico got out of hand. More than 18,000 people had to flee, and the fire came perilously close to the tritium facility at the Los Alamos National Laboratory (had it burned, radioactive contaminants would have spread widely). “The calculations that went into this”, confessed the secretary of the interior, “were seriously flawed.” Surely they were, but in place like New Mexico, where decades of settlement spread and fire suppression have starved the land of flame, the slightest contact between industrial life and dry vegetation – a downed power line, an exhaust pipe brushing grass – can mean conflagration. In 2018, a blaze in California known as the Ranch Fire burned 1,660 sq km. Its start? Sparks from a rancher striking a metal stake with a hammer. The resulting fire lasted 160 days. Such eruptive fires will only worsen with global heating, which dries fuels in fire-prone places. But global heating itself is a consequence of our modern relationship to fire. Because, despite appearances, we haven’t actually stopped burning things. Instead, we’ve extinguished open and visible fires and relegated burning to boilers and vehicular combustion chambers. There, fire feasts not on living grasses, shrubs and trees, but on fossilised plants that died hundreds of millions of years ago. The difference is vast. Societies using living vegetation for fuel are tightly limited by what the land can grow, and what people and animals can haul. With fossil fuels, however, we dig deep into concentrated stores of ancient organic matter, incinerating whole centuries’ worth of buried plant life annually. The coal, oil and gas we burn each year required as much organic matter to make as the entire planet grows in roughly 600 years. And as we burn it, we release long-dormant stores of carbon into the atmosphere. This has changed our relationship with time, the fire historian Pyne has observed. We used to burn what grew around us, with effects largely limited to our own day. Now we excavate plant matter from the deep past, burn it in the present, and send its byproducts wafting into an uncertain future. One thing we already know about that future is that it will be hot. And that heat is lengthening fire seasons in the most flame-prone environments. After Black Saturday in 2009, Australians recalibrated their index of fire danger, adding a new category, “catastrophic”, to describe the record-breaking weather conditions that they now regularly encounter. Thus far, the raised temperatures haven’t resulted in more fire overall; the global trend is still downward. But like fire suppression, the increased heat is encouraging new kinds of unruly fires, such as those in the far north. Arctic lands contain huge reservoirs of peat – ancient vegetation that hasn’t entirely broken down. Historically, much of that peat has been buried under frozen ground or protected from flames by cold and damp conditions. But as permafrost melts and summers lengthen, those rich peatlands encounter fire and burn furiously. Scientists are now wrapping their heads around “zombie fires” that can survive through winter by feeding on smouldering peat underground and emerge in the spring, releasing huge stores of sequestered carbon. We’re now well into a geologic epoch in which our behaviour is the main driver of the climate. The Anthropocene is what we usually call it – the age of humanity. Pyne thinks we might just as well call it the Pyrocene – the age of fire. It was burning that got us here, and now we’re facing the consequences of Earth’s “unhinged pyrogeography”. Seeing flames lick the suburbs of Athens, Greece, or Boulder, Colorado, it’s hard to disagree. We’re addicted to burning things, but we’ve kept fire like a shameful secret, hiding it from sight and bottling it up in boilers. Now it’s spilling out, uncontrolled: the return of the repressed. * * * The wildfires tormenting combustible landscapes such as California – which has experienced eight of its 10 largest recorded fires in just the past five years – highlight the threat of climate breakdown. And yet the California fires, for all the attention they’ve received, have been more dramatic than deadly. The 2018 Ranch Fire, which burned for months, only directly killed one person. California’s entire 2020 fire season, the largest in its modern history, was about as lethal as three days of traffic accidents on California roads. That’s something we rarely acknowledge about megafires: they burn plants and animals, but spare humans. The Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters at the Université Catholique de Louvain in Belgium maintains a database of more than 22,000 large global disasters since 1900. The earthquakes in its database killed on average more than 2,500 people, and the floods nearly 11,000. But the wildfires? They killed on average 23, rounding up. It’s not that fires are harmless. It’s rather that the ways they harm people aren’t the ways that come most readily to mind. Unless you’re a firefighter, you’re extremely unlikely to die in a big blaze. But you might shave years off your life by inhaling the particulates and chemicals that fires release. The death toll from wildfire smoke is enormous: 339,000 die a year from such smoke-related maladies as strokes, heart failure and asthma, according to the Australian public health scientist Fay Johnston and her fellow researchers. A few die in the affluent places known for their telegenic fires, such as North America and southern Australia (more than 400 from Australia’s 2019–20 Black Summer, Johnston and her colleagues have estimated). But the vast majority die in poorer places, where fires are smaller, yet chronic: sub-Saharan Africa and south-east Asia. The south-east Asian fires are particularly worrisome. Rather than visiting land that has regularly burned for millennia, they’re feeding on Indonesian forests and peatlands newly penetrated by economic development. These aren’t thermostat fires, where global heating is the main culprit (though it’s not helping). They’re chainsaw fires, lit as timber, palm oil, rubber, petroleum and gas firms pry open the closed-canopy forest. Moisture floats out, wind blows in and a largely fireproof ecosystem becomes combustible. Plantation managers have sped things along by torching trees to clear the land. And it seems that the people those plantations evicted may be setting fires in retaliation. In 1996, as industrial development pressed on Indonesia’s rice lands in Java, the nation’s president, Suharto, initiated the Mega Rice Project to convert the peatlands of Central Kalimantan into Indonesia’s new rice bowl. Over the quiet grumbles of experts – Suharto, then nearly 30 years in power, was not known for his receptivity to dissent – he had tens of thousands of workers dig 6,000km of canals through Central Kalimantan’s waterlogged peat forests. Developmentally, this accomplished little – even drained, the area was a poor place to grow rice. But environmentally, it exposed long-submerged peatlands, with their vast stores of prehistoric carbon, to the flames. No single one of Indonesia’s many fires in recent decades has been especially noteworthy. But altogether they’ve been cataclysmic. In 1997, a dense haze of airborne particulates from Indonesia’s fires was perceptible as far as the Philippines and Thailand. That year, on Sumatra – centre of Indonesia’s fires – a commercial plane crashed due to poor visibility and killed all 234 aboard. The next day, two ships collided off the coast of Malaysia for the same reason, and 29 crew members died. The economist Maria Lo Bue found that Indonesians who were toddlers during the 1997 haze grew less tall, entered school six months later and completed almost a year less of education than their peers. Another economist, Seema Jayachandran, found that the fires “led to over 15,600 child, infant and fetal deaths”, hitting the poor especially hard. Indonesia’s fires keep coming back, as does its haze. School closures, business losses and flight cancellations due to air quality are now routine. In 2015, another bad year, the plume from Indonesia’s fires stretched from east Africa to the middle of the Pacific. Those fires, feeding largely on dried peat, were also shooting ungodly amounts of previously sequestered carbon into the skies. At the height of the 2015 fire season Indonesia was emitting more greenhouse gas daily than the US. This catastrophe, engulfing the world’s fourth-most populous country in a choking haze and badly exacerbating global heating, would seem to be a story with legs. And yet international coverage of Indonesia’s fires has been sporadic at best. You can find recently published books covering California’s wildfires from virtually every angle: investigative journalism about incarcerated women working as firefighters, an inspiring chronicle of a high-school football team from a burned town, a children’s book about escaping wildfire and an account of Zen practitioners defending their monastery from a blaze. But a search on Amazon turns up only one book published in English about Indonesia’s fires in the past 20 years: an 80-page economist’s assessment of governmental mitigation programmes. The result of this unbalanced coverage is a warped understanding. When we think of how humanity is kindling fires, we think of global heating, which is the sum of our energy use in general. Our “burning planet” becomes an existential crisis, linked to modernity, rather than one tied to any specific company, activity or governmental scheme. And we think mainly of how fire affects the affluent people whose property is at stake, rather than the poor people whose lives are. Picture a dangerous fire and you’re likely to imagine a thicket of tall trees blazing in a drought-stricken climate. But a more accurate image is smouldering peat or scrub burning by a tropical logging road. The real threat isn’t catching fire, but the slow violence of breathing bad air. You’ve got a hacking cough, your father suffers a stroke and you watch your daughter – short for her age – leave school a year early. * * * Fire is not in itself a bad thing. Many landscapes, built to burn, simply couldn’t exist without regular fires, either natural or intentional. Though foresters once sought to tamp blazes out everywhere, we now recognise that as a grave mistake. A fireproof planet isn’t something we can get, or should even want. It helps to think of fire as like rain. Our world needs precipitation, and some ecosystems even depend on floods. But, as we know, it’s possible to have too little rainfall in one area and too much elsewhere, to see some places parched and others dangerously inundated. Something similar has happened with fire – we’re getting too much and too little at the same time. We badly need a healthier relationship to combustion. Rather than erratic, runaway fires, we need regular, restorative ones, like we used to have. Our forebears didn’t shun flame – they were relentless fire-setters. But they adhered to two important limits. First, they fed their fires with living vegetation, which reclaims lost carbon as it regrows. Second, they were guided by long-acquired experience with fire’s complex paths and consequences. We’ve blasted far past both of those limits. We’re now burning fossilised vegetation, which sends carbon on a one-way trip to the warming atmosphere. And we’re kindling fires that bear little resemblance to the ones we’re used to. There’s no generational wisdom telling us what to do when we drain the peatlands of Central Kalimantan or let dry fuel pile up precariously in the California countryside, all while raising the temperature to hitherto unrecorded heights. Books about fire typically end with prescriptions: we must invest in science, reclaim lost cultural knowledge, burn intentionally, build resiliently and power our grids renewably. All that is true, surely. But given how complex fire is, and how unprecedented nearly everything we’re doing with it is, the best advice would seem to be: slow down. We have scrambled our landscape, changed our energy diet, altered the climate and revised our relationship to flame, all in a very short time. It’s not a surprise that fire, once a useful if obstinate companion to our species, has now slipped our grasp. The world won’t burn up, as we sometimes imagine. But the fires of tomorrow will be different from those of yesterday, and we’re racing headlong into that unsettling future, burning tankfuls of gas as we go. • Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread, listen to our podcasts here and sign up to the long read weekly email here.Thousands of children are falling through the cracks in youth addiction services owing to Covid, staff shortages and funding cuts, psychiatrists have said, as figures suggest the number able to get help has fallen to the lowest on record. Analysis of data from the National Drug Treatment Monitoring System (NDTMS) found that 11,013 under-18s were in treatment for drug and alcohol dependency in England in 2020-21, which was 3,278 fewer (23% less) than in 2019-20. It was the sharpest annual fall since records began, and means 13,481 fewer children were being treated than at a peak in 2008-09. The vast majority of children in treatment (89%, or 9,832) had a problem with cannabis and 41% (4,459) had a problem with alcohol. About 12% (1,333) were struggling with ecstasy use and 9% (976) reported a problem with powder cocaine. The Royal College of Psychiatrists, which analysed the data, said the pandemic, together with “drastic” historical funding cuts, was preventing young people from accessing the drug and alcohol treatment they need, potentially condemning them to a life of addiction. It said spending on youth addiction services in England had been cut by 41% in real terms since 2013-14, to £43.19m in 2020-21, with two regions cutting spending by 60% or more. Every region in England had made real-terms funding cuts since 2013-14, ranging from 8% in Yorkshire and Humber to 61% in the West Midlands, it said. Dr Emily Finch, the vice-chair of the addictions faculty at the Royal College of Psychiatrists, said: “Children and their families up and down the country are having their lives blighted by drug and alcohol use due to drastic cuts, workforce shortages and the impact of the pandemic. “Addiction is a treatable health condition. Intervening early will mean many kids won’t go on to have an addiction in their adulthood, keeping them out of the criminal justice system and helping them to live full lives. It’s now time for the government to act on their promise and deliver the multimillion-pound investment into drug services.” The Department of Health and Social Care said it recognised the impact the pandemic had had on children and young people and it was committed to supporting those suffering from drug and alcohol misuse. A spokesperson said: “We are taking action through our landmark 10-year drug strategy, backed by a record £780m for treatment – this includes £533m over three years to rebuild substance misuse treatment services in England to ensure those misusing drugs and alcohol get the support they need to recover. “This is on top of our mental health recovery action plan, which includes an additional £79m funding that will be used to expand children’s mental health services in 2021-22.”Meeting then-Israeli president Reuven Rivlin in Jerusalem in May 2017, Donald Trump stunned advisers by criticising the then-prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, for being unwilling to seek peace while Mahmoud Abbas, the Palestinian leader, was “desperate” for a deal. The comment “knocked everyone off their chairs”, David Friedman, Trump’s ambassador to Israel, writes in a new book. “Although the meeting was private and off the record, we all envisioned a headline tomorrow that Trump had praised Abbas and criticised Netanyahu – the worst possible dynamic for the president’s popularity or for the prospects of the peace process. “Fortunately, and incredibly, the event wasn’t leaked.” Friedman now describes the incident, and how he says he changed Trump’s mind, in Sledgehammer: How Breaking with the Past Brought Peace to the Middle East, a memoir which will be published next week by Broadside Books, a conservative imprint of HarperCollins. The Guardian obtained a copy. Trump’s bankruptcy lawyer was a hugely controversial choice for ambassador. As well as being a hardline pro-settler rightwinger, during the 2016 campaign he called Barack Obama an antisemite and J Street, a liberal US Jewish group, “worse than kapos”, Jewish prisoners who worked as guards in Nazi concentration camps. He was confirmed as ambassador by a 52-46 Senate vote. US ambassadors to Israel are usually confirmed unanimously. In his book, he says the “worse than kapos” remark was not a political or policy mistake but a tactical one, as it gave ammunition to critics in the Senate. Describing four “murder boards”, sessions in which nominees are grilled over potential problems, he says he first said he used the controversial phrase “because I felt that J Street had betrayed the Jewish people”. That, he writes, caused a “firestorm of reaction” and he was told he could not speak that way. His settled-on answer was: “In the heat of a political campaign I allowed my rhetoric to get the best of me. I regret these comments and assure you that if confirmed, my remarks will be measured and diplomatic.” Describing his confirmation process, Friedman reproduces private conversations with Democratic senators including Kirsten Gillibrand of New York (a “bad joke”), Cory Booker of New Jersey (“delightful” in person, only, Friedman writes, to turn on him in hearings), and Chuck Schumer, the Democratic leader. Friedman says he had donated to Schumer and the two New Yorkers spoke amicably before Friedman made a pitch for his vote, which he said would send “a strong message of bipartisanship on Israel, which you have advocated on numerous occasions”. Schumer, he says, smiled and answered: “I’m not giving Trump the win. Sorry.” Friedman also recounts an angry meeting with Bernie Sanders, the independent from Vermont, who he accuses of “siding with terrorists over one of America’s strongest allies”. But his description of the meeting between Trump and Rivlin and how Friedman says he turned his president round makes for more surprising reading, not least in how it appears to show how eager Trump was for a deal. Friedman describes how during Trump’s next meeting, with Netanyahu, he manoeuvred all present into viewing a “two-minute collection of Abbas’s speeches that I thought was worth watching”. The tape contained “two minutes of Abbas honouring terrorists, extolling violence, and vowing never to accept anything less than Israel’s total defeat”. “After the tape ended,” Friedman writes, “the president said, ‘Wow, is that the same guy I met in Washington last month? He seemed like such a sweet, peaceful guy.’ “The tape had clearly made an impact.” Friedman writes that he was rebuked by Rex Tillerson, Trump’s first secretary of state, and HR McMaster, Trump’s second national security adviser. “They thought it was a cheap propaganda trick,” he writes. He told them, he writes, “I work for the president, and nobody else … I am going to make sure that he is well informed so that he gets Israel policy right.” Friedman emphasises his role in such policy, prominently including closeness to Netanyahu; support for Israeli settlers on Palestinian land; cutting aid to Palestinians; recognising Jerusalem as the Israeli capital and moving the US embassy there; and diplomacy that led to the Abraham Accords, the normalisation of Israeli relations with four Arab countries. Aides to Trump, Steve Bannon notably among them, have often suffered from being seen to claim too much credit for his successes. Friedman is sure to repeatedly praise Trump, while bragging of how close to “the boss” he became. Nonetheless, his description of Trump’s private meeting with Rivlin – behaviour Friedman says would have been embarrassing had it been leaked – could prove embarrassing itself. Trump has been repeatedly burned by books on his time in power, even those written by loyalists like Friedman. In December, the Guardian was first to report that Mark Meadows, Trump’s last chief of staff, described how the president tested positive for Covid-19 before his first debate with Joe Biden – and how the result was covered up.Media outlets are supposed to report the news not become it. On Wednesday CNN found itself coming afoul of that rule when Jeff Zucker abruptly resigned from his position as network president amid lurid circumstances. In a memo sent to colleagues, Zucker explained he was stepping down after failing to disclose a “consensual relationship” with a close colleague. While Zucker didn’t name the colleague directly, Allison Gollust, CNN’s executive vice-president and chief marketing officer, has confirmed her involvement in a memo to employees. Hang on a minute. Is a powerful man really resigning from a big job because he had a consensual relationship with a colleague? That’s not the usual way of things; many men have been accused of far worse transgressions and still managed to cling to power. Well here’s some context: Gollust happens to be the former communications director for disgraced former New York governor Andrew Cuomo. And Zucker’s relationship with Gollust came up during an internal investigation into former anchor Chris Cuomo, who was fired from CNN in December after using his job to help his brother, Andrew, combat sexual harassment allegations (leading some commentators to dub CNN the “Cuomo Nepotism Network”.) Zucker stood by Chris Cuomo for months when his conflict-of-interest scandal first hit but eventually fired him a few days after the anchor was accused of sexual misconduct by a junior colleague at another network. Like his brother, it seems Chris holds a grudge. Two sources told Politico that it was Cuomo’s legal team, which is still negotiating his exit from the network, who flagged the relationship between Zucker and Gollust. A reporter from media startup Puck News has also claimed that CNN received a letter from Cuomo’s lawyers asking for all communications between Zucker, Gollust and Cuomo to be preserved. While Zucker may not be having a very good week, Donald Trump (whose views on CNN are common knowledge) is having a ball. “Jeff Zucker, a world-class sleazebag who has headed ratings and real-news-challenged CNN for far too long, has been terminated for numerous reasons, but predominantly because CNN has lost its way with viewers,” Trump wrote in a statement. I hate to say it, but Trump has a point. You don’t have to be a cynic to reckon that CNN’s dismal ratings may factor into Zucker’s sudden departure: CNN had record ratings during the Trump years but has seen viewership plummet recently. The Cuomo scandal certainly hasn’t helped the network’s credibility: during the early days of the pandemic Chris Cuomo repeatedly interviewed his brother on air and it was largely treated like hilarious banter instead of a clear conflict of interest. And that’s hardly been the only embarrassment the network has suffered: last year Jeffrey Toobin, CNN’s chief legal analyst exposed himself on a Zoom call with colleagues. While the New Yorker fired Toobin from his staff writer position, CNN gave him a little tap on the wrist and put him back on the air. There are lots of brilliant, hard-working, journalists at CNN. However, Zucker has a storied history in reality TV (he green-lit The Apprentice during his time at NBC) and, under his stewardship, CNN has treated politics like entertainment. There have been several instances where the most basic journalistic principles have gone out of the window because “good TV” was more important. In 2016, for example, CNN hired Corey Lewandowski to be a political commentator shortly after he’d been fired as Trump’s campaign manager. They hired Lewandowski to talk about politics when the man was still collecting severance pay from Trump and had signed a contract prohibiting him from disparaging Trump. And it gets worse: in 2019, after being accused of sexual assault and boasting that he has “no obligation to be honest with the media”, CNN invited him back on air. Trust in media has declined dramatically and the media can’t just blame that on people like Trump shouting “fake news”. There is a revolving door between high-profile jobs in cable news and big jobs in government: the idea that journalists and politicians are part of an overlapping “elite” with aligned interests isn’t entirely misplaced. Take Zucker’s public “feud” with Trump, for example. Rather than being sworn enemies, the two have always had a symbiotic relationship. Back in 2016 Michael Cohen, Trump’s former fixer, secretly recorded conversations between the two in which Zucker can be heard lavishing praise on Trump, who he refers to as “the boss”. “I have all these proposals for [Trump],” Zucker says at one point in the tapes. “Like, I want to do a weekly show with him and all this stuff.” Now that Zucker and Trump are both out of jobs, perhaps they’ll finally put that weekly show together. In the meantime the fallout at CNN should be a wakeup call for everyone in media. Trust is hard to win and very easy to lose.James McAvoy is talking about Cyrano de Bergerac, the long-nosed, lovestruck poet he first played on stage in 2019, and is now about to reprise. But every now and again he interrupts himself with off-piste observations that have nothing to do with 17th-century libertines and doomed love triangles. It slowly becomes clear that he is inside his car, which is parked at the stage door of the Harold Pinter theatre in London, ready to jump into rehearsals after our chat. “What’s this guy doing?” he says, in his meta commentary of people-watching. “Oh my God. There’s a labourer walking down the road and he doesn’t have any trousers on. He’s just in long johns and he has got the biggest penis I think I’ve ever seen.” Wait, how can he tell? “Because he’s wearing long johns! And he’s packing a nine-inch –” All right, back to Cyrano. How does it feel to return to the loquacious swaggerer? “Partly,” he says, “it makes you feel like two years haven’t happened. Most of the lines were still just there in my head, without me having to worry, which has never happened before. I once sat with Patrick Stewart and Ian McKellen and both of them had a ‘Macbeth-off’ where they started speaking Macbeth to each other. I had just finished doing Macbeth and I swear I could not remember a syllable, man. It was awful.” The show is directed by Jamie Lloyd, who dispensed with the idea of “characters” early on in the original run. Instead, he asked the cast to bring themselves to their parts. This, says McAvoy, is what makes it a tricky endeavour: “The show relies on being authentic and you’re two years older now. So you’re slightly different people. Then Jamie went even further and said, ‘I don’t want you guys to wear costumes.’ And we ended up wearing a slightly heightened average of what we all wore a lot of the time.” Lloyd’s production is a daring reconceptualisation, using everything from rap and beat-boxing to poetry slam mics front of stage. Edmond Rostand’s Alexandrine verse has been freely – audaciously – adapted by Martin Crimp, who adds modern parlance and street slang, all of it striking for its intensity and speed of delivery. What’s more, Cyrano’s relationship with Christian – the handsome young lover for whom he writes words, to help him woo the woman they both love – comes with homoerotic edges. What does McAvoy make of these reworkings? “It’s radical in lots of ways but it’s quite classical as well. Martin really sticks to the couplets and rhyme of Rostand’s original, more than a lot of versions. The fact that it sounds like rap at times or poetry slams is partly down to Martin, but also down to the fact that Jamie cast people who create those beats, and for whom spoken-word performance is part of their everyday.” Even the homoeroticism doesn’t seem particularly radical to McAvoy, because it was always nestling in the subtext of the story. “I feel like it’s daft not to explore it when you’re talking about a love triangle. If I had to spend all my time loving a woman through a man who loved her and who loved him back, I would have to love him, too. The fact that it doesn’t get explored in other versions, I think, is about what people want to see and what they are ready for.” And what about the absence of Cyrano’s biggest comic feature? Why no big nose? McAvoy replies: “As soon as Jamie and I said, ‘Let’s do Cyrano,’ he said, ‘I don’t want to do any noses.’ I said, ‘Oh, but it’s about a nose.’ And he said, ‘No it’s not. The first act’s about a nose – but the rest is about objectification.’” After London, the show is transferring to New York but before that it will go to Glasgow, where McAvoy spent his childhood. His parents split up when he was seven, after which his father dropped out of his life. When his mother became ill, McAvoy was sent to live with his grandparents, who partly brought him up. How does it feel to be taking this show home, if Glasgow is still home? “It’s where I was born, where I grew up. I’ve still got a place there and all my family there. I see myself as a Glaswegian and a Londoner – a Glaswegian Londoner.” McAvoy, who is 42, separated from his former wife, Anne-Marie Duff, in 2016, and met the Philadelphian Lisa Liberati on the set of M Night Shyamalan’s thriller Split (Liberati was Shyamalan’s PA). They began a relationship a couple of years later and, he confirms, recently got married. So he’s now an honorary Philadelphian, too, isn’t he? “Yeah, it’s like a second home for me,” he says, but does not want to elaborate on this side of his life for fear of creating tabloid fodder. Acting wasn’t McAvoy’s first or only vocation. He thought about becoming a missionary so he could go to “far flung places”, then almost joined the Royal Navy. He grew up on a council estate but the ambition was to have a big life and broaden his horizons. In the end, he chose to go to drama school, at what is now the Royal Conservatoire of Scotland, graduating in 2000, and his career didn’t take long to sky-rocket. It hasn’t really come down, with such acclaimed films as The Last King of Scotland and Atonement under his belt, alongside the X-Men blockbusters and the BBC/HBO series His Dark Materials. In 2015, he pledged a significant sum of money to a 10-year scholarship programme at his old drama school. Was that about greater access into the industry? Not really, he says. “I don’t really care if all the people who have been through the scholarship process end up becoming actors or not. It would be a symptom of things getting better if our stages and screens continued to be diverse for the next 40, 50 or 100 years. But being exposed to art at an early age is not about creating artists – it’s about creating better people who are more able to communicate and feel worth something. Art, in all forms, allows you to see beyond your physical confines. If you do that then anything’s possible.” McAvoy has spent the entire pandemic in Britain, taking only UK-based film projects, and co-parenting his 11-year-old son, Brendan. He has done his part to help the NHS, too: in March 2020, he donated £275,000 to a crowdfunding campaign. Having been here throughout the lockdowns, how does he feel about partygate? “I’ve been disappointed in our political system for decades. So the fact that it’s letting us down isn’t a massive shocker.” So he feels disappointed by the system rather than by Boris Johnson? “I think the system relentlessly produces people that disappoint.” As for partygate, he adds: “We’re not even asking that they be held to a higher standard – and they can’t even fucking do that.” McAvoy has spoken about Scottish independence. Does he think Scotland should reach for this now? “The fact that Boris and his company of people who enjoyed a drink while they were telling everybody not to isn’t necessarily something that will make me go, ‘Oh yes, Scottish independence’ – even though he is iconic of an educational and elitist class system that plays into Scottish independence massively. Independence could be a fantastic thing but it needs to be done for the right reasons. Don’t choose it because we don’t like Boris. Choose it because we want it. We can’t just define ourselves by our relationship with England. I’m sick of that.” What about post-pandemic life? Does he feel safe under the new relaxed rules, in theatres particularly? He says he recently contracted the Omicron variant, even after being double-vaccinated and boosted. It put him out of rehearsals for a while. Although there is a risk, he says, there is also the importance of congregating as a society, in which theatre plays a vital part. “Every time you step outside you are taking a risk. But how long can we maintain a society that doesn’t move, that doesn’t connect? If you feel comfortable coming, we’ll see you. If you were a regular theatregoer and you’re not coming, we’ll see you in a couple of years. But if we wait to put on shows until this whole thing is truly over – if that’s ever going to happen – then things like theatre and music might not exist.” McAvoy has sometimes nodded off in the wings, a result of experiencing the same kind of tired tension a boxer might feel before a fight. He did so with Macbeth in London in 2013, which demanded so much, physically and emotionally. But he loved the part and would like to take on more Shakespeare. Maybe Hamlet? “Nah, I’m not that bothered about doing Hamlet. He’s always seemed a bit of a moaner to me.” King Lear? “Yeah, I’d love to, when I’m 100. You can do whatever you want in a production – but I want to feel I’m giving something of myself. So if I’m playing someone on their deathbed, I want to at least feel nearer to it.” • Cyrano de Bergerac is at the Harold Pinter theatre, London, until 12 March, then at Theatre Royal Glasgow, 18 to 26 March, and at Brooklyn Academy of Music from 5 April to 22 May 2022. • This article was amended on 3 February 2022 to correct a misnaming of director Jamie Lloyd as “James Lloyd”.Top story: rate hike to heap pressure on households Morning everyone. This is Martin Farrer bringing you the top stories this morning. A hastily assembled package of measures to ameliorate the impact of the cost of living crisis, including money off energy bills and more help for the poorest households, could be announced by ministers as early as today. With the Bank of England widely expected to increase interest rates again today to curb inflation, No 10 and the Treasury are under mounting pressure from Tory MPs to act as millions of households brace for a sustained assault on their budgets. A record increase in energy bills is set to kick in from April, and the likely rise in borrowing costs will see variable-rate mortgage holders paying more on their home loan every month. With the Conservatives sliding in the polls and Boris Johnson under fire over parties in No 10 during lockdown, the prime minister and his chancellor, Rishi Sunak, met yesterday to stitch together a multibillion-pound package to address the cost of living crisis. Downing Street refused to comment on reports that the measures could include a £200 discount on energy bills, backed by a £5.4bn plan to make loans available to energy suppliers. There were also reports last night that Sunak was planning a council tax cut for the poorest households. With energy bills the chief concern, Ofgem is set to reveal the how much more people will have to pay. Much focus will also be on Threadneedle from midday when most City economists say the majority of members on the Bank’s rate-setting committee will increase the base rate from 0.25% to 0.5%. They expect at least two more increases will follow this year. * * * Met crisis – A Metropolitan police officer disciplined after an inquiry into misogynistic and racist messages has since been promoted, the Guardian has learned, as Cressida Dick was warned she could lose the confidence of the mayor of London. Misconduct was proven against the unnamed officer but he was later promoted from constable to sergeant. Sadiq Khan had a 90-minute meeting with Dick yesterday described as “frank” and a source close to the mayor said he would consider withdrawing confidence in her if she cannot prove she is the right person to stop the rot. * * * PM pressure – A fresh wave of Conservative MPs have submitted letters of no confidence in Boris Johnson, breaking cover to criticise the prime minister as the fallout from the Downing Street parties scandal continued to imperil his premiership. In a sign that Johnson’s position is still under threat despite No 10’s desperate attempts to move on from the crisis, MPs Tobias Ellwood, Anthony Mangnall and Gary Streeter publicly called on him to resign. Seven MPs have now submitted no-confidence letters. * * * Brexit clash – Northern Ireland’s agriculture minister has ordered all Brexit checks on food and farm products to be stopped in a unilateral move that will set him on a collision course with Brussels. Edwin Poots threatened the move last week after he failed to get the backing of other parties in Stormont to intervene in the face of a delayed resolution to the dispute over the Northern Ireland protocol. Sinn Féin, with whom Poots’s DUP shares power, said it was an “unlawful” stunt. * * * Dementia clue – Having two or more chronic health problems in middle age more than doubles the risk of dementia. Work in the UK and France found that the risk of dementia was greater when conditions such as heart disease developed at a younger age (mid-50s) rather than later in life. For every five years younger a person was when multimorbidity occurred up to the age of 70 the risk of dementia went up by 18%. And another study suggests more exposure to bright daylight and dimming the lights in the evening could help to improve blood sugar control in people with pre-diabetes. * * * Ukraine tensions – The US decision to deploy more than 3,000 US troops in Germany, Poland and Romania is a “destructive step” that makes it harder to reach a compromise over Ukraine, Russia’s deputy foreign minister said last night, as Moscow continues to build up its forces. In the latest round of diplomatic efforts to prevent a conflict, the Turkish president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, will fly to Kyiv today to offer himself again in the role of mediator. It follows a phone call between Boris Johnson and Vladimir Putin yesterday in which the prime minister told the Russian president that invading his neighbour would be a “tragic miscalculation”. * * * Ship fight – A dispute has erupted over HMS Endeavour, the ship on which James Cook made his voyage to Australia, after the Australian National Maritime Museum announced it had been identified in waters off the US east coast. Despite the museum’s boss declaring he was “convinced it’s the Endeavour”, local experts denounced his comments as “premature” and driven by “Australian emotions or politics”. The Endeavour was scuttled off Rhode Island in 1778 and has been the subject of extensive exploration for decades. Today in Focus podcast After a year in which the Met lurched from one crisis to another, we look at the challenges faced by the leader of the force, Cressida Dick. Lunchtime read: James McAvoy on Cyrano, Hamlet and parties James McAvoy is returning to the stage in his native Glasgow in a hard-rapping, homoerotic Cyrano, but minus the eponymous character’s outsized nose. The star of Atonement and X-Men talks to Arifa Akbar about partygate, snout size – and tackling Lear when he hits 100. Sport Ashley Giles has become the first casualty from England’s horror tour of Australia after being sacked as director of men’s cricket and replaced by Andrew Strauss on an interim basis. In the latest instalment of the women’s Ashes, England have made a decent start in the one-day international round in Canberra. Great Britain’s curlers Bruce Mouat and Jennifer Dodds have continued their good start at the Winter Olympics in Beijing with an important win over fellow favourites Canada. Tom Curry is being tipped to captain England in the Calcutta Cup Six Nations opener at Murrayfield on Saturday after both Owen Farrell and Courtney Lawes succumbed to injury. The round-ball game provided all the drama north of the border last night though when Celtic beat Rangers 3-0 to go top of the Premiership thanks to two goals from the Hoops’ Japanese import, Reo Hatate. In the African Cup of Nations, Sadio Mané sealed Senegal’s progress to the final with a 3-1 win over Burkina Faso last night. And Roy Keane could be set for a surprise return to management and Wearside after it emerged that Sunderland want him as their replacement for Lee Johnson, who was sacked this week with the club third in League One. Business Meta, the company formerly known as Facebook, became the latest tech company to suffer a dramatic share price slump last night as it reported higher costs and slowing growth. Meta’s share price dropped 20% in after-hours trading, a fall that would represent $175bn in value if it holds when trading starts again today. At home, the boss of the CBI will warn ministers today that Britain risks a cycle of low growth without massive investment to raise skills, cut red tape and exploit the opportunities of the green economy. The FTSE100 is heading for a slight dip this morning and on the foreign exchanges the pound is on $1.356 and €1.200. The papers The government’s response to the cost of living crisis is the lead for many papers with the Mirror saying “D-Day on prices agony”, and the Mail splashing on “Energy bills to soar by £650 – now the heat is on Rishi”. The Times says “Millions of families to get cuts in council tax” and the Telegraph’s lead is “Sunak splashes out to ease bills crisis”. The FT reckons “Sunak and BoE work in tandem to head off ‘cost of living catastrophe’”. The Guardian’s main story is “Pressure on PM as more Tory MPs call for him to go”, while the i reports “No more funding to ‘level up’ UK” and the Scotsman says “Gove calls for ‘Team UK’ to support levelling up plans”. The Express leads on Boris Johnson’s warning to Russia on Ukraine: “A tragic gamble!”. Sign up The Guardian morning briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekendWhen fighting erupted in May between pro-democracy armed groups and the military in Demoso township in Myanmar’s Karenni state (also known as Kayah), Khu Bue Reh* had to leave his village with his wife and five-year-old son. They hid in the dense forest, their only shelter a tarpaulin, surviving on what little food they had carried with them. Two months after they left, Khu Bue Reh’s son, who had previously suffered from seizures, suddenly lost the ability to speak, sit up or eat solid food. With no one to turn to in the forest, the family embarked on a desperate journey through a heavily militarised area to take their son to a doctor in the state capital, Loikaw. Months later, with their son in hospital, they became trapped as the city came under a barrage of airstrikes and artillery fire. Khu Bue Reh’s family are just one among hundreds of thousands who are bearing the brunt of the rapidly growing humanitarian crisis across Myanmar. In response to rising armed resistance to its power, the military has targeted entire civilian populations with airstrikes, artillery shelling, arson and indiscriminate gunfire. More than 300,000 people across the country have become displaced since the coup, forced to abandon their homes and their livelihoods. Before the coup, Karenni, located on Myanmar’s south-eastern border with Thailand, had not seen active conflict over the past decade. Now it has become one of the country’s strongest new fronts of resistance. The military’s relentless attacks have displaced about 150,000 people across the state, or roughly half of its population, according to the Karenni Human Rights Group. Most of the displaced people are sheltering in mountainous and forested areas where they have extremely limited access to basic necessities. Civilians seeking to return to their village to fetch food and other supplies have been killed by the military. The military has also blocked lifesaving aid to displaced populations across the country and attacked humanitarian workers, leaving displaced people desperate for basic food, shelter and healthcare. The humanitarian and security situation in Karenni continues to deteriorate. On Christmas Eve in Hpruso township, the military massacred at least 35 civilians, including women, children and aid workers, and burned them in their vehicles. Fighting between the military and armed resistance groups has intensified since then, causing further displacement. In the last week of January, the bodies of eight civilians, including women and children, were found in two villages near Loikaw; some showed signs of torture, according to a Radio Free Asia report. The Guardian spoke to displaced people and volunteer nurses in Demoso in the last week of December. They say that medical care is only available for minor illnesses and there are shortages of medicine. “We are falling sick,” says one displaced person, “but we cannot visit a clinic.” In Loikaw, Khu Bue Reh’s son spent more than a month in the hospital after doctors found he had suffered a stroke. He has since been readmitted several times, leaving the family with more than 1,500,000 kyats (£630) in medical bills. These costs create a huge financial burden for him and his wife, who are rice farmers. Although they managed to plant their crop, they could not harvest it during the fighting. “I spent all my savings, and I still need to buy medicine and nutritious drinks for my son,” Khu Bue Reh told the Guardian in early January from Loikaw. “I cannot go home.” On 15 January, the 500-bed hospital where the family’s son was being treated was shut down and all the patients evacuated. Health workers told a local news site, the Kantarawaddy Times, that the fighting and the electricity blackouts in Loikaw had left the hospital unable to continue operating. Khu Bue Reh and his family are further from home than ever. He says his son has been relocated to a hospital 150 km north, in Shan state; he and his wife are now living in a displacement camp nearby. *Name has been changed to protect his identity Khu Peh Bue is the news editor of the Kantarawaddy Times, a Karenni state-based news media outlet. He is based on the Thailand-Myanmar border and is writing under a pseudonym for security reasons. Translated by Nu Nu Lusan; additional editing by Emily FishbeinDylan Thomas’s grave is an extravagantly simple affair. He’s buried in the overspill graveyard at St Martin’s church in Laugharne on the Carmarthenshire coast. There’s no gravestone, just a white wooden cross with his name on one side and, on the other, that of his wife, Caitlin, who lies there with him. I don’t recall seeing a humbler resting place for any such celebrated person. I wonder if the man who famously raged against the dying of the light would be so enraged about his light dying that he would like his grave this way, having something so basic in which he could sulk for eternity. Rightly or wrongly, the simplicity of it suggested humility; the man went up in my estimation. If you take the muddy track from the top of that graveyard towards the sea, you soon come across something rather grander bearing his name. The Dylan Coastal Resort is an upmarket development of “luxury self-catering properties with hot tubs, world-class spa and dining facilities”. It all looked very nice indeed, but the name felt terribly wrong. Perhaps it was coming across it moments after seeing that same name etched on to a simple wooden cross. For me the sight was a visual representation of the sound of nails screeching down a blackboard. I have since established that a week in May in one of the very nice Milk Wood Lodges would set me back more than £2,500. I imagine folk in those Milk Wood Lodges reading Under Milk Wood while the ghost of Dylan rages away at the dissonance of it all. • Adrian Chiles is a broadcaster, writer and Guardian columnistThe government is failing to cut greenhouse gas emissions from heating the UK’s homes, an influential committee of MPs has warned, with little sign of a clear plan for ending reliance on increasingly expensive gas. Home heating is responsible for about 14% of the UK’s carbon emissions, and must be tackled urgently if the government is to meet its carbon reduction targets. Last year, ministers announced a heat and buildings strategy, with the intention of weaning the UK away from gas – which makes up about 80% of domestic heating – and on to lower carbon alternatives, such as heat pumps. But the Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy (BEIS) select committee found that the strategy did not set out how the changes would be achieved, that government “lacked clear direction” on the issue, and that current policies were inadequate to the scale of the problem. The warning comes amid soaring gas prices around the world, which are also likely to result in a sharp rise in the energy price cap, to be announced on Thursday, and expected to hit lower income households hardest. The government is considering measures to reduce the impact of the price rises. Some Tory MPs and commentators have blamed investments in renewable energy and the net zero target for price rises, but analysts have made it clear that renewable energy has brought down energy costs in the UK and over-reliance on gas is behind the rises. Jan Rosenow, a director at the Regulatory Assistance Project, who advised the committee, told the Guardian: “Shifting away from fossil fuels is the only real solution to the energy price rises. The alternative is to keep using fossil fuels, and then we will see this again and again.” The BEIS committee report underlined that the government must communicate clearly to households that decarbonising heating and reaching net zero emissions should result in a net saving for households, and protect them from volatile gas prices. But the MPs said the government had not yet done enough to make this clear, and to make the transition easy for people on low and middle incomes. Darren Jones, chair of the cross-party committee, warned: “Replacing gas boilers is a huge task and we are not making anywhere near enough progress … Bill payers today are deeply worried about their energy costs, with many people struggling to afford to heat their homes.” He added: “Most people don’t realise that their gas boiler will need to be replaced within the next ten to 15 years. The government and energy companies should explain to bill payers why switching away from gas and insulating our homes is not only important in tackling climate change, but also a route to reducing energy bills. The government also needs to spell out what financial help will be put in place for those who need it most.” Ministers have a target of installing 600,000 heat pumps a year by 2028, up from only a few thousand today, but the committee said it was not clear how this could be met with current policies, including a £5,000 grant for installing heat pumps. The green homes grant, the short-lived scheme to insulate homes and install heat pumps, was abandoned last year after botched administration, and has not been replaced. The Treasury is also reported to want to scrap the Energy Company Obligation, a £1bn a year levy on energy companies, paid for through additions to energy bills, that funds the installation of insulation and other low-carbon measures for lower income households. Green campaigners say scrapping ECO would be counter-productive. Jones said the government must urgently come up with a replacement for the green homes grant. “Ministers can’t simply leave this to the market – government should tackle the cost of heating our homes in the round, and bring forward joined-up policies that address these issues together,” he said. Recent research showed that energy efficiency measures over the last two decades have saved UK households about £1,000 a year on current energy bills. But much of the saving came from regulations meaning only the most efficient gas boilers could be sold, and future cost savings and carbon reductions must come from replacing gas with alternatives such as heat pumps, electricity and district heating, as well as insulating Britain’s draughty housing stock. Juliet Phillips, campaign coordinator at the Electrify Heat campaign, said: “Heat pumps are the way to go for clean, safe and efficient heat – but there remains much work to be done to turn government ambition into delivery on the ground. This means building a skilled workforce who can install and maintain heat pumps across the country; widespread public engagement and provision of trusted advice to support households to make the switch; and boosting affordability through removing legacy policy costs from electricity bills, which currently unfairly penalise electricity use compared to gas.” Laura Bishop, chair of the Ground Source Heat Pump Association, an industry body, said: “Without heat pumps and other low-carbon heating systems, the UK’s net zero ambitions will be hard to achieve. Heat pumps are suitable for the majority of homes in the UK.” The committee also called for measures including help for households to access finance to install low-carbon heating, including grants for those most vulnerable, and for investment in the training of engineers and installers, in cooperation with the UK’s heating and construction industries. The Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy has been approached for comment.An American pizza chain has started paying its customers to not get their pizzas delivered to them, as a result of a national labor shortage. Instead, Domino’s will effectively pay them to pick up the food themselves. In a statement Domino’s has announced that it will start tipping its customers $3 that can be used towards their next order if they pick up their pizzas from the stores. “It takes skill to get pizza from a Domino’s store to your door,” said Art D’Elia, Domino’s executive president and chief marketing officer. “As a reward, Domino’s is giving a $3 tip to online carryout customers who take the time and energy out of their day to act as their own delivery drivers. After all, we think they deserve it.” The $3 coupon code can be claimed by carryout customers who order online between now and 22 May 2022. Customers can then apply the code to an online carryout order placed the following week with a minimum purchase of $5 before tax and gratuity. “Domino’s carryout tips come just in time for the biggest football game of the year, which is also one of the busiest days of the year for pizza,” said D’Elia, referring to the Super Bowl which will take place in three weeks. In recent months, Domino’s earnings have taken a hit as a result of the pandemic and fewer workers. The pizza company’s same store sales in the US declined by 1.9% in the third quarter of 2021, marking the company’s first decline in a decade. CEO Richard Allison attributed the shrinking sales to the nationwide worker shortage, which has largely led to insufficient delivery drivers for the company. The US is currently facing record resignations in its labor force, with 4.4 million workers or 3% of the country’s total workforce quitting in September 2021. Two industries – accommodation and food services – have experienced the highest quit rates as a result of low pay and poor working conditions across the board. Because Domino’s does not use third-party delivery services such as Uber Eats or DoorDash, “staffing has been a challenge”, according to Allison. Additionally, according to Domino’s corporate controller and treasurer, Jessica Parrish, the worker shortage has led to challenges in the company’s customer service division and has reduced operating hours, leading to fewer order counts. Allison also said that the company plans to deal with “unexpected increases” in food prices, as the cost of ingredients increase from 8% to 10% compared to the previous year. “We expected unprecedented increases in our food basket cost versus 2021 of 8-10%, which is three to four times what we would normally see in a year,” Allison said. “I think many of you are aware of the significant inflation across the US economy and how that is hitting many of the inputs that we have for our business from meats to cheese to some of the grains that go into the production of our products,” he added. In another cost-saving move, Domino’s has reduced the amount of chicken wings it offers to customers, cutting the number from 10 pieces to eight.“Creeping authoritarianism” is the wolf of the left, and we cry it all the time: I remember, almost nostalgically, thinking David Cameron was a creeping authoritarian for outsourcing punitive benefits initiatives to private companies; and that Theresa May was one when she earned the dubious accolade of politician least likely to answer the question in a broadcast interview. However, there is no ignoring or denying the vastly more anti-democratic manoeuvres of Boris Johnson’s government. The elections bill, currently in the Lords, features mandatory photo ID, which is well known to disfranchise younger and lower-income voters. It poses a direct threat to the reach and independence of the Electoral Commission, has serious implications for who can and cannot campaign at election time, and extends the perverse first-past-the-post voting system to the election of mayors and police commissioners. Beyond the explicit restriction of democracy, there is no plausible rationale for the bill; and unsettlingly, very little attempt has been made to produce one. Make Votes Matter has organised a protest against it this Saturday, which feels slightly poignant, under the shadow of the police, crime, sentencing and courts bill, which would make the attendance of such a demonstration fraught with real personal risk. This, too, has moved to the House of Lords, having passed its first stage last July. It contains many chilling provisions: the extension of stop and search; a new crime of interfering with “key infrastructure”; and the introduction of the “protest asbo”, a serious disruption prevention order that (the clue is in the name) you can get before you’ve actually disrupted anything. It was plainly framed with environmental protests in its sights, and indeed its advocates use the techniques of Extinction Rebellion and Insulate Britain – the traffic-blocking and pavement-gluing – as their proof that the current law is too lax. Yet you only need to look at the Sarah Everard vigil to see what happens when police powers over demonstrators are extended – in that case, by Covid legislation. This bill would affect the right to assemble in every particular and every instance. More sickening still is the nationality and borders bill, which makes it easier to strip the citizenship of anyone with a second nationality to fall back on, thereby creating a two-tier system of rights: white Britons at the top, minority-ethnic Britons at the bottom. Many of these measures, if they did pass into law, would struggle to get past the Human Rights Act: but that, too, has been under constant attack from the right wing of the Conservative party, with a consultation announced yesterday that is nothing short of a provocation (Prof Francesca Klug and Dr Natalie Sedacca will lay out the implications more fully at an online event next week). Then there are the atmospherics, memorably listed by Anthony Barnett: a prime minister who doesn’t bother with the truth and everybody knows he doesn’t; who “dresses up in the occupational costumes they wear in laboratories, hospitals and fish merchants (he has a particular liking for fish and crabs)”; who removes himself from scrutiny; who always smiles, and “everyone around him smiles”. These are the optics of a mini-dictator, while those around him create the conditions for him to remain in power perpetually. But there’s a hitch: what happens when the people around him stop smiling? What happens when the lies suddenly do matter? What happens when his party unity is shot? What happens when the anger reaches beyond Extinction Rebellion? To perform as badly as Boris Johnson is currently doing, to openly lie and spread untruths in the House of Commons, to breach your own rules so flagrantly and be so openly unrepentant, you really need the power of an actual dictator. You need to be able to throw your critics in jail. It’s not enough that you might, soon, be able to imprison members of Insulate Britain. You need to be able to shut down the phonelines of LBC and restrict access to the internet on a whim. Authoritarianism, if it’s to have any protective power for such inadequacy, has to go a lot faster than a creep. It’s peculiar that Johnson, with his expensive and so often flaunted education, didn’t think this through. Temperamentally, he is unsuited to the full implications and demands of his own agenda. Unlike his home secretary Priti Patel, who has a natural flair for the language of constraint and cruelty, Johnson craves approval, and is at heart a libertarian. He has built a political persona whose one consistency is bumbling, tousle-haired frivolity. It’s possible that he doesn’t have the requisite ruthlessness in him. Though it is more likely, I think, that this is just a lack of competence and foresight. By no means is this a call to complacency: this government isn’t over until it’s over, and the urgency of resisting these encroachments to democracy hasn’t in any way abated. Yet the fight against them looks more winnable every day. Zoe Williams is a Guardian columnistThe Phone Co-op announced in November it would withdraw its pay-as-you-go (PAYG) mobile phone service at the end of February. I’d just topped up with £70 which I’m unlikely to use in time. Now it seems I will not get a refund. CF, Farnham, Surrey As I reported earlier this month, mobile phone providers do not usually return unused credit, even after a customer dies. The Phone Co-op’s terms and conditions explicitly state that, if it decides to terminate the service, credits are non-refundable. This is legally questionable and the Co-op hastened to distance itself from its small print and update its website after I alerted regulator Ofcom. It told me it had decided not to apply its usual no-refund policy and that it would contact customers with credits of more than £50. Those with smaller sums are asked to make contact themselves. You have been refunded. Ofcom says it’s up to a court to decide if contract terms are unfair. Email your.problems@observer.co.uk. Include an address and phone number. Submission and publication are subject to our terms and conditionsSeveral years ago, a series of serendipitous events led me to temporarily swap houses with a stranger. The fortuitous exchange would introduce me to an area of Paris I had never previously heard of, and one that I would subsequently revisit numerous times. Compact enough to explore on foot but large enough to regularly reveal new treasures, its unrefined charms, the eclectic array of local residents and, perhaps most prominently, the range of delicious and affordable food to be found all captivated me. Straddling four arrondissements, Belleville has a rich history steeped in working-class rebellion. Its former residents were among the staunchest supporters of the Paris Commune, and when the Versailles army came to reconquer Paris in 1871, they faced some of the fiercest resistance from this vibrant quartier. The neighbourhood’s more recent battle is a modern one: the struggle against creeping gentrification. Though it has largely managed to withstand the sweeping changes felt in the neighbouring 18th arrondissement, plans to add a further six stations to the Métro line on which Belleville lies, combined with preparations for the 2024 Paris Olympics, are likely to accelerate the process. Belleville has long been a gathering place for immigrants. Armenian, Greek and Polish communities came and settled prior to the second world war. Sephardic Jews from Tunisia and Algeria soon followed. In the 1970s, Chinese and Vietnamese migrants arrived, and now cohabit with diverse communities from north and west Africa. Little more than a century ago, it was considered a particularly “Parisian” part of Paris, with more than half of its residents born in the area. Now, more than a third of its inhabitants come from outside Metropolitan France. This vibrant mix makes for one of the most interesting places to eat in the capital. The diversity of the district’s inhabitants is evident in the shops that line Boulevard de Belleville. Shelves are stacked high with edible delights from across the globe. Lamb heads replete with teeth turn beneath rotisserie chickens outside halal butcher shops. Store fronts groan with boxes of Chinese cabbage, cassava, okra, yams, plantains and a multitude of chillies. As home to the city’s second Chinatown, Belleville has countless eating options. Among the most authentic is La Tour de Belleville on Rue de la Présentation. The star of the show at this inauspicious canteen is undoubtably the soup. Lamian wheat noodles are expertly stretched to order in cat’s cradle fashion, before being swiftly blanched and added to a long-simmered aromatic broth, redolent with ginger and star anise, and adorned with meltingly tender beef, duck or pork. Amid a smattering of trendy newcomers on the 20th-arrondissement side of the boulevard sits a clutch of restaurants and cafes catering to the Tunisian Jewish community. Longstanding institution Chez René et Gabin attracts a loyal following, particularly on Fridays, when a brisk takeaway trade takes place in preparation for Shabbat. The menu features familiar Sephardic staples such as shakshouka (spiced eggs and peppers poached in tomato sauce), sitting alongside lesser-known daily specials like mloukhia, a vivid green herbaceous casserole of braised beef, and akoud, a slow-simmered and subtly spiced tripe stew. Although the signature casse croûte, a traditional Tunisian sandwich, is a bestseller for good reason, an arguably better version can be found on the other side of the street. The ever-present queue at Di-napoli is testament to the perennial popularity of this hole-in-the-wall, home to one of this notoriously expensive city’s culinary bargains. The small team operates tirelessly behind the tiny counter, churning out a relentless stream of orders, filling sandwiches abundantly with tuna, or minced beef with a mechouia, a tomato and pepper paste, and making fine omelettes on the cast-iron hotplate with a scarlet dollop of fiery harissa. A little further towards Ménilmontant lies the bright yellow facade of Spécialités Antillaises. While Covid has temporarily curtailed the attached restaurant, the shop does a thriving trade in ready-made dishes from the French Caribbean, with large queues lining up to receive special orders of stuffed sucking pig, creole-glazed ham and lobster fricassee, alongside other items unique to the islands. Midway up Rue de Belleville sits a community stalwart that has been in operation for more than 30 years. The perpetually packed dining room of Lao Siam accommodates an eclectic crowd of devotees.It stands out among a slew of fairly forgettable Thai restaurants by steadfastly sticking to the family’s roots, offering a selection of hard-to-find northeastern Thai and Laotian dishes, such as nem thadeua, a grilled rice salad with fermented pork, home-made sai oua, a spicy sausage flecked with turmeric, lemongrass, chilli and kaffir lime leaf. So far, Belleville’s defiant disposition remains – for how much longer it is hard to say. The collective community view seems to be that, no matter how many natural wine and organic grocers move in, the strong spirit of multiculturalism will endure. This pocket of Paris retains its allure partly because it is bereft of the mass tourism that characterises the more popular parts of the city. A far cry from the incredulous assertion made by Fox News that the neighbourhood was a “no-go zone”, it continuously reveals its diverse charms. At the benches outside Moncoeur Belleville, beers are sipped as the sun dips. Local kids kick footballs, the Eiffel Tower visible in the distance past Parc de Belleville. Women in traditional west African dress sell foil-wrapped pastels (doughnuts) from a bench for a few euros. Definitely Paris, but for now still defiantly Belleville. Christopher English is a writer and private chefThe Australian billionaire Andrew Forrest has launched criminal proceedings against Facebook for failing to take action on scam ads featuring his image. A Guardian investigation into the scam ads sheds light on how the scam works and what the ads look like. What are the scam ads? The ads appear on Facebook or on news sites as “programmatic ads” supplied by Google. Programmatic ads target individual users. These ads use images of celebrities or other well-known people in the regions they are targeting, such as Forrest or Dick Smith in Australia. They are presented as a news story claiming the celebrity has made a “big investment” and the banks are shocked by how well it is doing. If you click on the ad, it takes you to a fake news story that includes a link claiming to be a cryptocurrency investment scheme. If you enter details to register for the scheme, you receive a phone call typically asking you to invest a small sum, such as US$250. You are then asked to invest increasingly larger amounts. In one case that Guardian Australia previously reported, a 77-year-old Queensland grandmother clicked through from a Facebook ad featuring Forrest. She initially transferred $5,000 to a cryptocurrency exchange before being encouraged to put in more of her money. Scammers eventually emptied her accounts, stealing her entire life savings of $80,000. She was unable to get her money back. Some of the scams encourage people to invest in highly risky and often unregulated forex trading platforms where they are likely to lose most, if not all, of their money. The worst of the scams encourage people to hand over more and more money in an attempt to get their initial investment back, leading them to greater losses. An international investigation by the Organized Crime and Corruption Reporting Project reported that contact details of people who signed up for such services were also passed on to brokers offering other risky or illegitimate investments. These scams accelerated during the initial phase of the Covid-19 pandemic. Why have these ads been so hard to stop? The normal approach to stopping these sorts of ads is to block the website hosting them, or by looking for specific “keywords” in the ad text and banning those from being used. Google said in 2019 it removed about 5,000 ads a minute, or about 2.7bn in a year. But it is a game of cat and mouse. The scammers change ad text frequently to evade capture and to avoid domain blocking. Using a variety of domain registration companies, they buy hundreds of domain names every month to host the pages that users are directed to when they click on the ads. If you are viewing the scam websites outside the targeted location, they can look like innocuous sites for cooking, or gardens or fruit. Who is behind the ads? The investigation by Guardian Australia found that hundreds of these sites were registered under just five names, all with addresses in the centre of Moscow. None of those listed on the registration forms responded to attempts to contact them. The scams may also be based in Ukraine, as the scam sites do not allow people to register a phone number form there. A previous OCCRP investigation found a call centre running similar celebrity-based investment scams operating from the nation’s capital, Kyiv. Have the regulators done anything about it? In Australia, regulators have admitted it is difficult to trace and stop these scams. A spokesperson for the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission said the ads had been traced back to overseas. The ACCC had managed to get a handful of the sites removed by contacting the domain hosts. In the UK there has been more success, in large part due to a dedicated site where the public can report suspected scam websites. The country’s cybersecurity agency removed over 731,000 celebrity scam sites between April and December 2020.Vladimir Putin has stepped up his criticism of the US and Britain for staging a diplomatic boycott of the Winter Games in Beijing, accusing western countries of politicising sport and violating the Olympic charter, which promotes peaceful competition among nations. A number of western countries, which also include Australia, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Estonia and Lithuania have refused to send officials to Beijing for Friday’s opening ceremony in protest at human rights abuses by the Chinese government. However the Russian president told China’s official news agency Xinhua that he questioned their motives. “Unfortunately, attempts by a number of countries to politicise sports issues for the sake of their ambitions have recently intensified.” Putin said. “This is fundamentally wrong and contradicts the very spirit and principles of the Olympic Charter.” “The power and greatness of sports are that it brings people together, gives moments of triumph and pride for the country and delights with fair, just and uncompromising competition,” he added. “And these approaches are shared by most of the states participating in the International Olympic movement. Putin, who is in Beijing for the opening ceremony, has previously said that a diplomatic boycott by the west was a mistake driven by a desire to restrain China’s development. However the Russian president predicted that Beijing 2022 would be a success, telling Russian news agency, Tass: “I am convinced that China’s rich experience in the flawless organisation of representative international competitions will make it possible to hold this world sports festival at the highest level. “Our Chinese friends have done a great job for high-quality preparations for the Winter Olympic and Paralympic Games.” The Kremlin said that Putin’s visit would include top-level talks with Chinese president Xi Jinping to discuss “a Russian-Chinese comprehensive partnership and strategic cooperation.” The two leaders will also review topical international and regional matters,” a statement added. However he will not hold talks with other leaders, even though Ukraine’s president Volodymyr Zelensky is also expected to attend the opening ceremony. Meanwhile, the International Olympic Committee president, Thomas Bach, said he was proud to have averted the threat of an athletic boycott in Beijing. “You may remember that at our IOC Sessions in January and July 2020, we could already see the dark clouds of the growing politicisation of sport on the horizon,” Bach told IOC delegates. “We also saw that in some peoples’ minds, the boycott ghosts of the past were rearing their ugly heads again. “This is why we have been working even harder to get the unifying mission of the Olympic Games across to as many leaders and decision-makers as possible: the United Nations, the G20 leaders, intergovernmental organisations and national governments, individual politicians and many, many more. “In all these conversations we stressed that the Olympic Games can only accomplish this unifying mission, that we can only get all humanity together in all our diversity, if the Games stand beyond all differences and political disputes,” he added. “We appealed to them to respect this and thereby to support this precious mission of the Olympic Games. Today we can be happy and proud that apparently this message got through.”Edmund White’s latest book – his 30th, by my count – bears the subtitle “Another posthumous novel”. This alludes not only to the fact that White has continued to write prolifically after suffering multiple strokes, but also to those critics who have dismissed his most recent novels as an old-school irrelevance to the brave new world of contemporary queer fiction. The acerbic preface to this new one suggests that we’re about to read an autobiographical account of an affair, written by a ravaged old queen who must surely be White himself. However, the opening pages of the book itself plunge us straight – no pun intended – into a turbulent, picaresque and obviously fictional narrative. The year is 2050; a married couple are holed up in a remote Swiss chalet while the husband recovers from a skiing accident. To while away this enforced convalescence, they decide to write a pair of complementary memoirs that will describe their previous sexual careers with absolute honesty. In order to make the game more exquisite, they will take it in turns to read these confessions out loud – meaning, of course, that we will be allowed to eavesdrop. We quickly discover that this is no ordinary marriage. The wife, Constance, is in her early 30s, while her husband, Ruggero, is at least four decades older; she is an African American orphan, while he is a legendarily well-connected (not to mention well-hung) Sicilian aristocrat who also happens to be a world-famous baroque harpsichordist. Oh, and the sometime lover of a deceased and forgotten gay novelist called Edmund White. In the course of their readings, the couple work their way through pretty much every available combination of gender and lifestyle. Ruggero tends to focus on the visible and physical (he is obsessed with his prowess) while Constance – true to her name – is more concerned with the workings of fidelity. As the confessions unspool, the cracks in their marriage begin to show. Things get particularly sticky when we’re made privy to an email-by-email account of Ruggero’s obsessive two-year affair with the then octogenarian White. At this point, the Chinese boxes of White’s metafiction become ever more fantastically interlocked. Constance consults White’s (real) archive in Princeton to determine the (fictional) truth of Ruggero’s account of their affair; meanwhile, we are given a voyeur’s-eye view of Ruggero’s sado-masochistic romps with his besotted geriatric plaything. Of course, we can’t help but remember that it is White penning these pitiless descriptions of impotence and age, and it is perhaps in these truly hard to read passages that we glimpse the driving impulse behind the book. No matter how elaborately cultured or crudely pornographic the prose gets, it still crackles with a heartfelt insistence that the old and hungry have as much to tell us about the dynamics of sex as the young and sated. A fugue-like ending leads the central couple down ever stranger perspectives of self-discovery, into relationships that no one (least of all themselves) could have seen coming. If we really want to continue to put fiction at the service of liberation, White seems to be suggesting, then we might need to risk imagining ourselves in each and every sexual and emotional position in the book – no matter how abject or alien those positions might be. Back in the now-distant 1970s and 80s, White’s dazzling first quartet of novels forever enlarged what gay writing might do with its then newly found freedoms. With this latest report from the frontiers of desire, he has triumphantly dared to continue that project. A Previous Life is elegant, filthy – and quite possibly the queerest thing you will read all year. • Neil Bartlett’s latest novel, Address Book, is published by Inkandescent. A Previous Life by Edmund White is published by Bloomsbury (£18.99). To support the Guardian and the Observer order a copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.That’s where we will leave the blog for Thursday. Here’s what you might have missed: Australia’s chief health officer Paul Kelly said Australia is now “past the peak” of the Omicron wave but warned we are not out of the woods yet. Australia recorded at least 82 Covid-related deaths on Thursday. The federal government explicitly rejected Amnesty International’s assessment that Israel is perpetrating apartheid against Palestinians. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, flagged amendments to the religious discrimination bill to protect LGBTIQ+ students from discrimination. Citipointe Christian College has withdrawn demands for families to sign controversial anti-gay and anti-trans enrolment contracts – but says it won’t back down from teaching its fundamental beliefs. The foreign minister, Marise Payne, condemned the recent North Korean missile launches. Until tomorrow, stay safe. A bushfire emergency warning has been issued for parts of East Rockingham in Perth’s south, with residents urged to act immediately as there is a threat to lives and homes, AAP reports. The fire, reported at 1.50pm on Thursday, was moving fast in a southwesterly direction and was out of control and unpredictable, the Department of Fire and Emergency Services said in a statement. The warning was in place for people bounded by Crompton Avenue, Ennis Avenue and Lake Cooloongup in parts of East Rockingham in the City of Rockingham. “You are in danger and need to act immediately to survive. There is a threat to lives and homes.” Residents are being advised to leave for a safer place if the way was clear. “Do not wait and see, leaving at the last minute is deadly,” the warning says. “If you cannot leave, you need to get ready to shelter in your home.” The 2021 Australian of the Year Grace Tame says she broke her collarbone in a bike crash, and has now been discharged from hospital. “Bike stack, broken collarbone, thank you for understanding that we may take a while to respond,” she said in an Instagram story. “Out of hospital now and on the mend.” Tame is due to give a speech with Brittany Higgins at the National Press Club on Wednesday next week. More than 30 patients have been evacuated from a private hospital damaged by severe thunderstorms as Queensland braces for more flooding, AAP reports. Health minister Yvette D’Ath has hailed Sunshine Coast’s emergency services and health care staff for their swift action after Eden Private Hospital was hit hard by wild weather on Wednesday night. “There were 31 patients in total that needed to be relocated or discharged overnight and everyone did an incredible job to step in and address that,” she said. “I want to put a big shout out to the Sunshine Coast University Hospital, to the private hospitals in the area and Queensland Ambulance Service who worked so well together overnight to transfer the patients out.” QAS Sunshine Coast’s Tony Hucker said water could be seen pouring out of the ceiling when crews arrived. “They had a deluge ... through the roof ... which made the building unsafe for patients to stay overnight,” he told reporters. He said QAS worked with health care staff for almost eight hours until 1am on Thursday to help evacuate patients. Cooroy recorded more than 110mm of rain from 9am on Wednesday – including 65mm in one hour – with severe thunderstorms lashing the southeast, cutting power to 11,000 households overnight. The Bureau of Meteorology warned there may be more power outages with heavy rain likely across north, central and southeast Queensland. It signals the end of a three-day heatwave which has tested a state power grid that has hit peak demand as people try to keep cool. “Power outages are possible today due to increased use capacity and pressure on the grid,” BOM’s Brooke Pagel said. The BOM warned heavy rainfall may also lead to flash flooding across the state in coming days with western regions already hit hard. A statement has just come in from the foreign minister, Marise Payne, condemning the recent North Korean missile launches. The Australian government condemns the continuing pattern of provocative and destabilising missile launches conducted by North Korea in contravention of multiple UN Security Council resolutions, including the launch of an intermediate-range ballistic missile on 30 January 2022. North Korea’s pursuit of weapons of mass destruction and ballistic missiles poses a grave threat to international peace and security and is contrary to global and regional interests in a stable, secure and rules-based Indo-Pacific. Permanent peace on the Korean Peninsula can only be achieved through dialogue. Australia again calls on North Korea to refrain from further provocations and make a sustained commitment to meaningful talks with the United States and the Republic of Korea. Australia is committed to maintaining and enforcing sanctions against North Korea until it takes clear steps to abandon its nuclear weapons, other weapons of mass destruction and ballistic missile programs in a complete, verifiable, and irreversible manner. We supplement UN Security Council sanctions with our own autonomous sanctions against North Korea. Australia calls on nations to assist with UN Security Council sanctions and to take steps to prevent sanctions evasion. We will continue to work with our allies and security partners, including the United States, the Republic of Korea and Japan, to uphold peace and stability in the Indo-Pacific. There is growing doubt over the sustainability of the WA government’s hardline Covid-19 rules after cases were detected at Corpus Christi College, Harrisdale Senior High School and Winterfold Primary School, just days into the first term. AAP reports the entire Year 11 cohort of 212 students and their teachers at Corpus Christi must isolate for 14 days after a student tested positive. Other students across years 7-12 are deemed casual contacts and required to get tested after having attended a whole-of-school assembly. The case at Harrisdale involved the Year 12 cohort who attended an orientation program earlier this week. About 200 students who attended will be forced into 14 days quarantine. Two teachers have also tested positive after attending a professional development day at Winterfold Primary School, which closed for deep cleaning on Wednesday. The school reopened on Thursday with replacement teachers after isolation rules wiped out virtually all of the facility’s staff. About 27 children who were taught by an infected teacher also face 14 days quarantine, along with their close household contacts. Remote learning will be available for students unable to attend classes. Premier Mark McGowan has promised isolation periods will eventually be halved for Covid-infected people and their close contacts. But despite growing backlash, the premier has insisted the rules will only change when the state reaches a yet-to-be defined higher caseload. “We’ll eventually move to seven-day quarantining, and in certain circumstances people will still be able to go to school and go to work,” he told ABC radio. “But at this point in time, because we have very low case numbers, we take a precautionary approach.” McGowan has also refused to say when the borders will reopen after backflipping on a plan to reopen from 5 February. Defence minister Peter Dutton laid into journalists this morning when speaking to Ray Hadley on 2GB radio. It’s the usual schtick about journalists being out of touch etc but he’s expressing his frustration over the National Press Club questions to Scott Morrison this week. Hadley: There were plenty of galoots outside the National Press Club and a few inside the National Press Club. My problem with this is always the case: there are certain things put to a prime minister from a conservative, I guess, background, as opposed to what they say to either Labor prime ministers or Labor opposition leaders, and I can’t help but draw the conclusion that many within the National Press Club are there as a cheer squad for the Labor party and those of the left of politics, am I wrong? Dutton: No, I think you’re dead right. I mean there’s always been a criticism about the bubble in Canberra. Canberra is, Ray, a very affluent city. If you look at house prices, you look at the lifestyle that people lead in that circle within Canberra – the media – they’re paying big dollars for some of the journalists to be down there. In some cases they’ve been there for decades, and I just don’t think they get out and mix with people in the suburbs, regardless of what state you’re in. My assessment is that they can continue to pile on whatever they want to the prime minister, but he’s a resilient person. Like any human being, like you and I and every listener, he’s not perfect. But I tell you what, when we had the first briefings on the Covid situation here, we were talking about setting up morgues, and we were talking about positioning army personnel at hospitals where people would be turned away. We were looking at all sorts of dire situations which we have avoided in this country and I think people, as I say, can continue – whether they’re a premier or whether they’re part of the press gallery – to try and heap whatever rubbish they can on the prime minister, but I think most people out in the suburbs get it. Dutton then proceeds into the usual national security lines we are getting about the opposition (despite, amid much criticism, Labor basically supporting all the national security legislation the government has brought in). Hadley then moves on to this, which is interesting considering he was accusing journalists of being cheerleaders for Labor. Hadley: Well, just leave Mr Morrison and Mr Albanese aside, the prime minister made the point with me yesterday how the teams compare, and that’s been documented today in The Australian. Josh Frydenberg – Jim Chalmers. Peter Dutton – Brendan O’Connor. Karen Andrews – Kristina Keneally. Marise Payne – Penny Wong. Now, I’ll concentrate my efforts – I’ll leave you alone – I’ll go to Kristina Keneally. Can you imagine where we’d be with Kristina Keneally being a key member of a government in relation to our borders, our economy, our dealings with other people? And then you throw into the mix Chris Bowen and then the failed leader Bill Shorten. I mean, it’s a Melbourne Cup field of failures. And in response, Dutton brings in the boats lines (it’s not an election unless he does): Well I’m not sure what the collective is for average, but it’s a gathering of pretty average contributors. I mean if you look at Chris Bowen’s record, not only was he the one that came up with the retirees’ tax and with the general taxes that Bill Shorten took in the last election, but he also – don’t ever forget Ray – that when he was immigration minister or border protection minister, 398 boats arrived on Chris Bowen’s watch. I mean my opponent, the man that would be the defence minister in an Albanese government, Brendan O’Connor; he was a bit better than Chris Bowen – he had 184 boats arrive on his watch and then you’ve got Tony Burke – 83 boats. I mean you’ve just got to pause for a second and think what would happen. There is pressure – we don’t talk publicly about it – but we are dealing with pressures of boats and people and those coming out of Afghanistan and the uncertainty now in the Ukraine. There will be people movements and we’ve stared down – both Scott Morrison and I, if I can be honest about it – have stared down people smugglers over the last few years and we haven’t had boat arrivals. But those boats are still out there. The people smugglers are still trying to put people on boats, and Anthony Albanese, who’s been the leader of the left of the Labor Party for decades, has openly said that he could not take the decisions that we took to keep the boats stopped or to stop the boats in the first place. ... So scratch below the surface a bit and, yes, you can take your personnel attacks against the prime minister, but I’ll tell you what, he’s stood up for this country over the course of the last couple of years and we’re in a much better position than almost any other country in the world. Earlier this afternoon, I was watching the esafety commissioner Julie Inman Grant speak before the parliamentary inquiry into social media and online safety. It has come up through the course of the inquiry that the government’s social media (anti-trolling) bill is anti-trolling in name only – literally. It’s a bill tackling defamation – in particular removing liability for page owners like media companies, and shifting it to platforms like Facebook if they refuse to help unmask anonymous commenters in defamation action. Inman Grant was asked whether it was a concern the bill was being misrepresented as a way of protecting children. “I don’t think it is ideal,” she said. Inman Grant said the existing anti-bullying scheme operated by her office “will probably be a much more effective way to adjudicate those types of harms that are happening to young people”. The adult version of the scheme came into effect in late January, and her office has found a high number of the reported bullying falls into the category of defamatory comments online, which are not covered by the anti-bullying scheme. Prior to the scheme, the informal process the office had for dealing with complaints of bullying of adults online found about 31% of all complaints were defamatory comments rather than bullying. Since the new powers came into force, Inman Grant’s office has been investigating an account that had been sending messages to a user to commit self harm. After two escalations to the platform where the message had been sent, the account was removed within 12 hours. However, multiple similar accounts have since popped up, and Inman Grant’s office is now exploring using powers to find out the details of those behind the accounts. Australia’s supermarket giants have imposed fresh product limits in West Australian stores as floods leave supply chains severely disrupted, AAP reports. Freight services have ground to a halt on the Trans-Australian Railway after South Australia last month received a one-in-200-years deluge. Repairs are continuing along a section of track more than 300km long, which has sustained damage in 18 locations. Coles on Thursday announced temporary purchase limits for WA customers on a range of goods including pasta, rice, flour, sugar, chicken and sausages. Toilet paper, tissues, paper towels, medicinal products and rapid antigen tests are also subject to limits. Coles said while the majority of fresh produce in its WA supermarkets was grown or produced locally, some products could only be sourced from the eastern states. All freight options were being considered including road, marine and air. “We are continuing to review our stock levels and are working hard to get products through the network as quickly as possible,” the company said. “This is going to be a challenging time ... we thank our customers for continuing to treat our team members with kindness and respect and ask that they only purchase what they need.” Woolworths said it would impose a two item purchase limit on flour, sugar, rice, pasta, eggs, paper towels, frozen fruit, frozen vegetables and frozen chips in WA, in addition to pre-existing nationwide product limits on toilet paper and painkillers. “The loss of the key freight link from the east will regrettably have an impact on product availability in our stores over the next little while,” WA general manager Karl Weber said. “More than 80% of our fresh fruit and vegetable range is sourced from growers within Western Australia, so we expect that part of the store will hold up reasonably well. We also source a large volume of our milk, dairy and meat locally.” WA transport minister, Rita Saffioti, said she had been advised the rail line would reopen on 17 February but cautioned that purchase limits could remain in place for weeks to come given there was a significant freight backlog. With that, I will pass you on to the highly capable Josh Taylor who will keep you company for the rest of the afternoon. The vaccination rate among 5- to 11-year-olds is still lagging in Queensland, while in WA the adult vaccination rate is ramping-up: The minister for immigration, Alex Hawke, has announced arrival figures for international students and working-holiday makers following the reopening of the international border. Almost 7,000 international students have landed in the past week, with a 17% increase in arrivals of working-holiday makers. Hawke says visa application rates have “surged” in the past week since the government’s announcement of a special visa application charge refund window, particularly from backpackers. We are building back healthy pipelines of working-holiday makers, and we are processing these visas very quickly. The government is seeing a surge in demand from backpackers and we are ready to welcome them to our shores. There are more jobs now available in Australia than before the Covid-19 pandemic, and there are still many more places available to backpackers and students that we are ready to fill, so come on down. Since late November 2020, 56,000 international students have arrived in Australia. More than 50,000 overseas student visa lodgements have been made since late 2021. A total of 28,000 working-holiday maker visas have been approved in the past few months – since the reopening of international borders to a range of travellers. The Australian Retailers Association (ARA) has called the Covid provision under the NSW Workers Compensation Act “unsustainable”, renewing calls for a repeal of Section 19b of the Act which presumes that if a worker contracted Covid-19 they did so in the workplace. Appearing before a parliamentary inquiry on Wednesday, ARA chief executive, Paul Zahra, said the workplace presumption no longer reflects where transmission is most likely to occur and places an unfair burden on NSW retailers: When the Section 19b provision came into effect in May 2020, government-mandated lockdowns meant that if someone contracted Covid-19 it was more likely that they would do so at work. With the recent surge in cases of the highly transmissible Omicron variant, there is now a disconnect between where cases are deemed to have originated and where transmission has occurred. Despite this, retailers in NSW are still processing claims on the presumption that transmission occurred in the workplace - increasing costs and complexity at a time when we need to be helping the retail community back on the path to sustained recovery. Speaking of the religious discrimination bill, national lobby group Just.Equal Australia has written to moderate Liberals warning them “the devil will be in the detail” of the prime minister’s proposal to prevent discrimination in faith-based schools. Spokesperson Rodney Croome, said the protections Morrison was offering to LGBTQ+ students could “quite easily turn out [to be] hollow”: For example, amending the Sex Discrimination Act to prohibit sexuality and gender identity discrimination, as some moderate Liberals have proposed, would be pointless because the bill broadens the scope for faith schools to discriminate against LGBTIQ+ students and teachers on the grounds of ‘religious belief’ As the actions of Citipointe Christian College clearly show, there are faith-schools camouflaging discrimination against LGBTIQ+ students by invoking ‘religious beliefs’ rather than discriminating directly on the grounds of sexuality or gender identity. Liberal MP Angie Bell, one of a group of four Liberal moderates who have pushed the prime minister to agree to prevent LGBTQ+ students being expelled with amendments to the religious discrimination bill, has released a statement in response to Citipointe Christian College’s decision to retract its enrolment contract. The federal member for Moncrieff has welcomed the contract revocation, which discriminated against children who identify as part of minority groups: Discriminating on the basis of gender identity, sexuality, relationship status or pregnancy only serves to make the most vulnerable in our society feel more small and more excluded – particularly when this is done by a school. I welcome the revocation of the college’s enrolment contract as a mark of growth in our society and a step towards tolerance. It was the right move to listen to feedback from the student, parent, and teaching community. Providing pastoral care is a primary responsibility for all education institutions to ensure the development of adolescent wellbeing. As a society, together we should be judged on how we treat our most vulnerable children and work toward equality for all – including people of faith and Australians who identify as part of minority group. If you’ve missed it, we’re live now from Canberra where the Women’s Ashes first ODI has started. England are bowling, and have already taken a wicket, with Rachael Haynes gone for four runs. Check out the action here: The Royal Australian College of General Practitioners (RACGP) says allowing adolescents aged 16 and 17 to receive a Pfizer booster vaccine is a “positive step forward” in the vaccination rollout, but more assistance to the sector is needed. It comes after a recommendation from ATAGI. RACGP president Dr Karen Price: With tens of thousands of new Covid-19 cases emerging every day and students returning to school the timing couldn’t be better. These adolescents are in the senior years of their schooling so it’s so vital to offer them the increased protection a booster vaccine provides. We know from studies based on emerging real-world data that mRNA boosters, such as Pfizer, provide roughly 86% protection against symptomatic Omicron infection and 98% against severe infection. But Price said practices still needed more help to deliver the vaccinations in a timely manner: We are flat out delivering kid’s vaccines, which is more time intensive and complicated compared to adults, as well as boosters and taking care of our day-to-day patient case load. Some people avoided or delayed screenings and consults during the pandemic and others have had to delay elective surgery, so helping those people is also a high priority. If we are to continue as the backbone of the vaccine rollout, we really need more support from the federal government. Many practices are having enormous difficulty absorbing the cost of taking part in the rollout. We didn’t sign up to make money but at the end of the day we must make ends meet because no one benefits when a practice has to shut up shop. Back in Victoria, where the premier, Daniel Andrews, is speaking to reporters: One in six Gold Coasters may have had Covid-19 around the peak of the Queensland wave, a randomised household survey has found. The Gold Coast public health unit went door-to-door last month to 117 households across Gold Coast suburbs collecting PCR tests. Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk said the surveillance initiative delivered higher than expected results. Of those tested, twenty were positive to Covid-19 but only one in four reported having any symptoms. Only one in ten were aware they were positive. Palaszczuk: Initial results indicate Covid-19 is considerably more common in the community than reported and that many people who are infectious may not be aware. This particularly true for fully vaccinated and boosted Queenslanders, who are benefiting from the protective effects of the vaccine. A follow-up survey performed a week later on 29 January saw the rate of infection halve to one in 13. The four Victoria police officers who lost their lives on the eastern freeway in Melbourne will be remembered today at a statewide memorial service. Leading senior constable Lynette Taylor, senior constable Kevin King, constable Josh Prestney and constable Glen Humphris died on 22 April 2020 following a horror truck crash in the emergency lane of the freeway. The Victorian government is lighting buildings across the city blue following the service, to be held at Marvel stadium in Melbourne. Premier Daniel Andrews: The loss of Lynette, Kevin, Josh and Glen was devastating for their families, their colleagues at Victoria police and all Victorians. Approvals to build houses fell by a further 1.8% in December, continuing a slide from the record peak in April in 2021, AAP reports. The Australian Bureau of Statistics said private sector house approvals have now dropped 31.5% since April. The director of construction statistics at ABS, Daniel Rossi, said: While approvals for private houses have fallen from all-time highs, the series remains at historically elevated levels, with the December result 20.5% higher than the pre-pandemic level in December 2019. Overall approvals rose 8.2% in December, driven by a 27.5% increase in dwellings excluding houses. Separate data showed the construction industry suffered a slump over December and January due to the impact of the Omicron variant, continuing the sector’s volatile run over the past six months. The Australian Industry Group Housing Industry Association performance of construction index dropped 11.1 points to 45.9 over December and January, cutting short a recovery in November. It was the weakest index result since August last year, with a reading below 50 indicating the sector is in contraction. Ai Group chief policy advisor, Peter Burn: This latest downturn was driven by disruptions to labour supply, material supplies and business and household confidence associated with the rapid spread of the Omicron strain. Builders and constructors are hoping the reductions in Covid-19 infections evident over the past couple of weeks will ease some of the extra constraints evident over the past couple of months but they, like everyone else, are geared for further uncertainty and volatility. Over in WA, a bushfire Watch and Act order is in place south of Perth in the shire of Manjimup. People in the area bounded by Muir Highway to the north, Deeside Coast Road to the east, Kin Kin Rd to the south and Wheatley Coast Road to the west are under a possible threat to their lives as a fire approaches, burning in a west-southerly direction. Catholic Health Australia is calling on health minister Greg Hunt to immediately change Australia’s official definition of ‘fully vaccinated’ from two doses to three. Earlier today, Hunt said he was waiting for the Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation (ATAGI) to consider changing the definition. But the manager of health policy at CHA, Alex Lynch, said it was “misleading” for states to be reporting a fully vaccinated rate of 95% for double doses which was “inadequate” at protecting people from Covid-19: Health authorities are struggling to convince Australians to go out and get their booster and part of this is surely because people feel complacent when they see such impressive headline figures. A huge contributor to the speed of vaccination last year was people feeling responsibility for getting low rates to climb. We need to put that impetus on society once again. We now know that Covid-19 vaccinations are losing effectiveness just months after the second dose is received. A truly fully vaccinated community, with three doses for all who are eligible, will help alleviate pressure on our hospitals and start getting us back to normal. We will be hearing from Victoria in the next half an hour. The federal government has explicitly rejected Amnesty International’s assessment that Israel is perpetrating apartheid against Palestinians. Readers will recall that the prime minister, Scott Morrison, yesterday said “no country is perfect” in response to Amnesty’s 280-page report that concluded Israel had “perpetrated the international wrong of apartheid, as a human rights violation and a violation of public international law”. Guardian Australia asked the foreign minister, Marise Payne, several questions including whether she agreed with the assessment that Israel is perpetrating apartheid (and if she didn’t agree, why not) and whether she would be more direct in publicly urging Israel to uphold human rights. A spokesperson for Payne responded overnight. Here is the full statement: We do not agree with the report’s characterisations of Israel, and we remain a firm supporter of the State of Israel. The conflict between the Palestinians and Israel must be resolved so that peace and security can become normalised. We are strong supporters of a two-state solution, with Israel and a future Palestinian state establishing internationally recognised borders. We have always urged all parties to refrain from actions and statements that undermine the prospects for peace. For more, see our news report: National LGBTQ+ rights organisation Equality Australia has cautiously welcomed comments by prime minister Scott Morrison foreshadowing amendments next week to better protect LGBTQ+ people in religious schools. But the organisation has called for the Religious Discrimination Bill to be scrapped, warning it will result in widespread discrimination. Morrison’s comments were made on B105.3 this morning at the same time Citipointe Christian School announced it was withdrawing a controversial enrolment contract that labelled homosexuality as “sinful and offensive” and included a provision that allowed the school to exclude trans and gender diverse students. Equality Australia legal director, Ghassan Kassisieh: The PM made a commitment in 2018 to remove the outdated carve-outs in national anti-discrimination laws which allow discrimination against LGBTQ+ people in religious schools. This reform is long overdue, and better protections must apply to both teachers and students. But the Morrison government’s Religious Discrimination Bill will invite exactly this type of practice in employment across faith-based organisations, from schools, aged-care services, emergency accommodation and hospitals. The PM may be putting out one small fire, but his Religious Discrimination Bill will unleash a firestorm of discrimination in religious organisations against anyone that holds a different belief from their faith-based employer – even when they can faithfully do the job that is required of them. The Religious Discrimination Bill allows religious organisations like schools, hospitals, aged care and disability service providers to draw up contracts that require its workers to sign away their own religious and non-religious beliefs in order to keep their jobs. Kassisieh: If the PM is serious about fulfilling his 2018 election commitment, he would end discrimination against LGBTQ+ students and staff in religious schools by delivering simple legislation to stop schools from firing, expelling or discriminating against them for who they are. And if his government is serious about protecting people of faith from discrimination, he must withdraw the Religious Discrimination Bill and do what he promised to do; deliver a simple reform that protects all of us, equally. Yesterday RBA governor, Philip Lowe, was asked at his National Press Club speech whether now was a good time to switch to a fixed interest rate if you’re a borrower. Ever cautious to avoid sending too clear a message, Lowe encouraged people to have a “buffer” to absorb any interest rate rises that might be coming as the economy gathers pace and inflation perks up further. (He has paid off his home loan, we learned). Anyway, as if on cue, the CBA – the country’s biggest bank – raised its fixed home loan rates by as much as 0.2 percentage points. ING, Australia’s seventh largest bank, also raised fixed and variable rates but only for new customers. According to market tracker RateCity, the CBA’s four-year fixed rate has risen by 1.55 percentage points over the past year. Someone with a $500,000, four-year fixed loan will now be paying $411 more than someone taking out the same loan a year ago. For such loans, the CBA now charges 3.54%, ANZ – 3.39%, with both Westpac and NAB on 3.34%. RateCity research director, Sally Tindall, said: While much of the heavy lifting has already been done, we expect fixed rates will keep on rising in the months to come, not just from the big four banks but across the market. Right now, there are just 28 fixed rates [in the market] under 2% but the number is dropping rapidly. In a few months time they could be extinct. Here are the latest Covid numbers from around Australia today, as the country records at least 82 deaths from Covid 19: ACT Deaths: 0 Cases: 529 In hospital: 63 (1 person in ICU) NSW Deaths: 38 Cases: 12,632 In hospital: 2,578 (160 people in ICU) Queensland Deaths: 9 Cases: 8,643 In hospital: 749 (71 people in ICU) SA Deaths: 1 Cases: 1,583 In hospital: 226 (18 people in ICU) Victoria Deaths: 34 Cases: 12,157 In hospital: 752 (82 people in ICU) WA Deaths: 0 Cases: 19 Queenslanders might want to avoid mosquitos while also dodging Covid this summer: Queensland’s attorney-general, Shannon Fentiman, will hold a press conference at Parliament House at 11.45am local time today. Meanwhile, we may not have found the Endeavour after all. The chief executive of the Australian National Maritime Museum, Kevin Sumption, announced today the shipwreck of Cook’s vessel had been positively identified. But the Rhode Island Marine Archaeology Project has rejected the ANMM’s report, calling it a “breach of contract” with RIMAP, the lead organisation for the study in Newport harbour. It says there has been “no indisputable data” to prove the site is the Endeavour, though the study is “consistent with what might be expected”: There are many unanswered questions that could overturn such an identification ... RIMAP’s conclusions will be driven by proper scientific process and not Australian emotions or politics. Catch up on the story here: Western Australia has recorded 19 new Covid-19 cases overnight, sending hundreds of students and staff into a fortnight of isolation less than a week into the school year. Premier Mark McGowan told ABC Perth radio rules around isolation periods would remain in place for now. McGowan said the current rules were sensible until Covid-19 cases grew. Thanks as always to the marvellous Matilda Boseley. I’ll be with you for the start of this fine afternoon. With that, I shall hand you over to the amazing Caitlin Cassidy who will with you for the next little while. South Australia has reported another 1,583 Covid-19 cases and one more death as the number of active infections across the state continues to fall. Premier Steven Marshall says active cases are down to 18,308, the lowest number for some time. What we’re now seeing is a settling of the numbers in South Australia ... We’re starting to see those numbers plateau a bit. We’d like to see them go lower. SA has 226 people in hospital, including 18 in intensive care, with five on ventilation. Victoria’s Healthcare Association has welcomed the state’s extension of surge payments for healthcare workers in Covid settings but says the allowance should be expanded to other patient-facing roles. Guardian Australia has confirmed the surge allowance for hospital workers, paramedics and other frontline staff will be extended until 31 March as Victoria remains under a code brown declaration. The payments equate to an additional $60 per shift for public hospital and Ambulance Victoria workers. VHA chief executive Tom Symondson said the organisation had called for the payment to be extended beyond February to ensure healthcare workers were recognised for their “extraordinary work” as the state remained under a code brown declaration: Many healthcare providers are struggling to retain staff, let alone recruit them, so the next critical step is to expand this payment to other healthcare workers. They need to feel valued during this public health crisis. Scott Morrison was asked on Brisbane’s B105.3 radio this morning about Citipointe Christian College and the issue of LGBT students. Morrison replied: I don’t support that. My kids go to a Christian school, I wouldn’t want my school doing that either. The bill we’ll be taking through the parliament will be having an amendment that will deal with that to ensure kids cannot be discriminated against on that basis. I’ve been saying that for years. That’s always been my view. [If] you send your kids to a Christian, Muslim or Jewish school – they should be able to teach kids in that way. This is an ambiguous statement that we’re seeking to clarify with Morrison and attorney general Michaelia Cash’s office. If Morrison means that the religious discrimination bill will contain this amendment, then that is a shift in government policy; but if he means that there will be a separate bill that follows the religious package, then this is much less consequential than it appears. Morrison is right that he has suggested students shouldn’t be able to be expelled for their sexuality previously, but Cash has said that a bill to do this will have to wait 12 months until after the religious bill passes. On Radio National yesterday evening acting attorney general Amanda Stoker said: The religious discrimination bill that’s before the parliament does not empower this conduct. That is a factor that is already law, and it is law under the Sex Discrimination Act. The next thing to say is that the Liberal-National government has committed to taking away those exceptions, and we will do it as soon as we have the Religious Discrimination Act in force. The only reason we can’t do it beforehand is that we need to be able to tailor it to whatever product ultimately emerges from the Senate. But it’s already something we believe in and have committed to. So, it’s clear that Cash and Stoker think the fix for LGBT students is SEPARATE from the religious bills. Did Morrison misspeak or has there been a shift in policy? The ACT has recorded 529 new Covid-19 cases and no deaths. There are now 63 Covid-19 positive people in hospital with one person ventilated in the ICU. The absolute whiplash we all just experienced going from the maritime news of positive identification of Captain Cook’s ship to Anthony Albanese demanding Colbeck’s resignation. I need to go do some neck stretches! Reporter: In terms of the campaign process, as you face Scott Morrison in the upcoming election, do you share the view of Gladys Berejiklian that he is a horrible person? Albanese: Gladys Berejiklian’s comments are on the record for all to see and that is a judgement of a NSW premier who, at the time, was fighting hard. I respect the work she did during the bushfire crisis. I have said that publicly and privately at the time. But also we have a circumstance whereby Australians, and older Australians, are paying the price for the disunity in this government. I do not care that the Liberals do not like each other, I don’t care that the Nationals do not like each other and the Liberals do not like the Nationals. What I care about is the fact there are real-world consequences as a result of disunity. And the fact that this government is focused on itself and disunity, and older Australians are not being looked after. This government is not functional. It is not competent because they are too obsessed with attacking each other and fighting each other, and the most damning statement in those text messages is Gladys Berejiklian’s statement that Scott Morrison at the height of the bushfire crisis was more concerned about politics than he was about people, and this was at a devastating time for people at the height of the bushfire crisis. That to me is the most damning statement in those text messages. Here is what Albanese says Labor would do to fix aged care if they take government in May: Immediately we will act. Immediately, the first thing we would do is acknowledge the problems that are there. We would make sure that booster shots are available, that rapid antigen tests were available, that PPE equipment was available for people in the aged care sector. We would work with the sector, listen to what residents and workers and the aged care sector were saying and work with them, not have this approach that this government has of she will be right, mate. The problem is, this government have been in office for almost a decade, they have had a circumstance whereby we are now in the third year of this pandemic - the third year! They cannot say they have not had time to prepare. We have known, one of the circumstances which Australia has found itself in throughout this pandemic is because it began in other parts of the world we have had an opportunity to learn from that experience and we know that older people are particularly vulnerable to Covid, and that is why we have known what was coming in some circumstances in terms of looking at overseas experience. So, for example, rapid antigen tests were approved much earlier, supply was what under leadership from government and that was made available to the workforce. This government have failed to learn any of the lessons from the pandemic which is why they keep committing mistakes. Albanese won’t commit to supporting a 25% pay rise for aged care staff but says a Labor government would put in a submission to Fair Work supporting a pay increase. I agree there should be an increase in pay and conditions of age care workers. That is up to the commission what that figure should be but the government should make a submission. When the social and community services had an inquiry through the commission in to an increase in their salary, the then federal Labor government made a submission saying they supported an increase in wages ... If we were the government, we would make a submission ... We do not make submissions as opposition but if we were the government and if we formed government, we will make a submission supporting an increase. Albanese: That is the truth because this government have failed in this area but they don’t even have a commitment of putting a nurse in every nursing home. That is something I called for last May in my budget reply. It is something the royal commission has called for as well. It is something that was mentioned in the interim report of the royal commission. The truth is that this government continues to act with the word that summed up the aged care sector in the interim report, neglect. This minister is not doing his job and the prime minister continues to say it is all OK in the aged care sector. The opposition leader has been asked by a reporter how much of the issue in aged care is down to Labor’s time in government given that the royal commission found there were entrenched systematic issues. But Albanese isn’t having it. This government has been in office for almost a decade. They are shooting for a second decade in office. The entire government response that it is ‘Labor’s responsibility’ for something when we have not been in office since 2013 is a big call. And can I say that in regard to the minister and him being replaced and the implication that you need to skill someone new up, the problem with that statement is that this minister does not have any skills and he is not doing his job. He is absent. He is absent. We actually need a minister who will take responsibility. This minister will not take responsibility and when he does front up to a committee, to a committee hearing yesterday, he has refused to acknowledge that there is a crisis, has refused to acknowledge the problems that are there and the context of this – such as Mike Baird, the former Liberal new premier of New South Wales calling for the army to be brought in to make beds and to look after fundamental tasks in the aged care sector – because this crisis has just been building and building. Albanese: The problem with this government is that if you do not acknowledge that there is a problem, you have no chance of finding a solution. But the solutions are there in the aged care royal commission. Older Australians deserve better and their nurses and carers deserve better as well. They used to call these facilities nursing homes for a reason. Because nurses worked there. The aged care royal commission, and I called for it in my budget reply, called for a nurse, a registered nurse to be on call 24 hours a day in every nursing home. A nurse should be on call in every nursing home. That is pretty fundamental to the whole concept of care. What’s more, this government continues to refuse to put in a submission to the Fair Work Commission to increase the wages and conditions of the aged care workforce. Even though they know that this is causing a massive problem of retention of workers but a one-off payment certainly won’t solve it. This is a government that is incompetent, a government that is out of touch and a government that should be out of time come the next election. Albanese: [The government] knew, they knew that aged care residents were particularly vulnerable and yet we have aged care workers who still cannot get access to rapid antigen tests. We have aged care residents who are confused, who are locked in their rooms, who are not able to see their loved ones. We have the loved ones of these residents witness who are despairing, who are upset, who are fraught as a result of not being able to see their mum on dad or their granddad or grandmother, or their uncle or aunt or just a friend. This is not good enough. And we have an ongoing approach by this government that is characterised by complacency and characterised by always acting too little too late. And then we have the prime minister’s grand announcement at the National Press Club of one-off payments of up to $400 for aged care workers as a retention bonus. One of which is to be granted in March and one just about handed out with the ballot papers at the election in May. A cynical exercise from a government that does not even seem to understand the fact, which is that most people in the aged care workforce, they are part-time, they are casual and they are getting a part pro rata rate. Opposition leader Anthony Albanese is speaking now from Sydney and he is angry. Today I am angry. He is demanding the aged care services minister, Richard Colbeck, resign immediately from his position or be fired by the prime minister. I am angry because I have spoken to the families of aged care residents who have had enough. Richard Colbeck must resign today. If Richard Colbeck does not resign today the prime minister should sack him. He is simply incapable of fulfilling the task of looking after the interests of old, vulnerable Australians. What we have is a circumstance whereby these Australians have helped to build this country. They deserve dignity and they deserve respect. Not the ... contempt that we get from a minister who, having avoided appearing before a committee inquiry all year up until yesterday, went before that inquiry and said that it was working exceptionally well. He went before the inquiry and said that there was not a crisis in aged care and today, what we have, what we have, remarkably, is an announcement that they are going to have a taskforce, they are going to ask a few people in the department to look at the data. They are not going to act. That is what they are going to do. Well, here are some data. 566 deaths since 1 January. Double the number of deaths that occurred throughout 2021 in aged care. 15,000 residents and 17,000 aged care workers being infected with Covid. One-quarter of shifts not being filled. 80,000 aged care residents who have not received booster shots. Aged care residents who are missing out on showering, who are missing out on food and water, who are not having their wounds tended to. This is a crisis and it is a crisis on this government’s watch in the wake of a Royal Commission that described the aged care sector in one word, neglect. Queensland’s chief health officer has just spoken, confirming the state has recorded 8,643 new Covid-19 cases and sadly nine deaths. There are now 749 Covid patients in the hospital and 47 in the ICU. National Maritime Museum CEO Kevin Sumption says the US and Australian teams are working to protect the site of the Endeavour wreck due to its immense historical importance. You know, just like how Captain Cook famously was super respectful of the tens of thousands of years of immensely important Australian history when he landed on the continent 200 years ago. Sumption: It ended its final life as a prisoner of war vessel, it was in such bad condition that it was being used as a prison hold while it was in Newport by the British to hold American prisoners. To provide some further Australian historical perspective, 1778, when the vessel was scuttled to the bottom of Newport harbour, was 10 years before the First Fleet arrived in Botany Bay. And only one year before Cook met his death in Hawaii. Importantly, we are writing about findings as we speak, these will be reviewed in due course. The archaeological work does indeed continue, and we look forward to some further robust conversations over the coming months. We now, however, have entered an important phase of this project. As we look to protect this important site, importantly only about 15% of the vessel remains. We will continue to investigate, and will look closely with maritime experts in Rhode Island about the future of this site and what should happen to the site. Certainly protection is what we are working towards right now. OK, we are jumping over to some historical maritime news (I’m just as surprised as you are that I’m typing this sentence). The CEO of the Australian National Maritime Museum has just confirmed that a historic shipwreck in a US harbour is in fact the ship captain James Cook sailed to Australia in 1770. This morning, I am here to announce with great pride, that after a 22 year program of archival and archaeological work, and based on what we call the preponderance of evidence approach, I have concluded that an archaeological site known as RI2394, which is located in Newport harbour, Newport RSA, does indeed comprise of the shipwreck of HM Bark Endeavour. This of course is the vessel that James Cook sailed to Tahiti in 1769 to observe the transit of Venus, and following that he continued his scientific journey charting large parts of the South Pacific, and of course that is the coast of Australia in 1770. It is arguably one of the most important vessels in our maritime history and yes, the Australian National Maritime Museum, together with our partners, have found the wreck of Cook’s Endeavour. It has been announced previously that this may have been the site that the vessel, the Endeavour, was to be found, but it has been a few years of detailed scientific work to actually finally get to this point where we can conclusively confirm that this is indeed the wreck of Cook’s Endeavour. This is an important moment, as this vessel played a critical role not only in the history of the United Kingdom, but also New Zealand, of course Australia, and now the United States of America. A large Brisbane Pentecostal school has withdrawn demands for families to sign controversial anti-gay and anti-trans enrolment contracts – but says it won’t back down from teaching its fundamental beliefs. In a statement, Citipointe Christian College principal, Brian Mulheran, said families would no longer have to agree to the contract, which described homosexual acts as “immoral” and “offensive to God”. The contract also implied the school would not recognise transgender students. Mulheran said: We deeply regret that some students feel that they would be discriminated against because of their sexuality or gender identity, and I apologise to them and their families on behalf of the College. As stated previously, the College does not and will not discriminate against any student because of their sexuality or gender identity. It is central to our faith that being gay or transgender in no way diminishes a person’s humanity or dignity in God’s eyes. It is also deeply distressing that some of our students have been vilified in the community simply for their religious beliefs or because they attend the College. Every individual is created equal in the image of God and should be treated with compassion, love, kindness, respect and dignity. This will continue to be at the heart of our College and help us to come together again as a community. Our society gives freedom to people to be a part of groups with shared beliefs. Citipointe has the freedom to maintain its Christian ethos and this is an essential part of Christian education and choice for parents. As a College established for religious purposes, we will continue to provide an education based on our shared beliefs. The College will continue to ensure that families are provided with the information that is necessary to make informed choices about our community and our approach to teaching and caring for their children. Citipointe principal Brian Mulherin has confirmed that a controversial contract distributed to students requiring them to denounce homosexuality and bisexuality and conform to the gender roles of their birth has been withdrawn. He said the school “deeply regret that some students feel that they would be discriminated against the cause of their sexuality or gender identity, and I apologise to them and their families on behalf of the College.” You can read our previous coverage of the situation below: How much does a loaf of bread cost is one question being bandied around this week. Perhaps the more interesting one would be: what’s it going to cost this time next year? A lot, of course, is riding politically on cost of living issues. My colleague Greg Jericho opines here that the election may be dominated by them. And I had stab at how the RBA may be keen to see wages rise before lifting interest rates but real wages (after inflation) fell last year and may barely keep up with rising prices this year and next. (Take NZ as a warning sign.) Anyway, Rabobank, a bank specialising in commodities, has this morning published their Australian agribusiness outlook. They describe 2021 as a “once in a blue moon year”, which implies 2022 is not going to be a repeat. Senior commodities analyst Cheryl Kalisch Gordon says: There was a combination of drought and adverse weather in key cropping regions around the world, strong stockpiling demand in the face of potential food shortages along with Covid-induced labour shortages which impacted intensively-produced agri products and transport. Anyway, the expectation is Australia will have another good year given there’s no shortage of water (think giant cotton farms with their full dams in the Murray-Darling Basin). Assuming some of those supply constraints ease abroad, there should be less stockpiling, and those global prices of wheat, milk, meat and so on should start to fall. One key, though, will be the Australian dollar. Rabobank expects some “near-term slippage” before climbing later in the year. Since most commodities are priced in US dollars, a weaker Aussie dollar is not so helpful. The US Federal Reserve will start raising interest rates from next month and since the RBA seems determined to be stoic, the investors will likely push the Aussie down from its current 70 US-cent value (as they chase a higher yield). Aussie farmers (many of them multinationals) in other words, could divert more of their produce offshore ... leaving Australian consumers to face higher prices for their proverbial litre of milk or loaf of bread. Facebook whistleblower Frances Haugen has told the parliamentary committee on social media and online safety that the company could do much more to crack down on abuse on Facebook and Instagram. She said the company could invest in more moderation, have more stringent standards on abusers, and improve the detection of abuse on its platform. She said the company hadn’t gone far enough because it wasn’t transparent about what it was doing: Because Facebook doesn’t have to disclose what it does to prevent bullying, itt doesn’t go anywhere near to any near have an adequate length for those interventions. Health minister Greg Hunt says the government is completely confident in Scott Morrison’s leadership. More generally, the belief in the prime minister and the belief in the leadership is immensely strong. And the reason is here. As a country that has faced a global pandemic that has led to terrible human tragedy on a grand scale, Australia has not been unscathed. We have had human losses that we have been talking about that are profoundly tragic in each and every case. Each life matters. When you look back over the course of a pandemic, you see that we have a country with one of the highest vaccination rates in the world. One of the lowest rates of loss of life. With over 40,000 lives saved compared with the United Kingdom and United States, and over 30,000 compared with the OECD average. When you have the strongest economic recoveries, the big things that have occurred here under Scott Morrison and Josh Frydenberg have been immensely important. That is why we believed in them, that is why, if I had a blank sheet and I know everything that I know about the pandemic and I was asked to nominate the two people to lead the country at the start of the pandemic, I would pick Scott Morrison as prime minister and Josh Frydenberg as treasurer. OK, we have turned to the “complete psycho” texting scandal, and Greg Hunt has doubled down, stating that he doesn’t believe a federal minister would have sent them. I have to say as the cabinet is arguably the strongest, most united cabinet in the last 60 years ... quite frankly don’t believe that this is from a federal minister. I don’t know the veracity otherwise, but I do not believe it’s from a federal minister. Probably the easiest thing for the journalist in question is to release them, release all of the detail, all of the names. If they are not willing to do that, then share it with trusted people like Paul Kelly, Michelle ... They can look at it and verified and speak to anyone who is allegedly been responsible. I can speak for the whole of the cabinet, I just say to release, in full. No one in the cabinet is remotely worried about it being released and everyone in the cabinet would want it released. Hunt says 61% of Covid deaths were among people in palliative care: 61% of those of – in the most recent data we have – who have passed with Covid were in palliative conditions, and amongst the people who had passed, 19% were unvaccinated and 8% were partially vaccinated for a total of 27%. Those are the figures which the department provides. Greg Hunt has continued his a defence of the aged care booster vaccine rollout: Approximately 190,000 people in aged care ... 125,000 and their boosters, about 20,000 so far, have not had any vaccination or have not had their second vaccinations. So when you take those into account that means that you have a pool of about 170,000 who are eligible, 1125,000 who have taken it up so it there are about 35,000 who have not taken it up and we will continue to encourage either the residents or their families to take this opportunity. Right across the sector, 99% of facilities have been visited. [Some] have not been able to accept visit so far, that will happen in the coming days. Reporter: You and other ministers have said that rapid antigen tests were not approved until November and that is why we have not seen the take-up ... how come there is a discrepancy? When vaccines first came out you signed a memorandum of understanding six months ahead of approvals and we put aside hundreds of millions of dollars to purchase vaccines [even though] we were still in clinical trials, but we did not do this for rapid antigen tests? Health minister Greg Hunt: There are a number of assumptions in that question. In relation to the rapid antigen tests, the first of the rapid antigen tests for point-of-care were approved in 2020 by the TGA and we began to use tests in aged care in August 2021 and that was a point made on many occasions. The commonwealth has purchased, procured and provided continuous supply of rapid antigen tests in aged care since that time and we have now provided over 8m tests in aged care and that has been continuous since August and we were in a position of planning ahead in procuring and that is what we had done in relation to that ... There was a difference of views about the utility, particularly given that PCR was the standard test recommended by the AHPPC and the Communicable Diseases Network of Australia. Some states and territories were not supportive of using it and it was not allowed under law for some considerable period of time. We have been engaged since the outset and that forward planning has allowed us to have that continual supply in aged care. Facebook whistleblower Frances Haugen has urged the Australian government to regulate tech giants to address the spread of disinformation and hate before the federal election. She told the parliamentary committee examining social media and online safety on Thursday: It must go to the heart of the business model of platforms addressing the algorithms and design features that enable the spread of disinformation and hate and the exploitation of personal data. We see European and British regulators moving in this direction. Australia is due to have a federal election in only a few months. As we have seen in many recent elections around the world – the United States – threats to electoral integrity are unpredictable and can escalate rapidly. Australia, with its unique geopolitical position, is no exception. Social media as a major vector or coordinated disinformation campaigns, it adds fuel to the fire of confusion and fake news. It amplifies the most sensationalistic content to the detriment of balance. In fact, we can no longer rely on platforms, flawed content moderation systems to deal with harmful and illegal content downstream. She said the platforms needed to have “radical transparency” given their sway over democratic outcomes, and urged the committee to be the catalyst to regulate the tech companies. Chief medical officer Paul Kelly: The death rate from Omicron is 0.1%: 99.9% of people who get Omicron survive, and usually survive well, without ongoing problems. We are finding more about that all the time. There are issues with other longer-term effects but the reality is the death rate from Omicron 0.1% ... 99.9% of those are either asymptomatic, [or have] mild illness or severe illness. Because of the better clinical care and the surge capacity we are put into the sector, because of our very skilled health staff working at the frontline, because of all of those things, we have a spectacularly low rate of death. That is not to discount debate we have had a large number of deaths, when we have a large number of cases we expected and I said publicly on my advice to government that may happen and it has, and my condolences go to every single family that has experienced that over the whole pandemic. Paul Kelly says Australia is now “past the peak” of the Omicron wave but warns we are not out of the woods yet. We are past the peak in Australia in terms of the Omicron wave. It will not be the last Omicron wave we will have and it will not be the last wave of Covid we will have. We are learning to live with this virus, and that means that we have to have realistic expectations of what will happen this year, and probably subsequent years, in terms of Covid circulating in the community. Chief medical officer Paul Kelly says while Covid-19 is unlikely to be life-threatening for teenagers, the booster shot in this age group is still vital in curbing community spread: It is good to see now that we can join them to that adult rollout of the booster program. Essentially that older age group of teenagers, the Covid acts in a similar way to young adults up to in the 20s and 30s. It makes sense for them to get the booster for their own protection. I point out in that age group at the chance of having a severe dose of Covid, including particularly Omicron, and also if you have had two doses of vaccine already, is very low. But there is a personal protective component to it. More importantly, definitely, as part of our transmission wall, to decrease the transmission in the community, we know that 16- to 17-year-olds and young adults have more friends and social interactions and have a higher chance of transmitting throughout the community. Australia has one of the highest childhood vaccine take-up rates in the world, Greg Hunt says: I would make this point, that among our upper teenagers and 16- to 19-year-olds, we have a 91.3% first-dose rate and 88.2% second-dose rate. Among the younger teenagers and 12- to 15-year-olds, we have an 83.7% take-up, and 76.7% of those who have had the second dose. We want to encourage all of those families, with all of those younger teens to come forward for the first and second doses, it is important to complete the program. In relation to our children, we are, in the next 48 hour, set to pass 1m doses for five- to 11-year-olds. That has been one of the fastest take-up rates in the world and that is already, on the advice I had, one of the highest rates of take-up. OK let’s jump to Canberra where health minister Greg Hunt is once again speaking from his strange little hostage camera live stream rather than holding a regular press conference. (I’m sure there is a good reason for this but the fisheye lens looks a bit odd.) Hunt is discussing Atagi’s decision this morning to allow 16- and 17-year-olds to get the booster jab, three months after their second vaccine dose: What that means is they will be an immediate group of 380,000 teenagers who will be eligible to have the booster, this is the Pfizer booster that has been through both the TGA and other technical advisory group immunisation. Those doses are in the field and are the same as the adult doses, they are available and that is the group that has now passed three months until they have had their second doses. In particular, that is part of a broader group, 580,000 teenagers of 16 and 17 years old – my daughter is one of them and she has indicated she will be willing to make a booking in the coming days. That is what we encourage and urge all of our teenagers and all of our families to consider. The Northern Land Council, one of the NT’s biggest organisations, representing thousands of traditional owners across the top end, have welcomed the federal government’s decisions to establish a series of biosecurity zones across their area. Last night health minister Greg Hunt introduced strict biosecurity zones preventing outsiders from travelling to dozens of remote communities in the Northern Territory as Omicron cases swell across the territory. This covers the northern, central and Tiwi land councils regions, which will work together to allow come movement to continue between specific communities in the zones. NLC chairman Samuel Bush-Blanasi said the organisation was happy that the government had listened to its requests, after weeks of traditional owners contacting the council asking for this measure to be put in place: They want to stop people coming in from outside. These Biosecurity Zones or “bubbles” will help slow the spread of Covid out bush and give us more time to get more people their second and third jabs. We also have to get vaccinations for our kids 5 years old and up. School is back and they need to be vaccinated. In a statement, Bush-Blansi played out how the new biosecurity zone rules work: You can move around inside your own Biosecurity Zone but you can’t leave it without an exemption. This means that in Beswick and Barunga area where I am from, people will be able to travel from Beswick/Wugularr to Barunga or Bulman or Manyallaluk but not to Katherine or Mataranka. That’s the same for people in Katherine or Darwin – they won’t be able to travel into one of the Biosecurity Zone areas ... There will be exemptions but you will need an exemption form and a negative RAT test before you travel. But not if you’ve got the Covid – then you will have to isolate and stay in quarantine. South Australian premier Steven Marshall has travelled to the state’s northern flood-hit areas to thank locals, volunteers and emergency service workers for their efforts after damaging rains, reports Tim Dornin from AAP. Marshall arrived in Port Augusta on Thursday morning where a deluge on Monday night turned roads into rivers and left the town’s main oval underwater. He will then move north to Glendambo near where the Stuart Highway, the main access road to the Northern Territory, remains cut with repairs likely to take almost two weeks. Marshall said the government was doing everything it could to help support everyone affected by recent extreme weather, from flying in vital supplies to cut-off communities, to sending rapid response teams out to assess the damage: No stone will be left unturned in our efforts to help our regional communities, who have been dealt a fierce blow with many extreme weather fronts over the last week ... While the rain has been a godsend for some of our farmers, it has been devastating for local communities who have been cut off because of closed roads, rail and other vital infrastructure. Emergency services are currently working on the reopening of the Stuart Highway and engineers are working on options to expedite this process. This week the RAAF flew in 20 tonnes of food and other supplies to Coober Pedy, which has been left isolated by the floods. The torrential rain has also left most roads in the state’s Indigenous APY lands impassable. Trucks left Adelaide on Wednesday to deliver essential supplies to the region. SA Health has also organised an aircraft of 600 kilograms of essential food items for Pipalyatjara. Marshall said while the rains had subsided, travellers were urged to keep clear of the state’s north. Many roads are still closed, impassable or very dangerous. The Royal Australian College of General Practitioners says it welcomes Atagi’s decision to allow 16- and 17-year-olds to receive the booster jab but raised concerns over what this would mean for GPs’ workloads across the country. RACGP president Dr Karen Price said it was “another positive step forward in the vaccine rollout” but called for more support from the federal government: With tens of thousands of new COVID-19 cases emerging every day and students returning to school the timing couldn’t be better. These adolescents are in the senior years of their schooling so it’s so vital to offer them the increased protection a booster vaccine provides ... This latest booster announcement for adolescents 16- to 17-year-olds is great news but it will add another layer of work for the nation’s GPs and general practice teams ... We are flat out delivering kid’s vaccines, which is more time intensive and complicated compared to adults, as well as boosters and taking care of our day-to-day patient case load. Some people avoided or delayed screenings and consults during the pandemic and others have had to delay elective surgery, so helping those people is also a high priority. If we are to continue as the backbone of the vaccine rollout, we really need more support from the federal government. Many practices are having enormous difficulty absorbing the cost of taking part in the rollout. We didn’t sign up to make money but at the end of the day we must make ends meet because no one benefits when a practice has to shut up shop ... With Omicron cases surging across the country – the time for action is now. The widower of a police officer killed in a crash on Melbourne’s Eastern Freeway has paid tribute to her ahead of a state memorial service, reports AAP. Leading Senior Constable Lynnette Taylor, 60, was one of four officers killed when they were hit by a truck while on duty at Kew in April 2020. Her widower Stuart Shulze told ABC Radio he had lost his soulmate, and the service would allow friends to honour her and her colleagues. Senior Constable Kevin King, 50, and constables Glen Humphris, 32, and Josh Prestney, 28, were also killed. They had been standing in the emergency lane, about to impound a Porsche 911. Shulze said his wife of nearly 30 years had joined the police force at the age of 30, after travelling the world for a decade and starting her own business in London. He said she was a fair and dedicated officer with a strong sense of empathy, who was drawn to the police by her sense of adventure: I was in the force for 20 years so I knew what some of the dangers were ... I knew they were always going into dark dangerous places. Funerals for the officers were restricted due to Victoria’s first Covid-19 lockdown, while a state service also had to be postponed. The state memorial service will be held at Marvel Stadium in Melbourne today. The crash was Victoria police’s single greatest loss of life, with the truck driver responsible jailed for 22 years. Here is some more information on that New Zealand border reopening plan: We will be hearing from the health minister and CMO at 10am AEDT this morning, likely discussing Atagi’s decision to approve booster shots for 16- and 17-year-olds. I’ll bring you all the updates here: Victoria will extend payments that aim to encourage frontline healthcare workers to undertake risky shifts with Covid patients, as the state’s hospitals remain under a code brown declaration. The Andrews government has faced calls from hospital and paramedics bodies to extend the surge payment, introduced in October, that was due to expire next Thursday. Guardian Australia has confirmed the surge allowance for hospital workers and paramedics will be extended until 31 March. The payments equate to an additional $60 a shift for public hospital and Ambulance Victoria workers. Premier Daniel Andrews on Wednesday said Victoria was on a “more optimistic trajectory” but stressed there continued to be significant pressure on the health system. A Department of Health spokesperson said Victoria’s health workforce had “risen to the challenge”: We’ve backed our hard-working health workforce with funding for more wellbeing support, investment in more training and the extension of the surge allowance which was provided last year. In case my SA readers were wondering what their premier was up to this morning: he has just touched down in Port Augusta to speak to locals as assess the damage from Sunday night’s torrential downpour. New Zealand has announced it will reopen its border to visitors in stages, after its earlier plans to do so were derailed by Omicron. The country’s borders have been closed, apart from a short-lived travel bubble with Australia, for nearly two years. Jacinda Ardern: With Omicron’s arrival, we pushed that change in border settings out – to give ourselves the chance to roll out boosters – a chance most other countries never had. With our community better protected we must turn to the importance of reconnection. Families and friends need to reunite. Our businesses need skills to grow. Exporters need to travel to make new connections. Fully vaccinated New Zealanders and other eligible travellers from Australia will be able to enter New Zealand without staying in quarantine, known as MIQ, from Sunday 27 February. Two weeks later they can come from all other countries. From 12 April, 5,000 international students, and other eligible temporary visa holders, will be allowed to enter. Sometime before July, the border opens to Australians and other travellers who do not require a visa to enter New Zealand. All other international visitors will be allowed to enter New Zealand from October. Vaccinated travellers will be allowed to self-isolate for 10 days, while all non-vaccinated travellers will still be required to enter managed isolation and quarantine. Looking at hospitalisations from those two states. It seems Victorian has had a drop in both overall hospitalisations (down 16 to 752) and ICU numbers (down 17 to 81). In NSW overall hospitalisations are down 44 today (now 2,568), as are ICU numbers (down 10 to 160). But it’s not clear if some of the 72 deaths recorded across the two states overnight make up part of that decrease. It’s a similarly tragic scene in Victoria with 34 people with Covid-19 passing away and 12,157 new cases. Another extremely deadly day is NSW, with 38 Covid-positive people dying in the latest reporting period. So the country has been aflutter these last few days after Scott Morrison couldn’t tell a reporter the price of a loaf of bread when asked. Every politician across this sunburnt country has no doubt been desperately memorising the price of a small weekly grocery list, but Labor leader Anthony Albanese’s media minder clearly didn’t think to pop a box of tampons on the pop quiz, because when asked on the Today show this morning, he couldn’t answer. Host Ally Langdon: For your female voters, can you give us the price of a box of Carefree. Albanese: No, I can’t. I live with my son who is 21 years old and I assure you that isn’t something ... Langdon: Gotcha. Albanese: I can tell you the price of medical care and bread and Vegemite and a range of products. I can tell you the price of cereal but no, you have got me there, Ally. It looks as though we will be hearing from the Queensland leadership about 9.30am Brisbane time, 10.30am Sydney and Melbourne time. Andrew Forrest has launched criminal proceedings against Facebook alleging the tech giant breached federal anti-money laundering laws by not cracking down sufficiently on scam ads that used his image. The action in the Western Australia magistrates court is the first time Facebook has faced criminal charges anywhere in the world, the mining billionaire said on Thursday. The charges allege Facebook was criminally reckless by not taking sufficient steps to stop criminals from using its social media platform to send scam advertisements that aimed to defraud Australian users. It is alleged the scam advertisements – which used Forrest’s image and purported to promote cryptocurrency investment schemes – have appeared on Facebook since March 2019. You can read the full report below: A financial audit of NSW Health’s spending, originally reported by the Daily Telegraph, has revealed that the state government spent three-quarters of a billion dollars on PPE, including $150m on face masks, that ended up either not meeting health standards or passing its expiry date before it was used, so ultimately had to be thrown away. Here is what opposition leader Chris Minns had to say about it this morning: He also slammed the government’s actions while chatting with the newspaper about the situation: It’s staggering that the government would waste hundreds of millions of dollars on throwing out PPE or buying PPE that didn’t even meet regulations ... That money should have gone into bolstering our critical health resources. Hmm a twist in the political texting saga (basically, a minister texted Gladys Berejiklian during the black summer bushfires saying that Scott Morrison was a “complete psycho”.) The health minister says he doesn’t believe it was anyone in the (current) federal cabinet. So the mystery continues. Health minister Greg Hunt has defended the slow rollout of vaccine booster doses in aged care homes. About 80,000 residents still haven’t received a boost but Hunt says this is largely due to personal choice: There are families or individuals who are making their own choice not to receive that: 99% of facilities have had this visit ... so that opportunity has been there. Greg Hunt says the federal government isn’t in a position to provide an exact number of aged care residents who have died from Covid-19. He says the commonwealth is relying on state data (despite the vast majority of aged care homes being under federal authority): The figure I have as of yesterday is 777 since the 1st of July ... That data is collected by the states ... at this stage they haven’t been in a position to provide it. Speaking of the ongoing Covid aged care crisis, health and aged care minister Greg Hunt is defending the government’s handling of the situation, telling ABC radio that 99% of aged care workers are now double-vaccinated: We have over 99% vaccination rate amongst aged care workers, one of the highest rates in the world; 91% vaccination rate for residents. We’ve been able to have one of the lowest rates of loss of life in aged care in the world ... But it is immensely hard for so many. The mental health impacts of people being locked down in aged care, which is a protective mechanism for them, but at the same time it has a huge impact on their quality of life. If one was looking for a motive for the extraordinary leak of text messages describing Scott Morrison as “a horrible, horrible person”, “a fraud” and a “psycho”, then the wild factional brawl within the New South Wales division of the Liberals is a good place to start. “This is a major hit job by NSW on Morrison and his offsider, [Alex] Hawke,” one senior NSW Liberal said of the blue-on-blue attack. Morrison also upped the ante. During a chat with 2GB’s Ray Hadley he publicly threatened federal intervention in the NSW division: If they can’t endorse [federal environment minister Sussan Ley] they should get out of the way and let the federal executive ensure we can get things done. You can read the rest of the report below: Jacqui Lambie was also asked for her views on fellow Tasmanian senator, aged care services minister Richard Colbeck, attending the cricket instead of appearing at a Senate inquiry into the Covid-19 aged care home crisis: First of all, the cricket didn’t start until later that day. That’s the first thing. That cricket ran for three days. Pick an hour you want to go to and have your frothy, that would be fabulous. Right now we just ran through a royal commission in aged care. I can tell you what is going on with some of those aged care residents is woeful, let alone the staff still haven’t got their PPE gear. These guys are all lined up to get their AstraZeneca. We know that is not working as efficient as Pfizer and Moderna. We need to get the booster shots into them. We have a lot going on in aged care. “Here is a couple of payments of $400 each” – that is just over $2 extra a day and that is how we are going to convince the workers to stay in aged care? This is absolutely shocking. Aged care [is] in crisis. What I would like to see today, if journalists want to get productive today, ask the prime minister if he agrees with minister Colbeck that our aged care is not in crisis. Go and ask the prime minister that. By the way, this is how Jacqui Lambie responded when Today show host Karl Stefanovic asked if she knew who the mystery texter was: No, I wouldn’t have a clue, mate. I wouldn’t have a clue, mate. I wouldn’t have time for that shit, I will be honest with you. Tasmanian senator Jacqui Lambie has told Sunrise that she doesn’t know which minister called Scott Morrison a “complete psycho” in text messages to then NSW premier Gladys Berejiklian during the black summer bushfires. She told the Today show that the government should instead be focusing a bit more on the whole “running the county” part of the job rather than “playground level” arguments: I don’t know who it is. I’m actually really busy and I would have thought that the prime minister and his people would be that busy going into an election they wouldn’t have time for this stuff, this is really, really embarrassing. I think what it goes to show is this is a unit that is absolutely falling apart before we are going into an election. Quite frankly, I don’t really give a stuff who it is. I just wish they would start doing what needs to be done for the country. This is what we are at, we are at this playground level, at prep level and this is what we are worried about, who released that text message out. Quite frankly, there are so much other big issues on the table. A majority of voters oppose a key plank of the Coalition’s religious discrimination bill that would allow discriminatory speech and say they want greater protections for LGBTQ+ students and teachers, a new poll suggests. The YouGov Galaxy poll of 1,030 voters, conducted for lobby group Just Equal, suggests the public doesn’t back the bill which some government MPs oppose due to the potential impact on marginalised students. The poll comes after Citipointe Christian College urged families to sign an enrolment contract that included asking them to agree “homosexual acts” were immoral. That controversy caused Labor and Liberal moderate MPs to warn against waving the bill through federal parliament when it resumes on Tuesday. You can read the full report below: Why don’t we check in on how the shadow treasurer Jim Chalmers is doing this morning? Ooop, well it looks as though he is out and about of ABC radio, sounding the alarm bells over the potential that inflation rates will continue to rise throughout the year, while wage growth stays stagnant: It would have a significant impact on people’s family budgets ... That would sting, people would certainly feel that coming out their family budgets ... The reason we’ve got [stagnant wages growth] is because job insecurity is undermining the foundations of that wages growth ... The problem we’ve got is we’ve got a government that says low wages growth is a deliberate design feature of their economic policy. They’ve made something like 55 wages growth forecasts in the life of this government and been wrong 52 times. I’d be absolutely delighted to have an election about the economy ... The government’s been reduced to this grab bag of scare campaigns, slush funds and political panic-buying. Good morning everyone, it’s Matilda Boseley here and I’ve been up since the wee hours of the morning gathering all the news for around Australia for you. (I did wake up at 4.30am, but in truth it was mostly because I wanted to read a few more chapters of the sci-fi book Hyperion before work.) Back on Earth, there is some breaking news when it comes to Australia’s vaccine rollout. Atagi says 16- to 17-year-olds can roll up their sleeves for their third jab three months after their second in an effort to boost protection against the Omicron variant. This means that around two-thirds of the teenagers in that age group are now eligible, which must come as a relief for those entering into their final, vital, years of high school. Federal health minister Greg Hunt said he was pleased with the approval: With the return to school this week and many of these young people in, or approaching, their final year of schooling, the ability to extend the vaccine’s protection even further will help provide stability and reassurance during this important period of their studies. And it looks as though there could be more vaccine news coming in the next few days with Atagi chairman Prof Nigel Crawford telling the Covid-19 committee yesterday that the advisory group was considering making three vaccines doses the minimum to be fully protected. (Victorian premier Daniel Andrews has been pushing heavily for this over the last few weeks.) OK, with that why don’t we jump right into the day’s news?Saba Kumaritashvili shook his head in frustration as he buckled through the finish line on Wednesday night after the second of two runs in the opening practice session at the Yanqing National Sliding Centre, the sparkling new venue nestled in the tree-lined southern foot of Xiaohaituo Mountain. Even after barreling down the sharp turns of an icy track at frightening speeds exceeding 120kph, the Georgian luger came in dead last in his group among those who completed both attempts, each time finishing more than three seconds behind the pacesetter, Wolfgang Kindl of Austria. He could not hide his disappointment as he marched past a cluster of reporters in the mixed zone, paused for a beat to consider speaking, before hurrying off toward the dressing room to look toward Saturday, when the men’s singles competition begins in earnest. But while the temporary sour of his first taste of sliding’s biggest stage will pass, Kumaritashvili’s participation at these Beijing Games is a triumph that embodies the resilience and courage at the foundation of the Olympics. Twelve years ago in Vancouver, Kumaritashvili’s cousin was fatally injured after crashing in a training session just hours before the opening ceremony. Nodar Kumaritashvili was 21, same as Saba today, and one practice run away from his Olympic debut when he lost control on the insidious 13th turn at Whistler Sliding Centre, a course that had already prompted whispers among the competitors over safety concerns because of the breakneck speeds it was abetting. Nodar’s sled was traveling at nearly 145kmh when it catapulted off the surface and over the sidewall near the finish line, propelling his 176lb form into an unprotected metal support pole by the end of the track. He was pronounced dead less than an hour after he was airlifted to a Whistler hospital and resuscitation efforts failed, becoming the fourth athlete to die in preparations for a Winter Olympics after the British luger Kazimierz Kay-Skrzypecki, the Australian skier Ross Milne and and the Swiss speed skier Nicolas Bochatay. The first on-track fatality in 35 years rocked the sport to its foundation and generated worldwide media attention and sympathy. But the danger being laid bare did nothing to dissuade Saba from following the family trade. The fastest of Winter Olympics events simply runs in the blood. Saba’s great grandfather, Aleko, marshalled the construction of Georgia’s first luge training track in the early 1970s, and then a more complete track a few years later. Aleko then served as head coach of the national team. Saba’s grandfather Felix and uncle David were both highly decorated lugers when Georgia was part of the Soviet Union. His father is only the latest in a line of family members to preside over the national luge federation. Nodar would have become the first of this proud lineage to officially compete in an Olympic Games had he made it through that fifth and final practice run in Canada. Now it will be Saba, who has climbed to No 47 in the world rankings since making his debut at last year’s Nations Cup in Sigulda and has arrived in China as the lone athlete from a sliding sport on Georgia’s nine-person delegation. “Every generation of our family had at least one luge sportsman, and now my father and I are continuing this tradition and following Nodar’s footsteps,” he told the Associated Press after qualifying for the Beijing field. “Thinking about him is painful but gives me strength as well.” He added: “I think every sportsman’s goal and dream is to be competing in the Olympic Games, so two years ago I decided to achieve this goal. And here I am.”The government is under mounting pressure to tackle Britain’s worsening cost of living crisis, with inflation at the highest rate for 30 years and a record increase in household energy bills expected from April. Here are six charts highlighting the scale of the challenge as the squeeze hits the poorest households hardest. Inflation has soared since the economy reopened Inflation as measured by the official consumer prices index (CPI) jumped to 5.4% in December, the highest rate since March 1992. However, the Bank of England has said the official gauge for the annual increase in living costs is expected to rise further still, with a peak close to 6% expected by April. Some economists have warned that inflation could rise further and remain higher for longer than expected. The increase reflects a snapback in demand for goods and services after lockdown, when prices fell sharply, as well as the impact from supply chain disruption due to Covid-19 hitting factory production and global trade. Advanced economies around the world are dealing with similar problems, though the UK has added disruption from Brexit. Most economists expect inflation to ease as Covid disruption abates, although there are warnings of persistently higher rates than in the past. And it’s hitting all areas of daily life Prices are rising at similar rates for richer and poorer households, according to official figures. However, household income levels influence personal experiences of inflation – an issue raised by the food and poverty campaigner Jack Monroe. Poorer households find it harder to cope with similar rates of inflation to richer families as essentials, such as energy and food, form a larger proportion of their shopping basket than discretionary items. According to the Resolution Foundation, on average the lowest-income families spend twice as much proportionately on food and housing bills as the richest. “The decisions people have to make are made harder,” said Dave Innes, head of economics at the Joseph Rowntree Foundation poverty charity. “If you’re already spending mainly on essentials, where are you going to cut back if prices are going up?” Petrol and diesel prices are high UK petrol and diesel prices have hit their highest levels on record in recent months, hitting motorists and adding to business costs, driven by a sharp rise in global oil prices after lockdown. Having plunged from about $60 a barrel in February 2020 to about $20 just two months later in the early stages of the pandemic – and with some prices for US oil dropping below zero – the price of Brent crude has since risen to the highest in seven years at almost $90 a barrel. The government has frozen fuel duty for 11 years, saving the average car driver a cumulative £1,600. However, critics say the policy has added to carbon emissions, while more could have been done to invest in greener electric vehicles. And gas prices have soared in recent months Gas prices on the wholesale market have soared to record highs in recent months, fuelled by soaring demand after lockdown, cold weather draining reserves and lower levels of wind over the summer affecting renewable energy production. The surge has triggered an energy crisis across several major nations and led to almost 30 smaller UK household suppliers of gas and electricity going bust in recent months. Consumers have been relatively insulated so far by the government’s energy-price cap, although that will change dramatically in April after Ofgem, the industry regulator, recalculates the limit to reflect wholesale market prices. Households are expected to see their gas and electricity bills go up by about 50% from April, an increase worth about £600 for an average annual utility bill, taking the total cost to almost £2,000 a year before any measures from the government to reduce the impact. It comes after a previous record jump when the cap was last altered in October, when prices went up by about £139 for those on default tariffs. Tax rises and energy price increases will squeeze budgets Britain’s poorest households are expected to be hit hardest by the increase in energy bills as they spend proportionately more of their income on energy. According to the Resolution Foundation, the poorest will see their energy spend rise from 8.5% to 12% of their total household budget – three times the proportion for the richest. While households across the board will be hit, the Joseph Rowntree Foundation estimates the situation is worse for particular families. It estimates that low-income single-adult households could be forced to spend 54% of their income on gas and electricity. It comes as the government prepares to increase national insurance contributions for workers in the same month, leading to calls from some Tories to scrap the tax raid to ease the pressure on living costs. While experts say there are fairer ways to increase taxes than through national insurance, the plan is relatively progressive and they warn that scrapping it would be a badly targeted way of helping the poorest households with their energy bills. At the same time, wages are stagnating High rates of inflation are eroding the spending power of workers’ pay packets, with economists warning that average weekly earnings after tax will fall in real terms in 2022. According to official figures, inflation-adjusted pay fell in November and has sunk below the pre-financial crisis peak for wages recorded in 2008. Ministers argue that the lowest-paid will see an inflation-busting 6.6% rise in the national living wage to £9.50 an hour from April. However, average pay is expected to shrink this year. The Institute for Fiscal Studies expects the average worker will be almost £13,000 a year worse off by the middle of the 2020s than under a scenario whereby wages continued to rise at pre-2008 financial crisis trend rates. Real pay had been rising steadily for decades prior to the banking crash, although it has now fallen on three occasions in the last decade alone. • The graph showing changes in wholesale gas prices was amended on 3 February 2022. An earlier version had the figures in pounds per therm; this should have been pence per therm.After a tumultuous climax to the 2021 Formula One season that ended in both sound and fury, it is Lewis Hamilton’s continued silence that has defined the winter. With the new season rapidly approaching, the British driver’s future in F1 remains unknown and ostensibly undecided. As the FIA wrestles with an inquiry into the events in Abu Dhabi, it is Hamilton’s absence that looms over the sport, his silence speaking volumes. Seven times an F1 world champion but beaten to the title in controversial circumstances at the season finale at Yas Marina by Red Bull’s Max Verstappen, Hamilton left Abu Dhabi angry and disillusioned. He believed the race had been manipulated in Verstappen’s favour and so disenchanted was he with the way it had played out, he had lost trust in the rules being applied fairly. His Mercedes principal, Toto Wolff, confirmed shortly afterwards that his future in F1 was in doubt. From Hamilton himself there has been all but nothing since he congratulated Verstappen immediately after that race. He has barely been seen in public and his usually exuberant use of social media has ceased completely. Given his competitive nature, his ability to ultimately overcome and move on from setbacks, it is hard to imagine Hamilton would allow this event, albeit one of crushing proportions, to derail his attempt to take an eighth title this year. F1 insiders are cautiously optimistic that he will indeed return but crucial to that decision will surely be that the 37-year-old has confidence in an even-handed and transparent application of the rules. Hamilton and many of the sport’s fans, also disillusioned by the events in Abu Dhabi, demand a level playing field. Regaining trust in how the sport is run seems paramount and the FIA investigation is key to that. At the heart of the enquiry are the actions of the race director Michael Masi, whose future hangs in the balance. Verstappen passed Hamilton for victory on the final lap after Masi improvised decisions around the rules in order to ensure the season’s final race did not finish behind a safety car. There was consternation, confusion and for all that Verstappen was a worthy world champion, distaste and disenchantment for many at how it had happened. Sources inside the FIA insist the sport’s governing body is investigating dispassionately, pursuing a thorough examination of exactly whether the rules were followed. Yet regardless, change is still coming. Peter Bayer is the FIA’s new head of F1, heading the inquiry, and will draw up proposed changes to present to the teams. Last week he admitted that there was a “possibility” Masi could be replaced. Yet the indications are that this seems unlikely. Certainly at very least there seems widespread agreement across the paddock, within the FIA and confirmed by Bayer that Masi can no longer do the job alone and will need assistants to reduce the burden. Equally there is consensus that safety car rules must be revised, to leave a clear protocol for how it would be used if, as the teams desire, races are not to finish under the safety car and that the ability for team principals to lobby the race director live over the radio as events unfold would be removed. The unseemly impression that barracking from the heads of Mercedes and Red Bull was influencing Masi in Abu Dhabi did F1 no favours in the eyes of many who had simply tuned in to watch drivers not their bosses do battle. Mercedes also remain silent on the subject, focusing on their new car, but the team felt Hamilton’s pain with the same piercing sense of injustice and without doubt they too will have strong expectations of the FIA presenting not only a clear review of what happened in Abu Dhabi but more importantly that Bayer’s proposals are a blueprint to prevent a repeat of the events. An ambition that should be shared by all, for the sport to draw a line under 2021. The FIA will present its findings to the teams at the F1 commission meeting on 14 February and is expected to make them public shortly afterwards. However should the FIA not do so, it may indicate serious dissent may remain from some participants. Four days after the F1 commission, Mercedes will launch their new car on 18 February when it would be expected they will present Hamilton alongside it, if his mind is made up. When he finally ends the silence it must be hoped it is to confirm he will indeed race on. It is hard not to imagine after all that he will feel there is unfinished business to address but for now all the pressure and the scrutiny lies firmly with the FIA. This is perhaps the greatest and most high-profile test of governance the organisation has faced in more than a decade,it sorely needs to get it right and not only for Hamilton’s sake. Confidence in the sport’s ability to deliver equitable racing was severely rocked in Abu Dhabi, restoring it will go some way to placating fans who felt entertainment and spectacle had taken precedence over fair play. The sport’s reputation was tarnished and before a wheel is turned in anger this year the furore around 2021 must be put to rest.For several weeks, millions of Britons have said or heard words to the effect of: “Surely Boris Johnson can’t survive this.” And yet he has, batting away Sue Gray’s non-report after the Metropolitan police helped gut it, morphing daily into a plummy-mouthed Donald Trump, littering an already mucky political world with lies and entirely bogus smears about Keir Starmer and Jimmy Savile. Yet Johnson is now treated by his growing band of critics as a freakish aberration who has disgraced the esteemed office of prime minister. His predecessor, Theresa May, who built her own career on bashing migrants – an approach that culminated in the Windrush scandal – has won plaudits for castigating Johnson in the House of Commons. But Johnson is no grotesque interloper: his behaviour and attitudes are emblematic of the British establishment. If our ruling institutions have a shared culture, it’s entitlement and shamelessness, a conviction that wrongdoing should meet consequences only if you are poor and powerless. When Johnson solemnly lectured the nation to abide by the rules while presiding over illicit parties in his Haçienda-on-Thames, his thought process is not hard to imagine. He must have believed that the rules had to accommodate his needs, rather than vice versa. It’s the same attitude that drove the expenses scandal: the MPs who railed against “benefit cheats” while milking hard-pressed taxpayers believed they were not sufficiently remunerated, certainly not compared with the party donors – the City hotshots and top lawyers they clinked champagne glasses with. Why shouldn’t they just help themselves to extras they deserved? A handful of MPs went to prison, but for most, being personally winded by some adverse newspaper headlines did not prove a roadblock to their future political careers. The revolving door between the fourth estate and politics has enjoyed a bit-part in this scandal. The career of the former journalist Allegra Stratton did not survive being demoted to being Johnson’s human shield. But perhaps she felt invincible after her false portrayal of a single mother as a benefit “scrounger” on Newsnight in 2012 led to 27,000 complaints and a BBC apology, but did nothing to impede her media career. Compare and contrast that with Newsnight colleagues who attempted to scrutinise the wealthy, well-connected Jimmy Savile just months before, and claimed they paid with their BBC careers. But spreading myths and outright lies about benefit claimants, refugees or Muslims is largely consequence-free. It’s quite a different story when media figures target the powerful. When, in December, Boris Johnson sought to distract from “partygate” by escalating the war on “middle-class drug users”, he merely emphasised the establishment’s unofficial motto: rules for thee and not for me. It made his recent suggestion in parliament that the Labour frontbench are drug takers all the more bizarre: he’s admitted to taking drugs; so has his deputy, Dominic Raab; and so has Michael Gove – to cocaine, indeed, on several occasions. Coke may coat parliamentary latrines, but our country remains one in which Black drugs offenders are 1.5 times more likely to be jailed than a white offender, not that the latter group will include politicians. Our scandal-convulsed prime minister once boasted that nobody “stuck up for the bankers as much as I did” after the crash. Indeed, Johnson has been a longstanding and unapologetic champion of the wealthiest, who he once described as a “put-upon minority” who made a “heroic contribution”. They barely needed his defence. Following the financial crisis, 324 financiers were convicted of crimes after the financial system nearly collapsed in the US. In the UK, the number of bankers who went to prison was just five. Again: terrible behaviour, minimal consequences. There are good reasons why members of the establishment may believe their power and connections are a bullet-proof vest. Consider the fact that in the UK, you are 23 times more likely to be prosecuted for benefit fraud than tax fraud . Benefit fraud may inflict far less economic and social harm, but our society hysterically demands that it’s the sins of the poor that must be punished. When Cressida Dick faced demands to resign after her officers attacked a vigil for Sarah Everard last March – a rather more heavy-handed approach than the officers stationed at No 10 offered when government officials boozily frolicked – she must have known she’d brazen it out. After all, the Met had already avoided full accountability for police spies having relationships with women under false pretences and stealing the identities of dead children , the unlawful killing in 2009 of Ian Tomlinson, and the 2005 shooting of Jean Charles de Menezes – the latter in an operation headed by none other than Dick herself. Johnson may understandably be bewildered that he is suddenly facing the level of scrutiny he always deserved after getting away with so much for so long. In fact, much of the fourth estate has conspired to help construct his jovial, amiable persona. From the Evening Standard editor who was a personal friend when he was London mayor to Theresa May appointing him foreign secretary, he has always been helped to power. Now he is viewed as a liability. His support is melting away like a marshmallow over a flame. But self-serving attempts to paint him as an anomaly should be fiercely resisted. Johnson is the British establishment in its undiluted and unapologetic form. If he gets away with this, it will be another illustration of the truth that is as old as the establishment itself: that consequences are for the little guy, not for the powerful. Owen Jones is a Guardian columnistA Gunai/Kurnai woman who spent a decade working as a police officer has won Australia’s richest literary prize, for her “powerful” memoir detailing her experiences with racism and domestic violence. Veronica Gorrie, who worked in the Victorian and Queensland police forces, collected the $100,000 Victorian prize for literature at the Victorian Premier’s literary awards for her book Black and Blue: A Memoir of Racism and Resilience. The memoir, which was selected by Guardian Australia as one of the top 25 Australian books of 2021, also won the $25,000 category for Indigenous writing. Accepting the award on Thursday night, Gorrie said “truly wasn’t expecting this … I truly don’t feel like I deserve it.” She used her speech to appeal to the Victorian state government to raise the age of criminal responsibility. “No child should be locked up. It breaks my heart to know that it’s kids as young as 10 caged up right now without their family,” she said. The Melbourne-based writer Melissa Manning won the fiction category for her debut Smokehouse, a collection on interlinked stories set in her birthplace of southern Tasmania. Announcing the winners at Melbourne’s The Wheeler Centre on Thursday, Victoria’s creative industries minister, Danny Pearson, said the awards celebrated emerging artists as well as established writers. “The winning works tell stories that are urgent, eye-opening, poignant and powerful, and reflect the extraordinary talent we have here in Victoria and across the country,” he said. Gorrie’s Black and Blue documents her childhood in Bung Yarnda (Lake Tyers) in eastern Victoria and her early adult life as a struggling single mother and conflicted rookie cop. The book confronts corruption, racism, domestic violence and tackles a number of failures in Australian policing history, including the notorious 2004 Palm Island death in custody of Cameron Doomadgee, which fuelled a series of riots and ultimately led to a $30m class action settlement to victims 14 years later. Gorrie, who joined the police force in order to break the cycle of fear that law enforcement authorities had instilled in her family for generations, was medically discharged from the force in 2011. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The prize judges praised Gorrie for her simple yet captivating style of storytelling. “Free from pretension and condescension, through telling her story Gorrie challenges the reader to ask what they can do in their personal and professional lives to confront racism in all its guises,” the judges wrote. “The work is a demonstrated tale of strength, resilience and humour in settings where none of those attributes would normally exist.” The judges described Manning’s winning collection Smokehouse as “atmospheric, mesmerising stories by an incredibly skilled writer”. “Manning has created an entire world in this small Tasmanian town; a place glistening with pathos, empathy and the essence of human connection,” the judges said. “With an innovative structure, perfectly spare prose, and great emotional weight, Smokehouse is a celebration of ordinary lives made extraordinary.” The non-fiction prize went to the western Sydney artist, lawyer and women’s rights advocate Amani Haydar for her personal account of domestic violence, The Mother Wound. In 2015 Haydar’s mother was stabbed to death by the writer’s father. Judges described The Mother Wound as a heroic and critical portrayal of a “diasporic patriarchal cultural milieu as it intersects with a broader Australian patriarchal culture and legal system”. Dylan Van Den Berg, a Palawa writer from north-east Tasmania, won the drama prize for his play Milk, and the Victorian poet Maria Takolander won for her collection of poetry Trigger Warning. The prize for young adult writing was won by Felicity Castagna for her novel Girls in Boys’ Cars. The category winners each take home $25,000.BT has entered exclusive talks with the US pay-TV firm Discovery to create a joint venture business that will include BT Sport, which has rights to sports including the Premier League and Champions League. The joint venture, which BT expects will be operational later this year subject to regulatory approval, ends almost a year of uncertainty over the future of the telecoms company’s decade-old pay-TV sport operation. Discovery owns Eurosport, which broadcasts a wide range of sports including tennis and cycling and holds the pan-European rights to the Olympics. The decision to combine with Discovery, which in the past has considered bidding for the UK TV rights to the Premier League, is a blow to the sports streaming business Dazn. Backed by the billionaire Sir Leonard Blavatnik, Dazn, described as the “Netflix of sports”, pushed hard for a deal to buy BT Sport to fuel its plans to grow in the UK. “The proposed joint venture with Discovery would create an exciting new sports broadcasting entity for the UK and would act as a perfect home for our BT Sport business,” said Marc Allera, the chief executive of BT’s consumer division. “With a shared ambition for growth, as well as the combination of our world-class sports assets along with Discovery’s premium sports and entertainment content, our customers will benefit from even more content in more places.” BT, which has had to seek clearance from the Premier League and Champions League to push through the change in ownership, has also extended a reciprocal channel supply deal with Sky that is crucial to its sports broadcasting business until 2030. The telecoms company has spent billions on sports rights to drive the growth of BT Sport since it was launched a decade ago to stem the loss of millions of broadband customers enticed by its rival Sky’s offers bundling internet connectivity with sport and entertainment programming. The business succeeded in its job, although it only has a few million customers and turns just a small profit, and BT is now focused on its £15bn plans to roll out next-generation broadband and 5G mobile networks across the UK. Dazn said its plans for the UK remained unfinished but the deal it had been discussing with BT Sport was not commercially viable. “We remain fully committed to growing our business and investing in the UK, as you will see in the near future,” said Kevin Mayer, the chairman of Dazn. “On this occasion, however, the deal for BT Sport became uneconomical for Dazn. However, we respect that BT chose a different strategic path and wish BT, BT Sport and Discovery all the best for the future.” Despite the positive news, BT’s shares fell by 4% in early trading, making it the biggest faller among FTSE 100 stocks, as the company warned of a drop in full-year revenues as a result of a delayed Covid-19 recovery and ongoing supply chain issues. BT said it had revised its revenue forecast owing to a lag in expected performance in its global and enterprise operations, which focus on business-to-business customers, as companies struggle to get back on track. The company said it was suffering from a slowdown in expected business from companies, as well as some supply issues relating to equipment it needs from its own suppliers. “Everybody hoped this supply chain issue would resolve itself more quickly than it is,” said Philip Jansen, the BT chief executive. “We have managed it pretty well but in specific places, such as the large corporate area, it has been difficult to get hold of certain kit from our suppliers. They are short due to the global chip shortage and from a wider supply chain point of view. It will be fine but it does cause a little bit of softness (in revenues).” Jansen was asked whether he thought his new largest shareholder, the activist investor Patrick Drahi, intended to increase his holding further. Drahi, who raised his stake from 12% to 18% in December, can raise his stake further but under UK regulations cannot mount any potential takeover bid until June. “We have strong, big shareholders all of whom are 100% supportive of the direction of this business,” said Jansen. “[Drahi] hasn’t given any indication he wants to increase it further. He sees huge value in BT going forward.”Companies handed a combined £1.3bn in controversial fast-track Covid contracts with minimal scrutiny also claimed at least £1m in furlough grants, it can be revealed. Analysis of the accounts of companies that won lucrative emergency contracts to supply personal protective equipment (PPE) to the NHS during the height of the pandemic shows 12 also claimed funds to put staff on furlough at taxpayers’ expense. Many had no prior history of supplying PPE but received huge boosts in revenue after securing deals to supply items ranging from gowns to masks. Overall the scramble to obtain PPE resulted in the Department of Health and Social Care (DHSC) spending £9bn on personal protective equipment that was either substandard, defective, past its use-by date or dramatically overpriced. These furlough claims were legal under the terms of the £70bn job preservation scheme, but the revelations raise questions about the ethics of claiming taxpayer support while reaping windfall gains from lucrative state contracts. All 12 companies that claimed furlough grants had won PPE contracts via a so-called VIP lane, where approvals were fast-tracked often after a recommendation by ministers and government officials. The government spent £5bn on VIP lane contracts with 47 companies, but its use of the lane was found unlawful by the high court in last month. The London-based fashion brand Skinnydip, which built its reputation selling designer mobile phone cases, secured a £13m contract to supply PPE in May 2020 after a referral by the former Conservative party chairman Lord Feldman. That pushed it from a £1m loss in 2019 to a year of “record profitability” in 2020. It posted profits of £4.5m from revenues of £38m, more than double the previous year’s turnover, according to its annual report. The company, which had 15 retail stores as of 2019, also claimed at least £500,000 in furlough grants in 2020 to ensure “that our retail colleagues, whose place of work was closed for much of the year, continued to receive a monthly income, albeit at 80% of normal salary”. HMRC records show that Skinnydip’s furlough claims continued until at least last August. Other companies received contracts in 2020 that were worth several times their revenue for the whole of the previous year. Monarch Acoustics, a small, family-run furniture company based in Nottingham, claimed more than £200,000 in furlough grants. It won a PPE contract worth £29m – almost three times its total revenue in 2019 – after the former health secretary Matt Hancock referred it into the VIP fast lane. The result was a 4,700% jump in pre-tax profits, from less than £300,000 to £12.6m in 2020. The company continued to make furlough claims into 2021, receiving a further £25,000 to £70,000 between January and March. It is not possible to give the exact amount of furlough payments because they are reported in ranges by HMRC. Some of the companies that received both contracts and grants employ just a handful of people. Aventis Solutions is a Manchester-based recruitment firm that furloughed one of its three employees after winning an £18.5m contract to supply PPE via the high-priority channel. The firm’s director, Jamie Farrell, said the employee was a recruiter whose job was no longer needed after the pandemic shut down the recruitment side of the business, which had previously supplied non-clinical staff to the NHS, among others. He said: “Aventis Solutions Ltd has been a trusted supplier of the NHS for nine years and, during that time, has supplied PPE and other safety equipment on many occasions prior to the contract awarded by the Department of Health and Social Care. “At a time of unprecedented global demand and when the NHS was critically short of vital PPE equipment, our company was able to provide medical-grade masks from trusted suppliers and deliver within 14 days. “This was done at substantial financial risk to us, both as a business and personally to our company directors. There was no downpayment required from the DHSC, and at our own cost Aventis Solutions procured additional testing of all products, by an independent testing house, before delivery. “We are proud to have assisted the NHS in this way, and to have played this small part in the UK’s response to the Covid crisis.” Farrell added that Aventis’s prior PPE and safety equipment contracts, which numbered at least 20, had been with NHS hospital trusts, NHS provider organisations and clinical commissioning groups. Margaret Hodge, Labour MP and a former chair of the public accounts committee, said: “On top of the scandalous way in which our taxes were spent to give contracts to chums and allies, it is astonishing that companies that had benefited from this rigged system had the gall to claim more of our money through the furlough scheme. “The whole point of the furlough scheme was to rescue companies from bankruptcy and protect jobs, not to protect companies who had already profited massively at the taxpayer’s expense. “This whole saga demonstrates the absurdity of Boris Johnson’s claim that he successfully managed the pandemic.” A government spokesperson said: “Furlough provided a lifeline to more than a million businesses across the UK and protected nearly 12 million jobs – with businesses passing all the money they received from the scheme on to employees. “We also took swift and decisive action to secure PPE to protect health and social care staff. All contracts underwent rigorous financial, commercial, legal and policy assessment.” For some furlough-claiming companies, assessing the impact of Covid contracts on their finances is complicated by opaque corporate structures. Unispace Global Limited, a UK subsidiary of the Australian office designer Unispace, was identified by the National Audit Office as one of the biggest beneficiaries of the government’s emergency Covid scheme, having received £680m in PPE contracts after referral to the VIP lane. The company went on to claim up to £20,000 in furlough grants in March and April 2021. However, despite DHSC contracts that show Unispace Global’s address and company number, the £680m has not appeared in the company’s revenue figures, which declined from £88m in 2019 to £64m in 2020. A spokesperson for Unispace Global referred the Guardian to another company, Santé Group (formerly Unispace Health), saying: “Unispace cannot comment on this matter, as ownership has changed and the firm is no longer affiliated with Unispace Health in any way. Unispace, not including Unispace Health or Santé, was acquired by the private equity firm PAG in February 2021.” Santé Group is a network of at least four companies belonging to the brothers Gareth and Charles Hales, the founders and former majority shareholders of Unispace. All were incorporated after the start of the pandemic. Skinnydip, Monarch and Santé did not respond to requests for comment. A government spokesperson said: “The government contracted with Unispace Global Ltd for the procurement of PPE and all products ordered were delivered.” The headline of this article was amended on 3 February 2022 to correct the amount of money claimed in furlough grants.A cyber-attack targeting KP Snacks could lead to a shortage of some of Britain’s most popular snacks including Hula Hoops, McCoy’s and Tyrrells crisps, Butterkist, Skips, Nik Naks and KP Nuts. The company has sent a letter to stores saying the ransomware attack, which has crippled its IT and communications systems, could lead to supply issues until “the end of March at the earliest” as it “cannot safely process orders or dispatch goods”. The warning message, sent out through the groceries wholesaler Nisa, said KP Snacks was going to limit the size of orders to retailers so it could “manage what stock we do have”, according to the website Better Retailing, which first published news of the attack. “On Friday 28 January we became aware that we were unfortunately victims of a ransomware incident,” said KP Snacks in a statement. “As soon as we became aware of the incident, we enacted our cybersecurity response plan and engaged a leading forensic information technology firm and legal counsel to assist us in our investigation. “Our internal IT teams continue to work with third-party experts to assess the situation. We have been continuing to keep our colleagues, customers, and suppliers informed of any developments and apologise for any disruption this may have caused.” The hackers are threatening to release information stolen from the company’s IT systems in order to try to force it into making a payment to decrypt its files to continue operations. “This is another example of the real-life consequences that ransomware can have, and they are becoming more common than ever before,” said Carl Wearn, head of risk and resilience at cybersecurity firm Mimecast. “Our recent report found that organisations in the UK experienced an average of 3,000 ransomware attacks in the last two years, at a rate of four attacks per day.” In October, the crisp firm Walkers was hit by IT issues that resulted in gaps on shelves that lasted through to the end of December. In December, the Spar wholesaler and store operator James Hall was also hit by severe IT issues after a cyber-attack affected more than 600 independent and centrally owned Spar stores across the north of England, forcing many to close temporarily. Jeremy Fleming, the head of UK intelligence agency GCHQ, disclosed in October that the number of ransomware attacks on British institutions had doubled in the previous year. The impact on the British economy is estimated to run into the hundreds of millions of pounds, mostly stemming from the costs of immobilising businesses. Fleming said locking files and data on a user’s computer and demanding payment for their release had become increasingly popular among criminals because it is proving to be highly profitable. “It works,” he said, speaking at the Cipher Brief annual threat conference last year. “It just pays. Criminals are making very good money from it and are often feeling that that’s largely uncontested.” In June, meat producer JBS, which supplies more than a fifth of all the beef in the US, paid a £7.8m ransom to regain access to its computer systems. The same month, the US’s largest national fuel pipeline, Colonial Pipeline, paid £3.1m to ransomware hackers after they locked the company’s systems, causing days of fuel shortages that paralysed transportation on the east coast. Then in July, hackers attacked software firm Kaseya, demanding £50m, which resulted in hundreds of supermarkets closing in Sweden because their cash registers didn’t work. “Cybercriminals are still little more than exploitative bullies looking for easy money,” said Andy Barratt, UK managing director at cybersecurity consultancy Coalfire. “There is no better way to have a ransom paid, than by promising a business it will lose more in potential profits than if they simply pay the fee. Wherever there is financial, personal, or project-related data there is always a risk.” However, the UK’s National Cyber Security Centre (NCSC) has warned that even if firms pay up “there is no guarantee that you will get access to your computer or your files”. Last week, the NCSC, part of GCHQ, urged British companies to bolster their digital security over concerns of possible Russian cyber-attacks linked to the growing political crisis in Ukraine. A cyber-attack on Ukraine government websites earlier this month warned the public to “be afraid and expect the worst”, which Ukraine said was orchestrated by Russia.February is supposed to be the pinnacle of football excellence. Next Sunday, the Cincinnati Bengals will return to the Super Bowl after 33 years behind second-year phenomenon Joe Burrow to play the LA Rams and Matthew Stafford, who has never been to the big game in his 13 years in the league. Keeping with the theme of football excellence, fans, players and the media will no doubt express gratitude to Tom Brady, who this week announced his retirement after 22 years in the NFL and had arguably the greatest career the game has ever seen. Still, the magic of the moment is lost to myself and my Black colleagues. We watch our white counterparts rightly win praise for the success that they have earned. We Black coaches and players, on the other hand, have to fight twice as hard to get half as far. We saw it with Colin Kaepernick taking a knee to bring awareness to social injustice against Black and brown people, and subsequently being blackballed from the league despite leading his team to the Super Bowl just a few years prior. Colin hoped to highlight the fact that that though we are all created equal, we are not all treated equally, and that needs to change. Now Brian Flores has taken up the same fight on the coaching side. Flores is suing the NFL over racial discrimination in an environment that he likens to “a plantation”, with rich white team owners profiting from the labor of young Black men. Flores’ lawsuit clearly struck a note and another Black coach, Hue Jackson, has come forward with his own allegations of discrimination (as well as claiming he was offered bonuses if his team lost). In a league focused on statistics like yards, touchdowns, sacks, and interceptions it’s easy to find numbers that back up Flores and Jackson’s claims of systemic racism. The NFL’s Rooney Rule states that teams must interview at least one minority candidate for head coaching vacancies. But, as Flores details in his lawsuit, these interviews are often undertaken with little chance of the minority candidate getting the job. The proof? When the Rooney Rule was instituted 20 years ago there were three Black head coaches in the NFL. Now there is one. More than a quarter of NFL teams have never even had a Black head coach. That includes one of the franchises named in Flores’ lawsuit, the New York Giants, who have existed for nearly 100 years in one of the most diverse cities on earth. It’s incredible that such a rule – whether it is effective or not – is needed in a league where more than two-thirds of players are Black. The imbalance leads players like me to the conclusion that, as Black people, we are valued by the league when we put our bodies and health on the line as players. But as soon as we offer our minds and leadership as coaches we are cast aside. We, as Black people, can be all things: players, coach, and owner; though an NFL team has never had all three at the same time. Having a leader with the same background and experiences as yourself is helpful. At the same time Black players are happy to play for white coaches if they are good leaders – no one could deny the skills of Bill Belichick, Andy Reid or Sean McVay. But we want to see that the NFL gives everyone the same chance of becoming a leader. The most significant currency in any sport, as with society as a whole, is opportunity. And as Black History Month starts, it appears that in the NFL if you’re a Black coach, you’re soon history. Earlier this season, we got a peek into the bigoted conversations that happen off the field when leaked emails showed former Raiders head coach Jon Gruden and other NFL figures using racist, homophobic and misogynistic language. And take it from someone who played in the league: we can be sure that those emails were a small glimpse into the mindset of many in football. When the next generation – my nephews or my future children – come to me and ask to play football, what will my reaction be? Will I be confident that whatever they put into the sport will be paid back? Or will I recoil and prepare them for the discriminatory and challenging road that a love of sports may subject them to? I find strength in the Black players, coaches, and people fighting to make the league a more inclusive place for all. Still, as with any movement, there needs to be allyship. Why are marginalized voices often asked to change systems of oppression that we did not create? Looking back on my time in the NFL, I wish I had done more to fight for justice off the field, as I fought for my teammates on the field. But I have hope. I choose to believe that as brave men like Flores come forward that the NFL, which I love so much, will continue to grow. This is not the same league that it was at its founding when Black players were banned from competing in the 1930s and 1940s. And regardless of this particular dispute, it will not be the same league moving forward. If you show up to play or coach and are qualified, respectful, hardworking, and team-oriented, you should be rewarded. I think we can all agree that we want to get what we have earned. I hope that as we lend our voices through essays, interviews, protests, platforms and donations, we can all agree on one thing: we as humans were all created equally and thus should be treated equally. If you’re a leader, you should have the chance to lead. RK Russell played in the NFL for the Dallas Cowboys and the Tampa Bay Buccaneers.A Morrison government report to the United Nations on the status of the Great Barrier Reef claims its approach to tackling climate change is among the best in the world and its management of the reef was “second to none”. But conservationists and scientists immediately hit back at the claim, saying the reef needed more protection and the government’s record in cutting emissions and cutting pollution over it was inadequate. Last week the Morrison government announced a $1bn reef funding package over the next nine years, including $580m for projects aimed at lowering pollution running into the reef. The report, delivered to the UN’s world heritage centre in Paris on Wednesday, was requested last year by the 21-country world heritage committee after it ignored Unesco’s recommendation to put the reef on an “in danger” list. The report comes as the reef is on the verge of a potential sixth mass bleaching event with scientists and conservationists hoping for enough cloud and rain in the next two weeks to cool the ocean off the north Queensland coast. Data from the Bureau of Meteorology has confirmed December was the hottest month on a record going back to 1900 for sea surface temperatures over the reef. The environment minister, Sussan Ley, said the government’s investments were “strengthening the resilience of the reef” and its management and scientific research was “second to none.” Unesco is due to carry out a monitoring mission to the reef in the first half of this year ahead of the world heritage committee meeting scheduled for July in Russia. Ley said on Thursday the mission would provide the committee with a “first-hand insight” into the scientific research and management of the reef. Unesco’s recommendation the reef be placed on the “in danger” list was prompted by the affects of three mass bleaching events on the reef in 2016, 2017 and 2020. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The Morrison government staged a fierce lobbying effort to prevent the listing, with Ley flying to Europe on a government jet while Canberra-based ambassadors travelled to Queensland for a snorkelling trip on the reef. The government argues climate change impacts should not be used as justification for world heritage sites being placed on the list. The world heritage committee requested the report and raised concerns that progress on improving pollution levels and water quality across the reef was too slow. New plans needed to address “the threat posed to the property by climate change”, the committee said. In its UN submission, the government said an update to water quality monitoring – which has not yet been made public – “will show that some of the targets in the reef have already been met or exceeded”. The most recent report on reef water quality, using data up to 2019, suggested the federal and state governments were well behind meeting many of the 2025 targets and the adoption of voluntary programs among farmers to improve land management practices was low. Ley said global action on climate change was needed, but work to support scientists, farmers, traditional owners and tourism was vital “to ensure the long-term health of our iconic Great Barrier Reef”. Associate prof Scott Heron, an expert on reef science at James Cook University, said: “We see on the reef that many water quality targets have not been met, despite a decade of targeted awareness around that.” The Greens ocean spokesperson, Peter Whish-Wilson, said the report was “a stunning work of spin” that suggested the reef’s future was rosy, “when we all know just one more marine heatwave would devastate any tentative recovery”. The Greenpeace Australia Pacific climate campaigner, Martin Zavan, said the government’s submission “reeks of hypocrisy” because it had refused to update its 2030 climate targets before last year’s Glasgow summit. Richard Leck, the head of oceans at WWF Australia, said the government’s $1bn pledge was welcome, but it was a “continuation of existing funding” rather than a significant increase. He said in 2021 Unesco had asked the government to deliver an emissions reduction plan that was consistent with keeping global heating to 1.5C. Analysts have said the government’s current 2030 emissions reduction targets are more aligned with global heating of 3C by the end of the century, rather than 1.5C. Lissa Schindler, Great Barrier Reef campaigner at the Australian Marine Conservation Society, said until the Morrison government developed a credible climate change plan, it could not claim to have a “proper plan for the reef”. Jon Day, a former federal government official on world heritage, now a researcher at James Cook University, said the report would be used to lobby members of the committee in the lead up to the next meeting in July. “They will be taking these highlights to everyone on the committee and using it to make it sound as if they really, really care. I think they do care, but the reality is they don’t care enough.”Fifa’s plans for a biennial World Cup have come under a coordinated ambush from International Olympic Committee members in Beijing, with one warning it would create “immeasurable damage” to global sport. Three delegates in a row at the 139th IOC congress in Beijing stepped up to attack Gianni Infantino’s controversial idea before the IOC president Thomas Bach intervened to say that the Fifa president – who was due in Beijing – had not shown up and that further criticism should wait. Those critical of Fifa’s plan included the National Olympic Committees of Africa president, Mustapha Berraf, who claimed it would have a “heavy impact” on the continent and football in general. “The plan would create immeasurable damage and would put sport in danger and in particular football,” said Berraf. “It would simply push away other sports and relegate them to the back benches – which is unacceptable – and create a rift between women’s and men’s sport, and be a setback to our aim of creating equity and parity for all sports.” He also pointed out that footballers were “not robots”, adding: “I make the request to put an end to this endeavour which is incompatible with our Olympic values.” Berraf’s intervention was particularly notable given that Infantino, who is also an IOC member, last week claimed that his biennial World Cup proposal could help prevent African migrants from finding “death in the sea”. Nenad Lalovic, head of United World Wrestling, and Ryu Seung-min, a member of the IOC Athletes’ Commission and a former Olympic table tennis gold medallist, also condemned the idea. “Football should cooperate in solidarity with other sports and International Federations,” Ryu said. “Sport is for all and we need more solidarity among sport.” However, Bach then stepped in to reveal that Infantino had cancelled his visit to Beijing two days earlier, and that any discussions should take place with Infantino present. “We would like to discuss this with the Fifa president but this is not possible because he cancelled his visit to Beijing the day before yesterday,” Bach said. “We should not discuss this now on a wider scale on this issue in his absence in respect for our colleague. “If you agree, we will try to take contact with him again and forward these comments which have been made by Mr Berraf, Mr Lalovic and Mr Ryu to him and Fifa.”The news that the first HRT product will be made available over the counter comes as the government is gearing up for the launch of its Women’s Health Strategy this spring. The review of women’s health has been a long time coming: it follows a string of women’s healthcare scandals over several decades, including vaginal mesh and epilepsy medication that harmed unborn babies, and the stark finding in Sir Michael Marmot’s 2020 review that women’s life expectancy in the poorest parts of the UK has declined for the first time in 100 years. Some wondered if the latest exercise would be a token gesture. The decision is a promising indication that it will be more than that. Making vaginal oestrogen tablets – a product called Gina – available over the counter is fairly uncontroversial and a sensible place to start. The drug is used to treat vaginal dryness, a symptom estimated to affect up to 80% of menopausal women and which can cause irritation and pain during sex. The drug can also lower the risk of urinary tract infections, which affect some women more frequently during the menopause and often need treatment with antibiotics. And because it only has a tiny dose of locally acting hormones, it carries none of the risks of global-acting HRT, such as breast cancer and blood clots, making it safe to take indefinitely. “Nobody talks about vaginal dryness,” said Paula Briggs, a consultant in sexual and reproductive health at Liverpool Women’s Hospital, who has welcomed the prospect of the HRT product being dispensed over the counter. “Women accept it as part of ageing and it doesn’t have to be. This is an area where we could massively improve quality of life.” A public consultation, ahead of the launch of a Women’s Health Strategy, found that for women aged 40-59 the menopause was the most common health priority. There are suggestions that the government is poised to take action in other areas, with an announcement this week that it plans to ban virginity testing and hymen repair surgery, which is offered at some private clinics. There are other relatively straightforward steps that could be taken, such as making the provision of abortion pills at home – an emergency measure brought in during the pandemic – a permanent arrangement. The amended rules are set to expire on 30 March. However, there are also deeper changes in health provision that will be required to more fully address the wide range of health inequalities faced by women. The 2020 Cumberlege inquiry identified a culture among medical professionals in which serious medical concerns have been dismissed as “women’s problems” as underpinning some of the failings in women’s health provision. Others have highlighted systemic issues that mean that chances to improve women’s health are routinely missed. For instance, women who suffer from pre-eclampsia during pregnancy are at a far higher risk of heart disease later in life, but are not always offered interventions aimed at improving long-term cardiovascular health. There is also fractured commissioning, that means, for instance, that a woman who needs a hormonal coil to treat menopause symptoms cannot be treated at a sexual health clinic. Some areas of women’s health, such as treatment for endometriosis, have been acutely hit by the backlogs created during the pandemic. And there are significant disparities in experiences and outcomes between women, depending on where they live, ethnicity, education and wealth. Tackling these issues is a far more ambitious task, but, experts hope, is the motivation for having an over-arching strategy rather than making a handful of one-off policy changes. Dr Edward Morris, president of the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists, said: “This isn’t about getting it right for those who know where it is, it’s about getting it right for everybody.” • This article was amended on 3 February 2022. The vaginal oestrogen tablet product is called Gina, not Gina-10.At the beginning of the year, Israel’s foreign minister Yair Lapid reflected on the diplomatic challenges for 2022. “We think that in the coming year, there will be debate that is unprecedented in its venom and in its radioactivity around the words ‘Israel as an apartheid state’,” he told Israeli journalists. “In 2022, it will be a tangible threat.” Lapid pointed to two United Nations investigations he said were likely to conclude that Israel’s governance of occupied Palestinian territory amounts to the crime of apartheid under international law. Several Israeli and international human rights organisations have reached exactly that view, including Amnesty International with the release of a report this week, Israel’s Apartheid Against Palestinians: a Cruel System of Domination and a Crime Against Humanity. Israel is also facing an international criminal court investigation into actions in the occupied territories, such as the confiscation of Palestinian land to build Jewish settlements, that Amnesty International and others have said breach international laws against apartheid. But Israel is also concerned that the breaking of the longstanding taboo in the US on comparing its rule over the Palestinians to white South Africa’s racist repression of its black population is evidence of a slower-moving – but potentially more dangerous –threat: the fracturing of once rock-solid backing for Israel within its most important ally. The Israeli foreign ministry’s director general, Alon Ushpiz, placed protecting longstanding bipartisan support for the Jewish state in the US at the top of a list of Israel’s diplomatic priorities this year as opinion polls show eroding support among Democrats, in part driven by changing narratives about the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. For years, polls showed that Democrats sympathised with the Israelis at twice the rate of support for the Palestinians. But since the Israeli assault on Gaza in 2014, backing for the Jewish state has fallen and support is now about evenly divided. That change is accentuated among younger Americans, with adults under 35 far less well-disposed towards Israel than older generations. A separate survey last June found that half of Democrats want Washington to shift policy toward more support for the Palestinians. Support for Israeli government policies is even falling within the US Jewish community, with a poll last year finding that 25% of American Jews agreed that “Israel is an apartheid state”. There is little evidence that Washington’s backing for Israel, including the largest amount of (mostly military) US aid given to any country, is in any immediate danger. But pro-Israel groups are increasingly concerned at the diminishing effectiveness of their attempts to portray the Jewish state as yearning for peace but confronted by Palestinian terrorism. That claim has increasingly been challenged by what Americans can now see on social media, particularly video of Israeli attacks and maltreatment of Palestinians. Israel’s 2014 assault on Gaza – which killed about 1,500 Palestinian civilians and more than 600 fighters, and destroyed schools and homes, while Hamas rocket attacks killed six civilians in Israel and 67 Israeli soldiers died in the fighting – helped solidify the view of an all-powerful state unleashing destruction against a largely defenceless population. The rise of Black Lives Matter has fuelled the drive to frame the Palestinian cause as a civil rights issue of resistance to Israeli domination. “People can see for themselves what’s happening in a way they didn’t before,” said Sarah Leah Whitson, the former director of Human Rights Watch’s Middle East division who worked on the group’s report, A Threshold Crossed, Israeli Authorities and the Crimes of Apartheid and Persecution. “It’s made it harder, particularly in the United States, for the emotional defenders of Israel, who’ve had this mythology about Israel and the kibbutz and sowing the land and this sort of fantasy of what Israel’s like, confronted with the reality of what they see in front of their faces.” Israel’s attempts to push back against the shifting narrative have been undermined by its own actions, including the passing of the “nation state” law in 2018 which enshrined Jewish supremacy over the country’s Arab citizens. Israel’s prime minister, Naftali Bennett, and members of his cabinet have a long history of opposition to a Palestinian state. Israel can still count on solid support at the top of the American power structure. But Democratic sympathies were not strengthened by Israel’s former prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu, who was openly hostile to President Barack Obama while publicly aligning with the Republican leadership in Congress. His embrace of President Donald Trump’s “peace plan” two years ago further alienated some Democrats who denounced it as a smokescreen for Israeli annexation in the West Bank that would create Palestinian enclaves reminiscent of “Bantustan”, black homelands in South Africa. Daniel Seidemann, an Israeli lawyer who has spent decades exposing Israel’s land grab and settlement policy in occupied East Jerusalem, recently travelled to Washington to gauge Israel policy. “The sands are shifting in the United States, in the Congress, in public opinion, and in the American Jewish community, and the apartheid discourse is part of it. There is a centre but that centre is not going to hold,” he said. “Increasing numbers of people abroad are beginning to see Israel as an apartheid state and a pariah state, and Israelis are increasingly fearing that.” • This article was amended on 3 February 2022. An earlier version referred to three Israeli teenagers being killed in Hamas rocket attacks; the three were killed by Hamas abductors in the West Bank.For two and a half years, it was like waiting for Godot. But the levelling up white paper is finally here. So was it worth the wait? First, the good points: the plan’s ambitions are clear, and there are things to praise within it. For one, the notable shift of focus to improving living standards rather than simply targeting growth. Legally binding “missions” to improve wellbeing across the country, close the gap in healthy life expectancy, narrow the attainment gap and boost wages and jobs are all a step forward. They show that the government has finally understood that its previous strategy of pursuing growth above all else failed to improve the lives and livelihoods of people in the country that most needed it. Equally important are plans to create regional mayors across the country with new powers to deliver economic change. But full details on what powers will actually be devolved are glaringly absent. And that is the problem with the white paper: the ambition is clear, but how the government will deliver on its promise to close the divide is still unclear. Over 300 pages of policies cobbled together from across Whitehall that do more of the same simply won’t cut it. Recycled infrastructure spending, innovation hubs, and high street task forces are all well and good, but they simply repeat the old remedies that successive governments have tried and failed to close the divide. The bottom line is that levelling up simply won’t happen without a major shift in policy. For us at the New Economics Foundation, this must start with the devolution revolution that Michael Gove has promised. But rather than ad hoc devolution deals and centrally controlled funding pots for new schemes, we need a radical transfer of powers over transport, housing, skills, employment support, business support, climate change and local taxation from Whitehall to town halls. The challenges faced in Bradford or Manchester are different to those faced in Darlington or Barnsley. Pushing control over money and economic decisions to leaders that know their patch is the first step to levelling up. Local power and control must be matched by a big injection of investment into our communities. The government simply cannot level up on the cheap, especially after a decade of cuts to council budgets. Why not create a £15bn social infrastructure fund to plough much-needed investment into public services and local facilities that people depend on? Or bring together the government’s goal of net zero and levelling up? We know that there is no path to net zero without public investment. So why not invest £28bn a year into our communities to create green jobs, boost green industries and remake places? This would create a much-needed stimulus to local economies and enable places to revive their communities as they rapidly decarbonise. There must also be a new focus on boosting incomes and creating good jobs in the parts of the economy that are often overlooked but form the backbone of local economies. Sectors such as retail, hospitality and care exist in every place, and make up 63% of all jobs. An uplift to the national living wage to reflect the true cost of living, for instance, would push up wages in these low-paid sectors and put money into the local economy. Equally important will be a new focus on small and medium-sized enterprises that account for over half of the jobs created across the country and almost two-thirds of private sector jobs in the north-east and north-west. Access to finance, targeted business support and affordable rents will be key. There is no silver bullet to a problem that is as complex and difficult as closing the divide between people and places. But as real incomes in London have grown by £600 a year since 2019, compared to £90 in Yorkshire and Humber and £20 in the north-east, the country is being torn apart. The government must now shift from laudable pledges to action. Without a major shift in policy, levelling up will continue to elude it. Miatta Fahnbulleh is chief executive of the New Economics FoundationWhen the world is in crisis, where should we look for comfort? Given humanity’s dwindling religious beliefs, we are less likely than previous generations to see our lives as part of a grand cosmic plan, or believe that paradise awaits in the great beyond. All of which can make consolation – the idea that there is a point to existence, and therefore to our tragedy and suffering – that much harder to find. In his new book of essays, the Booker prize-shortlisted novelist, academic and erstwhile politician Michael Ignatieff examines the concept of solace over the centuries and how we might find it in our more secular age. “The challenge of consolation in our times,” he explains, “is to endure tragedy, even when we cannot hope to find a meaning for it, and to continue living in hope.” This is not a tract on how to improve your mental health or a guide to self-care. Rather, it’s a meditation on the nature of comfort, explored via a series of portraits of artists, writers and thinkers who have stood on the precipice of despair and sought consolation in difficult times. In his preface, Ignatieff recalls visiting a friend who was bereft following the death of his wife. The writer’s impulse was to offer comfort but words were not enough to alleviate his friend’s suffering, and so they mostly sat in silence. “To understand consolation,” Ignatieff observes, “it is necessary to begin with the moments it is impossible.” He is dismissive of our present-day use of therapy and medication and believes that mental health professionals “treat our suffering as an illness from which we need to recover. Yet when suffering becomes understood as an illness with a cure, something is lost.” His assertion casually overlooks the fact that there are those for whom such treatments are life-changing and, in many cases, life-saving. To tackle human suffering, Ignatieff would rather go back in time and study the examples set by our predecessors, first of which is Job, on whom God inflicts multiple cruelties to test his devotion, from slaughtering his cows and burning down his house to giving him the plague. Ignatieff is not religious but does respect religious traditions and parables. From the trials of Job, he sees a man who keeps faith in the face of despair. Elsewhere, he looks at the Roman statesman and philosopher Cicero who preached stoicism and self-control, and whose convictions were put to the test when his daughter, Tullia, died in childbirth. He also considers the art of El Greco, the music of Gustav Mahler, the letters of St Paul and the political convictions of Karl Marx. Like Max Weber, another case study here, Marx’s ideas were tethered not to a higher power but to the welfare of future generations. Ignatieff’s subjects are unapologetically high-minded – much as it could be fun to read him on the healing properties of Chic’s Good Times, or the films of Billy Wilder, popular culture doesn’t get a look-in, which is his prerogative. That the subjects are overwhelmingly white and male is more dispiriting, however. Just two women feature: the social worker and physician Cicely Saunders, who advocated for better end-of-life care and in 1967 founded St Christopher’s Hospice in London, gets a chapter to herself, while the Russian poet Anna Akhmatova, writer of Requiem, about the Great Purge of 1937, gets a paltry three pages. Ignatieff makes clear that his choices are personal, though his approach seems strangely blinkered. It feels significant that this book was started long before the pandemic, at a time when ideas about consolation might not have seemed as vital as they do now. So will it bring solace to the anxious reader? Well, yes and no. In Ignatieff’s gallery of the broken and bereaved, there is no escaping the ultimate trajectory that we are all on. Grim anecdotes also abound, from Cicero’s grisly execution, which involved having his head and hands cut off, and his severed tongue being stabbed with needles by Mark Antony’s wife, Fulvia, to Michel de Montaigne watching plague-ridden peasants digging pits to die in. If you think we’ve got it bad, the author seems to say, try watching a sick man climbing into his own grave. But there are also lessons to be taken from those who have faced enormous hardship and emerged with a greater understanding of themselves and their place in the world. Ignatieff’s aim in telling these stories is to remind us that we are not the first generation to encounter despair and to search for pathways through it. “What do we learn that we can use in these times of darkness?” he asks. “Something very simple. We are not alone and never have been.” • This article was amended on 5 February 2022. An earlier version incorrectly described Michael Ignatieff as a “Booker prize-winning novelist”. His book Scar Tissue was shortlisted in 1993. • On Consolation: Finding Solace in Dark Times is published by Metropolitan (£16.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Before the coronavirus pandemic swept through New York City like a foaming white storm surge in the spring of 2020 and irrevocably displaced the trajectory of her life, Hannah Davis was an expert in artificial intelligence and machine learning. She gave talks on her projects, which included working with a computer program that generated music from literature, at Ted conferences, technology expos, even the Library of Congress. Toward the end of March 2020, as the first wave was gathering speed and the number of new cases in the US was inching upward toward 20,000 a day, Davis was living in the Bedford-Stuyvesant neighborhood of Brooklyn – an area that would become one of the hardest-hit communities in the borough. She was stocking up on supplies one final time at a local grocery store before sheltering in place when she believes she got infected with Covid-19. In the days that followed, Davis, who is 33, experienced a debilitating array of symptoms that only partly matched the symptomatology broadcast by major media outlets and published by health agencies. While she registered a temperature of 100F and felt chills and fatigue, she was also experiencing headaches, tremors and neurological manifestations. When she traveled to a local emergency room, the doctor seemed to dismiss the non-respiratory symptoms she anxiously detailed, sending her home with a prescription for an albuterol inhaler. She scheduled a telehealth appointment with a neurologist to address her piercing headaches and the bewildering cognitive issues that were ravaging her productivity, but the physician suggested she was probably just suffering from symptoms of ADHD, which she’d been previously diagnosed with – which she found “really frustrating and concerning”. By 14 April, Davis had been sick for three weeks. By then, Covid-19 had become omnipresent, a second sun around which all our lives now orbited. The version of it Davis was experiencing, however, was completely absent from the sky. Scouring the web for anything that might validate her experience, she discovered an opinion article in the New York Times written by Fiona Lowenstein, titled We Need to Talk About What Coronavirus Recoveries Look Like. In it, Lowenstein recounted experiencing “fatigue, intense headaches, continued congestion, a sore throat, trouble focusing and short-term memory loss” a month out from her initial infection. The confusing constellation of symptoms, and the way they waxed, waned and evolved, looked all too familiar to Davis. She joined Lowenstein’s online support group for Covid-19 survivors, Body Politic. Visiting the group, which is hosted on Slack, was like walking into an overcrowded waiting room bustling with frightened patients whose escalating sense of internal crisis mirrored her own. Many were discussing everything the CDC, NIH, NIAID, CNN and Fox were not, including the unreliability of negative PCR tests and the lingering symptoms that were starting to look an awful lot like chronic illness. Though they had no way of knowing it at the time, members of the Body Politic were among the nation’s first “longhaulers” – and their condition was initially met with intense doubt from many. After all, the coronavirus was supposed to be a flu-like virus that subsided in a matter of days, with the worst cases lasting perhaps two weeks. Suffering from symptoms for longer was to be wading into uncharted territory, one that started evoking questions about stress, psychological health and personal credibility. ••• On 24 April, Davis found herself on the “research group” channel of the Body Politic. The group was created by Gina Assaf, a technology consultant, and she and others discussed the possibility of putting together a structured survey. “I was very motivated by the idea that, if there was a reason we were still sick, then I could fix it,” Assaf said. Davis, who had experience in data analysis and machine learning, immediately volunteered to help glean the responses. Several other people, including Lisa McCorkell, a policy analyst, Hannah Wei, a product developer with experience in computer science, and Athena Akrami, a neuroscientist at University College London, also offered their respective expertise. After 12 days, Assaf closed the survey; by then, it had been filled out by 640 members. A deep trove of data now in hand, the fledgling research team went about analyzing it. Though it was never peer-reviewed and only included one traditional research scientist (Akrami), the report nevertheless featured a relatively sizable data set, sophisticated quantitative analysis, and a number of highly legible visualizations illuminating the group’s findings. The report offered a number of stark revelations: for one, it blew open the notion that that illness was limited to the respiratory system. It listed 62 self-reported symptoms, including not only chest tightness, dry cough and elevated temperature but also brain fog, concentration issues, memory loss, dizziness, insomnia and even seizures. Over 90% of the respondents had not yet fully recovered. The group also found that the participants had less than a one-in-five chance of making a recovery by day 50 of their illness. They wondered whether the report could influence a national conversation tucked snugly inside a familiar binary framework: life on one hand, and death on the other. The group – which by then had assumed the name Patient-Led Research Collaborative to reflect the history of patient participation in medical research – worked with Lowenstein and the Body Politic to put the report in front of journalists and patient organizations. On 13 May, two days after the report was released, the prominent journalist and HIV-Aids activist Ann Northrop mentioned it on her podcast, Gay USA. Later that month, the Atlantic science writer Ed Yong interviewed several members of the group for a piece he was putting together on longhaulers. The story, which was published in early June and would eventually be read over a million times, linked to the report and discussed its findings over several paragraphs. “They absolutely know more about this condition than academics do,” Yong told me. “I think they were asking interesting questions, they had a big data set. To this day, this is one of the only groups that has really tried to look at the arc of these symptoms over time.” But Yong also lamented the fact that members of the PLRC and other longhaulers were facing a steep uphill battle in convincing skeptics that their malady was real. “One of the central things about long Covid is that people are disbelieved,” Yong said. “They are told that their symptoms are in their heads, or that they’re just suffering from anxiety, that they’re going through psychosomatic stuff. It’s all the same attitude that people with ME/CFS and other similar illnesses have had to deal with for a long time.” Yong’s piece – part of the series that won him a 2021 Pulitzer prize in explanatory reporting – would prove to be a crucial spotlight. “From there, we started getting calls from the CDC and the NIH,” Davis recalled. Suddenly, the lines of communication with officials at America’s foremost health agencies were wide open, and the PLRC’s data ultimately “informed a lot of the early CDC documentation on post-Covid sequelae”, Davis said. When I spoke to Jennifer Chevinsky, an epidemic intelligence service officer with the CDC, she confirmed that her team consulted the PLRC while writing the interim guidance for post-Covid conditions. “Their work was used to better understand illness in patients that were younger and previously in good health,” she said. In early September 2020, the NIH’s director, Francis Collins, dedicated an entire blogpost to the “citizen scientists” of the PLRC who had published what he called the “first detailed patient survey” investigating long Covid. By the end of that summer, McCorkell recalled, they had “seats at tables that we previously did not have”. ••• In April 2021, the UK’s Office for National Statistics put out data showing that over a million citizens were experiencing long Covid. And most of these cases were not mild, either. The report notes that “an estimated 674,000 people reported that their symptoms have negatively impacted on their ability to undertake their day-to-day activities”. Those are astonishing figures for a country whose population is slightly more than one-fifth of America’s, offering a sharp counterpoint to the notion that the vast majority of individuals make full, expedient recoveries from their bouts with the virus. (While it’s too early to tell whether the Omicron variant triggers long Covid in numbers equal to those of its predecessors, it’s all but certain that the total number of longhaulers will increase after the surge has subsided.) Discrediting uncommon conditions is hardly a phenomenon novel to the age of Covid. Multiple sclerosis has been around for hundreds of years – descriptions of the illness date back to the 14th century – and scientific research into it started at least as early as the 1860s, when Jean-Martin Charcot, who would come to be known as the father of neurology, first described “la sclérose en plaques” – sclerotic plaques, or lesions, in the brain and spinal cord. Nevertheless, for a century following Charcot’s revelations, women presenting with the classic symptoms of MS were often diagnosed with hysteria instead. Though MS is now estimated to be up to four times more prevalent among women than men, by the middle of the 20th century it was still being diagnosed equally among both genders. But while doctors were diagnosing men with a neurological disease in which the body’s own immune system attacks myelin (the protective sheath wrapped around nerve fibers), most of the women presenting with the same symptoms were understood to be suffering from a psychological malady that was somaticizing into a host of physical ills. It was a double-standard that flourished, at least in part, because the people who stood to lose the most from it had been stripped of their believability. They were, after all, deemed by their own physicians to be crazy. More recently, those suffering from myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome, or ME/CFS – a condition I myself live with – have been subjected to similar misdiagnosing and psychologizing. The illness, despite thousands of scientific papers attesting to the biological validity of the condition, remains a Gordian knot for which no conclusive diagnostic markers exist. When it cropped up in the hundreds in several small communities in Lake Tahoe in the 1980s, it was widely mocked and summarily dismissed by the local media. For years, the mysterious, polarizing “Tahoe flu” was regarded by many doctors with cagey skepticism at best; at worst, they were convinced something bizarre and even untoward had happened in the Sierra Nevada Mountains, perhaps a modern episode of mass hysteria. “Young doctors in the 1980s were often advised by senior physicians not to become associated with an illness that didn’t yet have a scientific explanation, because their efforts to try to help their patients could be viewed by others doctors as quackery,” said Anthony Komaroff, a professor of medicine at Harvard Medical School and one of the foremost experts on ME/CFS. According to Komaroff, “there is no longer a basis for being skeptical about whether there are underlying biological abnormalities in ME/CFS”. Those who remain wary of the illness, he believes, “simply have not read the published scientific literature on the subject”. Though the chapter largely faded into obscurity, it left an air of dubiousness wreathed around ME/CFS for decades: here was a condition with a strange, vaguely off-putting history, a phalanx of detractors, and patients whose credibility had been repeatedly called into question. Perhaps, many doctors seemed to conclude in the 1990s and 2000s, the best way to think about such a quagmire of a condition was to not think about it all – to steer clear of diagnosing it, and generally avoid the burden and stickiness of acknowledging its existence at all. The way physicians discuss relatively unknown, unestablished conditions can quickly become dyed into the wool, codified among general practitioners and specialists and understood as red flags delineating what conditions might not actually be biological illnesses at all – and therefore best avoided or referred to a psychiatrist. When presented with a condition they know little about or, worse, a cluster of symptoms they’ve never encountered before, many doctors have historically done one of two things. Either they’ve psychologized the malady, attributing it to a psychiatric cause – hysteria, conversion disorder, somatization – or they’ve assured the patient that there’s nothing actually wrong with them, and they just need to relax and rest. “A real thing that happens in medicine a lot of times is that when we don’t understand something,” said David Lee, an ER physician at NYU, “we just try to explain it away rather than accept that, ‘Hey, maybe we just don’t understand this.’” Or, as Harvard pulmonary physician Jason Maley put it, “I think that there’s definitely a risk, if there isn’t a rigorous description of a condition, for people to assume it’s not real, or it’s anxiety, or it’s not a big deal.” The term now routinely employed to describe this phenomenon is gaslighting. Physicians hold a great deal of authority in a society with a predominantly reverential stance toward them. In part because of their status, acquiescing to the limits of their knowledge is not a practice that comes naturally to most doctors. By telling patients that the physical symptoms they’re experiencing are conversions of their psychological ills, clinicians are effectively releasing themselves of their obligation to treat conditions with complicated etiologies. Instead, they’re passing the buck back on to the sufferer. That such a maneuver is destructive to the patient practically goes without saying. When a person is told that her pain, fatigue, visual disturbances or cognitive dysfunction is a manifestation of psychological illness, she is forced into a position of confusion, vulnerability and self-recrimination. “It causes trauma,” Davis said. “It causes medical PTSD.” After all, when patients are told that their symptoms either don’t exist or are all just the florid projections of a delusional mind, what are they supposed to do with that information? Referrals to psychiatrists notwithstanding, the practice creates a clinical dead-end, leaving patients with no coherent treatment plan and zero actionable steps to take toward their own recovery. It’s not just that a psychosomatic diagnosis is offensive to many people because of its troubled history and dismissive implications; it also discards them into medicine’s wastebasket. The downstream effects of medical gaslighting mean that legitimate biological diseases are marginalized, to the point where clinicians become wary of taking them too seriously for fear that the aura of skepticism that plagues the condition will come to stain them, too. It can take decades for sufferers to slough off the stigma – the effluvium of doubt, the condescension and contempt, the faint but unmistakable intimations of madness. ••• This past August, I spent several days visiting Davis at her home in Brooklyn, in the borough’s industrial Gowanus neighborhood. Aside from two trips a week to grab groceries and run errands, daily walks, and the occasional get-together with a friend, Davis rarely leaves the two-bedroom apartment she shares with her partner, Myk Bilokonsky. The entrance, framed by two black bookcases lined with copies of authors ranging from Dostoyevsky and Joyce to Philip K Dick and Neil Gaiman, led into a modestly sized living room where tabletops were cluttered, variously, with plants, supplements, orange prescription bottles and the odd Rider Tarot deck. A thin, unaffected smile penciled over her fair-complexioned face, Davis greeted me in what I assumed were her pyjamas – she was barefoot, wearing a graphic tee and baggy cotton pants. It was an outfit she would wear different iterations of each day I visited her. Though a few symptoms had abated over the previous year, Davis was still grappling with debilitating cognitive dysfunction, memory loss, low-grade fever, and postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome, a condition that causes a person’s heart rate to spike when they stand up or walk around. Nearly a year and a half had passed since she first developed symptoms from the coronavirus, but she was nowhere closer to returning to her fulfilling career. “I miss it,” Davis said. “I haven’t admitted to myself that it’s over.” Although Davis is not paid in her capacity as one of the co-leads and co-founders of the PLRC, the position is, for all intents and purposes, her full-time job (to pay her bills, she relies on Bilokonsky, a computer programmer, and a few small stipends from her research work with other organizations). She and other members of the team have started publishing research in academic journals with increasing regularity – including a recent collaboration with the National Covid Cohort Collaborative – and are continuing to pursue projects that will progress through the traditional peer-review process. In addition to the data analysis she carries out for these research papers, Davis participates in several Zoom calls every single day. In the short time I visited her, she had calls with the American Academy of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation; the World Health Organization; the Department of Health and Human Services; and the Council for Medical Specialty Societies, among others. Even though long Covid has stripped her of so much of her sharpness, energy and intellectual vibrancy, she quietly remains dedicated to furthering research on her condition. “I am walking around with a lot of grief,” Bilokonsky said during one afternoon conversation over mugs of black coffee. “I fundamentally see her as having lost a lot of her irreplaceable value, and that meant a lot to her. I see that her ongoing health problems are not resolving, and are possibly in some cases getting worse. And the result is that I’m trying to do my best in what I consider to be a pretty horrific situation.” The past year of research forms a picture of a condition that’s wreaking havoc on people’s functionality – think exhausted and enfeebled, housebound and sometimes bedbound – far away from the overburdened hospitals and jammed intensive care units that absorb so much media attention. But go online, and you will be witness to a theater of commiseration. One subreddit, r/covidlonghaulers, includes more than 23,000 members, many of whom appear to be living with families and social networks who meet their plight with emaciated smiles and flittering eyes, betraying bewilderment at why they can’t simply move on with their lives (as though chronic illness were a self-destructive act of volition). Others are sucked into the convolutions of the healthcare system, an unforgiving labyrinth of debt, dead-ends and doubt. As one user writes, “I’ve seen rheumatology and endocrinology with no answers. My PCP just recommends the ER for psych evals, he thinks it’s all mental.” On Facebook, meanwhile, the support groups are too numerous to count, and collectively feature hundreds if not thousands of new posts every day. In March 2021, Davis co-wrote an opinion piece with Fiona Lowenstein for the New York Times. “Long Covid is not a footnote to the pandemic or a curious human-interest story,” they declared, but rather “could be one of the largest mass disabling events in modern history”. In December of last year, the PLRC put out a second study on long Covid on the site medRxiv, which makes unpublished academic research available to the public (known as “preprint”, the paper would later go through the full peer-review process and be formally published in the Lancet’s open access clinical journal). The second paper is larger, deeper and more rigorous in almost every way. It analyzes survey responses from more than 3,700 participants representing 56 different countries. The PLRC paper does not purport to demonstrate that Covid-19 evolves into long Covid in a specific percentage of cases; it instead analyzes the insidious sprawl of sequelae associated with long Covid. Describing more than 200 symptoms affecting 10 organ systems, the paper serves as a floor-to-ceiling window into what it actually means to be living with the amorphous syndrome. Two months after its publication, in February Frances Collins, NIH director, directly referenced the study in an announcement that Congress had approved $1.15bn in funding for research “into the prolonged health consequences of SARS-CoV-2 infection”. ••• Despite the spate of new studies and grim boom of support groups, there remains a contingent of Americans highly dubious of the condition. In an opinion piece for the Wall Street Journal published in March of 2021, psychiatrist Jeremy Devine argued that the symptoms of long Covid can be “psychologically generated or caused by a physical illness unrelated to the prior infection”. The condition, he alleged, “is largely an invention of vocal patient activist groups. Legitimizing it with generous funding risks worsening the symptoms the NIH is hoping to treat.” Another opinion article, published in the New York Times in August and co-authored by physicians affiliated with Harvard Medical School and Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, respectively, assumed a similarly critical – though slightly more nuanced – stance. “Long Covid has come to mean different things in different contexts and to different people,” they wrote. “Psychosocial strain could be one contributing factor, particularly in light of the sharp increase in psychological distress amid the tragedy of the pandemic.” While Devine is ascribing something almost conspiratorial to the PLRC and the Body Politic, suggesting that they’re beguiling followers by offering an “attractive alternative” to the mental health issues they’re actually facing, Adam Gaffney and Zachary Berger, who authored the Times article, construe long Covid as more of a conflation of multiple psychological and physical ills. In both cases, though, we see the latest permutations of a longstanding insistence that complex biological syndromes are partially or completely “psychosomatic-symptom disorders”, as Devine put it. Yochai Re’em, a psychiatry resident at New York-Presbyterian hospital, says that “part of the urge to reject the notion that there is something called long Covid comes from the fact that many of the patients either are untested, or tested negative, and as a result there’s no objective sign that they actually experienced a Covid illness”. But, he added, the consistency in the symptom presentation of long Covid makes a psychosomatic diagnosis unlikely. “There are situations where people have some type of unresolved psychological conflict that then presents with physical symptoms. But usually that is such a unique individual process, and there aren’t unifying themes when a whole group of people presents that way. In other words, all the patients would present with symptoms that are very different. But in long Covid, there are common themes.” The PLRC itself has faced scathing skepticism. After the organization put out its second paper, a small but highly vocal group of detractors emerged almost immediately. After a link to the paper was approvingly retweeted by Eric Topol, a renowned cardiologist and the founder of the Scripps Research Translational Institute, several prominent medical personages voiced more disparaging views. Francois Balloux, a geneticist at University College London, tweeted that the preprint was “Mickey Mouse science at best”, presumably a shot – at least in part – at the fact that most of the co-authors were relatively young and unaffiliated with major research institutions (his tweet was later deleted). Gaffney, who more recently co-wrote the New York Times opinion piece, declared, “the ‘long Covid’ narrative needs revision, rapidly,” while questioning the fact that the majority of the study participants had either a negative PCR test or had never taken a test at all. Of the 3,762 participants, 2,742, or 70%, never received a positive test, a phenomenon that could be explained by the lack of testing availability and the prevalence of false negatives ranging from 1 to 30% in early 2020. (The paper demonstrated that there was no significant difference in symptoms between those who tested positive and those who tested negative or were not tested at all.) The first few detractors might have been more focused on the research methodology, but what succeeded them were anonymous attacks from agitators perturbed by the existence of an unabashedly vocal research group constituted entirely of female longhaulers. “It was just a shitshow for I don’t even remember how long,” Davis said. At one point, Davis received a dyspeptic, borderline deranged email divulging personal information about her – including her middle name – that she’d never put online. “There is nothing more obvious than the fact that you have Munchausen syndrome,” the message read. “Your symptoms are made up and are mentally ill derived! If you don’t stop this behavior in a very reasonable amount of time then I’m going to have you committed to a mental institution.” Others were drawn to invoking irrepressible old tropes about the chronically ill, including accusing Davis and the PLRC of seeking to profit from a fictitious condition. “Long Covid is a scam just like Lyme, chronic fatigue, adrenal fatigue,” one tweet read. “Grifters are pushing this and millions of dollars will be made.” During the demoralizing weeks-long conflagration, Davis and her colleagues learned that there are people who were angry, even personally offended that they were sick – a kind of medical gaslighting by way of internet mob mentality. It’s difficult to say what advantages a culture of illness denialism provides to society at large – perhaps the obfuscation of vexing truths that complicate the borders between what Susan Sontag famously termed the kingdom of the well and the kingdom of the sick. The PLRC, though, has aspired to serve as a forceful corrective to this enduring impulse. Helen Burstin, the CEO of an organization that represents 45 physician groups comprising more than 800,000 doctors across the US, said that without them, “we would have not learned as much about the symptomatology of long Covid as soon”. Ziyad Al-Aly, an epidemiologist at the VA studying long Covid, is more forthright. “When the history of medicine is going to write about this pandemic,” he said, “they’re going to be seen as really an essential piece that galvanized awareness that long Covid exists.” ••• On a Wednesday morning in August, I met Davis at her apartment to listen in on a Zoom call she was having with Zero Covid Thailand. The small organization had seen PLRC’s research and was working on raising awareness about long Covid in its own country, which had scarcely acknowledged the condition. “Your paper is very famous,” a young man who introduced himself as Lin told her. “We really, really appreciate the amount of work that you and PLRC and Body Politic have put into making, not just long Covid, but the patient perspective on long Covid heard.” It occurred to me that there was a chance the PLRC’s paper was the only published research on long Covid that they’d been exposed to at all. In Thailand, they told Davis, all the focus was on keeping the infection numbers low and battling mortality. Morbidity was rarely if ever addressed. As barbed and contentious a subject as long Covid could be in the United States, in other parts of the world its level of recognition was absolutely nil. A young woman whose Zoom screen read “Benz” spoke up. She’d gotten Covid about a month ago, had rested during a two-week self-quarantine, but was finding herself struggling to return to full strength. “I realized my recovery is not the same as getting the flu and recovering,” she said. A longtime practitioner of Ashtanga yoga, she now felt depleted and dazed after just 30 minutes of training. “It’s like I lost four years of practice,” she observed. “I really think this is kind of like a long Covid-ish situation for me, but I don’t know how to deal with it yet.” The expression on Davis’s face shifted, just slightly, her brows furrowing and her gaze long and full as she considered the prospect of another person becoming disabled by the condition that had so dramatically truncated the bandwidth of her own life. She told Benz to practice pacing herself as often as she could, not force herself to exercise if her body was responding poorly to it, and join Body Politic as soon as she was able to. “I feel like I’ve been sick long enough where it’s very hard to hear,” she told me after the call. “I think it needs to get to a point where it’s recognizable by people, and people aren’t suffering in the dark like this.”The US decision to deploy more than 3,000 US troops in Germany, Poland and Romania is a “destructive step” that makes it harder to reach a compromise over Ukraine, Russia’s deputy foreign minister has said, as Moscow continues to build up its forces. Alexander Grushko said the move by Joe Biden would “increase military tension and reduce scope for political decision”, and would “delight” Ukrainian authorities, who would continue sabotaging the Minsk agreements “with impunity”. The Minsk agreements of 2014 and 2015 were designed to reach a political settlement in the east of Ukraine, including greater autonomy. The US said on Wednesday it was sending 1,700 troops from the 82nd Airborne Division to Poland, while a headquarters unit of about 300 from the 18th Airborne Corps will move to Germany and a 1,000-strong armoured unit was being transferred from Germany to Romania. The move is in response to Russia’s deployment of an estimated more than 125,000 troops within striking distance of the Ukrainian border, including nearly half of its available battalion tactical groups and support units. John Kirby, a Pentagon spokesperson, said the US movements were “designed to deter aggression and enhance our defensive capabilities in frontline allied states. We expect them to move in coming days.” Vladimir Putin “continues to add forces, combined arms, offensive capabilities; even over just the last 24 hours he continues to add in western Russia and Belarus, and in the Mediterranean and the north Atlantic”, Kirby added. “He has shown no signs of being interested or willing to de-escalate the tensions.” Meanwhile, the Nato secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, said on Thursday that Russia had been moving 30,000 combat troops and modern weapons to Belarus in recent days, Moscow’s biggest military deployment to the country since the end of the cold war. The deployment included Spetsnaz special operations forces, Su-35 fighter jets, dual capable Iskander missiles and S-400 air defence systems, Stoltenberg said. “All this will be combined with Russia’s annual nuclear forces exercise,” he added. The term “dual capable”, which Stoltenberg used for the Iskander missiles, is used to describe weapons meant for conventional and nuclear warfare. The moves come ahead of a fresh flurry of diplomacy. On Wednesday Boris Johnson warned Putin in a phone call that any further incursion into Ukraine would be “a tragic miscalculation”, according to Downing Street. The Kremlin account of the call said Putin had complained that his demand for security guarantees had not been met and accused the Kyiv government of “the chronic sabotage” of the Minsk agreements. On Thursday the Turkish president and wildcard of Nato diplomacy, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, will fly to Kyiv to offer himself again in the role of mediator between Ukraine and Russia. The Erdoğan mediation proposal has not yet been picked up by Russia but Jake Sullivan, the US national security adviser, and İbrahim Kalın, the chief adviser to Erdoğan, spoke on Tuesday about their commitment to “deter further Russian aggression against Ukraine”, according to a White House statement. France’s president, Emmanuel Macron, was also due to speak to Putin on Wednesday evening, their third conversation in less than a week. The German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, said on Wednesday night that he would meet Putin in Moscow “soon”, without providing a precise date. Scholz, who faces criticism at home and abroad for acting too passively over the Ukraine crisis, said “endangering the territorial sovereignty and integrity of Ukraine would come at a very high price” and that Russia was aware of this. While the former German chancellor turned Russian gas lobbyist Gerhard Schröder has accused Ukraine of “sabre rattling”, Scholz said he was not taking advice from his centre-left predecessor. “I didn’t ask him for advice, and he didn’t give me any,” Scholz told the broadcaster ZDF. Biden and Macron pledged to coordinate their response to the crisis in a phone call on Wednesday, while the French leader’s office said he would be talking to Putin again on Thursday evening. The decision to deploy US troops follows diplomatic efforts that have so far failed to deliver any progress in defusing the crisis. The Kremlin claims it has China’s support in the standoff – backing that would be demonstrated when Putin meets Xi Jinping in Beijing on Friday. The Dutch prime minister, Mark Rutte, was the latest Nato leader to visit Kyiv on Wednesday in a show of support, meeting the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy. After the talks, Zelenskiy said Ukraine was focused “only on peace”, but that it had the right to defend itself. Rutte said it was “essential for dialogue to continue” between Russia and the other players. There has also been exchange of documents over the past few weeks between the US, Nato and Russia setting out their respective positions on European security, and a series of phone calls between the US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, and the Russian foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov. The US has suggested a number of areas for negotiation and possible confidence-building measures but has insisted there can be no compromise over Ukraine’s right to join Nato. The alliance has also stated that is non-negotiable. Russia’s central demand is for guarantees that Nato will not expand farther eastward.A frayed sheet of A4 paper bearing the lyrics to Turn Your Lights Down Low, with scribbled corrections; a pair of old football boots still with mud in the cleats; the surface of a battered acoustic guitar, deteriorated through overuse. Such poignant relics are few and far between in the first touring exhibition devoted to Bob Marley, which relies largely on portraiture, framed gold discs and staged recreations to tell its tale. Promising an immersive experience illustrating the philosophy, vision and drive that made Marley one of the most famous singers on the planet, the Bob Marley One Love Experience unfolds across six rooms, over two floors of the Saatchi Gallery, London. And the giant red, green and gold replica of the multiplatinum Legend compilation album that takes centre stage in the opening One Love Music Room sets the tone. Aside from his date and place of birth displayed on a banner on the wall, there is precious little information about the man himself, though many may already be familiar with the tale. There’s the award to mark his 1994 induction to the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame and some backstage tour passes, but the most striking thing in the room is a wall-length portrait by Mr Brainwash that cleverly incorporates all of the Island Records album covers, displayed opposite replicas of the albums themselves. The One Love Forest offers a chance to slouch on beanbags or mount a rope-swing, but we’re hardly transported to the Jamaican countryside; beneath the hazy green lights and chirping birdsong, the fug evokes disinfectant and artificial grass, the plastic plants reminding us that we’re in Babylon and not the idyllic hills of Nine Mile, where Marley spent his formative years. The semi-immersive aspect continues in the Soul Shakedown Studio, where Bluetooth headphones allow us to enjoy concert footage on various video screens. There are previously unseen photographs on display, including live shots from early tours, Marley flanked by Jamaican politicians Michael Manley and Edward Seaga at the One Love Peace Concert, and an alternative of the lift shot that adorned the back cover of Uprising, evoking key moments of his career. The Beautiful Life zone salutes Marley’s love of football and table tennis, but there’s a gratuitous display of the family-sanctioned Adidas Ajax third kit shoe, ironically beneath the song quote, “Don’t gain the world and lose your soul / Wisdom is better than silver and gold,” emphasising the tussles between art and commerce at the heart of the posthumous Marley industry. Upstairs, a long corridor littered with stage gear leads to the Concrete Jungle and Fan Art exhibition, which has more Mr Brainwash pieces and a range of portraits by largely uncredited artists – many of which are captivating. A piece made with discarded mobile phone components is particularly striking; others suggest Marley as a cosmic warrior, or biblical prophet. The final room honours widow Rita and the children and grandchildren who have become feted performers in their own right (including Ziggy, Stephen, Julian, Damian and Skip). Then exit through the gift shop, where One Love mugs and jigsaw puzzles are prominently displayed. As implied by the name, the Bob Marley One Love Experience is not especially nuanced, nor trying to be deep; this is very much a commercial enterprise celebrating Marley as an industry success story as much as a creative force. Nevertheless, the family-friendly format is inclusive (if not hugely instructive), and whether diehard devotee or casual listener, there is plenty to savour for an hour or two if approached with an open mind. • Bob Marley One Love Experience is at Saatchi Gallery, London, until 18 April.The image of Vicky McClure, in her latest strong, female cop role, was used the other day by UK counter-terrorism policing to recruit more women into the police. “Strong female leads aren’t just on TV,” the tweet said, above a picture of the actor as Lana Washington, the dynamic, brave, take-no-nonsense bomb-disposal operative in Jed Mercurio’s latest ITV drama, Trigger Point. And an attractive lure it is. Washington, with her slicked-back hair, chiselled visage and burning passion to save lives, could well turn the heads of intelligent young female graduates, or girls leaving school, to consider a career in policing. But sadly this is drama, not reality. The latest poster boys for the Metropolitan police, a force where less than one in three officers are women, well below the national average, are a breed of men who flaunt only their toxic masculinity, aggressive misogyny and deeply embedded rape culture, which they pass off as mere banter. It is worth repeating a bit of the dialogue of this latest Met police drama, as revealed by the Independent Office for Police Conduct (IOPC) watchdog. The characters are 19 male officers in Charing Cross police station, the time frame 2016-2018. Hardly a period piece, the subject of this excerpt is how to seduce a woman. “Getting a woman into bed is like spreading butter. It can be done with a bit of effort using a credit card, but it’s quicker and easier just to use a knife.” Or this gem to a female colleague. “I would happily rape you … if I was single … if I was single I would happily chloroform you.” And this piece of marital advice: “You ever slapped your missus? It makes them love you more. Seriously since I did that she won’t leave me alone. Now I know why these daft c**ts are getting murdered by their s****** boyfriends. Knock a bird about and she will love you. Human nature.” Followers of this particular horror show will know these latest revelations come after the rape and murder of a young woman, Sarah Everard, by a Met officer, Wayne Couzens, who was part of another unit, the parliamentary and diplomatic protection command, which is now subject to a root-and-branch review of its culture by the Met. Then there were the scenes of officers manhandling women who attended a peaceful vigil for Sarah at Clapham Common after her death. In previous episodes of how not to persuade women to join up, male officers guarding the murder scene in a London park where the bodies of Nicole Smallman and Bibaa Henry lay fatally stabbed – surely the most sensitive of duties – instead decided to abuse their position to take photos, some showing their bodies, shared them in WhatsApp groups and called the victims “dead birds”. Yet the Met tried to say this week that this was not about institutional misogyny. Instead, the behaviours exhibited so dramatically at Charing Cross were those of a small number with attitudes and beliefs that were not welcome in the force – AKA the bad apple theory; never mind that the police watchdog, the IOPC, explicitly rejected this theory and said what was on display was part of an offensive Met police culture. The bad apple excuse has long been trotted out. It was given to me 10 years ago, when, as crime correspondent for this newspaper, I exposed for the first time the hidden reality of police officers abusing their positions to sexually abuse, rape and stalk women who were victims of crime or witnesses – the sort of abuse of power exhibited by Couzens so many years later when he used his warrant card to stop Sarah Everard as she walked home. While the official line in 2012 to my reporting was the “bad apple” excuse, one senior female officer telephoned to thank me for shining a light on abuse by male officers because it had been known about but swept under the carpet for too long. Back then, there were, as now, promises of change, talk of a determination throughout policing to identify and remove those who betray the reputation of the overwhelming majority of officers etc, over so many years. But now it is 2022 and I, like every other women I speak to, am enraged again at the behaviour of police officers. It seems that nothing has changed – indeed, the unchecked, pervasive and violent attitudes to women seem more, not less, prevalent. A young female relative, a graduate who is brave and intelligent – all the qualities displayed by McClure in her fantasy portrayal of the life of a female cop – told me this week that she was ripping up her application to join the police, so horrified is she by what she sees and hears. When I protested that women such as her could forge change from within, she shook her head in refusal: “Why would I put myself through that in my life, just why?” Sandra Laville, a former Guardian crime correspondent, is now its environment correspondentMedal count winner Four years ago, Norway edged Germany atop the table with a staggering 39 medals (including 14 golds), besting their previous high as the host country in 1994. This time it won’t be nearly as close. The familiar dominance in cross-country skiing, in addition to likely medals in alpine skiing, biathlon, curling, freestyle skiing, ski jumping, snowboarding and speed skating, should end in another record haul. No mean feat for a nation with a smaller population than greater Atlanta. BAG The only question for Norway is whether they’ll match or beat their record of 39 medals from 2018. Gracenote’s final projection: 44. You can’t bet against a country in an event that doubles as a mode of transportation for its citizens, and yes, Norway will dominate in cross-country skiing and biathlon once again, but they’re also strong in the Alpine events and basically anything that involves snow. The resurgent ROC may slow the Norwegian procession, as may host China, which excels in winter sports with flips, twists and other forms of gymnastics. BD Covid will ... ... be responsible for at least one completely out-of-nowhere gold medalist thanks to China’s strict ‘Zero Covid’ protocols – which include daily throat swabs for testing and enhanced ‘close contact’ tracing – meaning athletes will face minimum two-day isolation for a positive test and risk missing their competition even if they are asymptomatic. The early days inside the closed loop for athletes and other participants have gone smoothly enough, though an outbreak looms as the doomsday scenario. BAG ... be all but forgotten by day three. I said the same thing for the Summer Olympics, and when I get one of these predictions right, I have to stick with it. We may see a few more Covid-related absences this time around because omicron is more contagious, but China and the IOC both have plenty of experience building bubbles. BD Breakout star Besides Eileen Gu? Let’s take a flyer on Jordan Stolz. The 17-year-old speed skater from the Wisconsin village of Kewaskum followed up his maiden World Cup medal at Calgary in December with a breakout performance at last month’s US Olympic trials, smashing double Olympic champion Shani Davis’s track record in the 1000m to become the third-youngest American man to make an Olympic team in long track after Eric Heiden and Emery Lehman. BAG Norwegian Alpine skier Aleksander Aamodt Kilde has hit his peak at age 29. He had no top-12 finishes in his prior two Olympics, but won the overall World Cup title in 2020 and leads the speed disciplines this season. Oh, and he’s dating Mikaela Shiffrin. For the USA, curler Chris Plys is competing in mixed doubles and has moved up to vice (second-in-charge) for John Shuster‘s defending gold medalists in the men’s event. For Australia, Jakara Anthony finished fourth in moguls in 2018 and has only gotten better, holding the lead in the overall World Cup standings. For Canada, short-track skater Courtney Sarault has successfully moved up after a strong junior career. For Team GB, it’s all a potential three-medal performance in curling, with the relative newcomer being Jennifer Dodds in mixed doubles and the women’s event. BD Bold prediction The highest-profile border war on the medal table comes down to the women’s ice hockey final, where Canada’s win ensures it will finish with more medals than the United States for only the third time in history. BAG After taking no medals in 2014 and just one in 2018, the US long-track speed skaters bounce back with six medals in Beijing. BD Can’t miss event Alpine skiing, women’s slalom (9 Feb, 12.45am ET). The Mikaela Shiffrin-Petra Vlhova rivalry that’s captivated the sport all season – they’ve been one-and-two atop the overall World Cup standings while pulling away from the pack all year – reaches a flashpoint on the unknown piste in Yanqing. Shiffrin has dominated the sport’s most technical discipline like no one before her, but Vlhova has won six of the last slaloms on the World Cup circuit dating back to last season. BAG USA v Canada in anything. In women’s bobsled, Kaillie Humphries goes for her third and fourth Olympic golds after switching nationalities and accusing Canadian officials of verbal and mental abuse. In curling, Canada will aim to shake off disappointment from four years ago but will find 2018 gold medalist John Shuster and 2021 world championship bronze medalist Tabitha Peterson in their way. Both countries have contenders in most of the X Games-ish freestyle and snowboard events. And the main event will be the all-but-certain quadrennial (annual, if you add in world championships) showdown in the women’s hockey final. BDSteph Jones jokes that she used to think she was psychic. The psychotherapist says she can often tell instinctively what a client’s issue is before they’ve even sat down. “I can say to them: ‘All of a sudden my throat is tightening,’ or: ‘I feel dizzy,’ or: ‘I can see a particular image – does this mean anything to you?” she says. This is because Jones has the ability, she explains, to experience not just other people’s emotions but their physical sensations in her own body. And it is a skill that has been invaluable for her work. It was only after she was diagnosed with autism that she realised this was simply part of her neurodiverse profile. “It’s called mirror-emotion or mirror-touch synaesthesia and is part of what being autistic means for me, as well as having hyperawareness, hyperperception, hyperempathy and hypermemory – all of which come in very handy as a therapist,” she says. People with mirror-touch synaesthesia vicariously experience other people’s emotional and physical sensations in their own bodies. The condition, which is believed to affect 2% of the general population, varies from person to person: it can mean individuals feel the same sensation – like touch – in the same part of the body that another person feels the sensation. Others describe it as an “echo” of the touch. Some clients, understandably, are disconcerted by Jones’s reading of their issues. “But once I explain what it is and it makes rational sense to them – rather than it seeming frightening or paranormal – they usually feel completely elated that someone gets them on that kind of deep level.” It is, she says, “fast-track rapport-building …Being able to tune into someone so quickly means it can feel like we’re skipping the starter and getting right into business, whereas other therapists may need to spend much longer building relationships. I can only describe it as some kind of instant resonance. Clients will often describe how it feels like we’ve always known each other – and it’s just as intense for me as it is for them.” There are more ways, Jones believes, that having autism can turbocharge a mental health specialist: autistic people often excel at problem-solving, enabling them to pick up cues that neurotypical therapists might filter out. They’re unlikely to judge people, enabling clients to feel genuinely accepted, and often have intense interests, which can lead to an obsession with research, training and further education. Jacqueline also feels her autistic traits have helped in her job as an advanced nurse practitioner in a 24-hour crisis assessment team – especially being open-minded. “I am very good at remaining neutral when doing urgent crisis assessments of highly distressed people and their families, which often involve the police and emergency services,” she says. “I am fairly direct and to the point. Again, when you need to assess a difficult situation quickly this is a good skill to have,” she adds. “I also see patterns and themes because my mind likes to find solutions to problems.” Zoë, a specialist neurodevelopmental clinician, credits her autism with allowing her to qualify in several psychotherapy specialisms with ease. “My autism does actually feel like a superpower: I have focused and studied so hard that I have a wealth of experience that clients often reference, saying how it makes their therapeutic process so much easier,” she says. Yet while the mental health experts I speak to say their autism has benefited their work, sadly, it is something they have felt they need to keep from colleagues. Jones, for instance, says – until now – her diagnosis has been a closely guarded secret. “Admitting openly that I am autistic could be professional suicide,” she says. “I’m terrified that, in ‘coming out’, I may fall foul of a misconception: the now widely debunked myth that autistic people are not capable of empathy or feelings.” A keen blogger (under the handle of autistic therapist), Jones was recently thinking about the fact that only 22% of autistic adults are in paid employment. Autistic people can have strengths that may be beneficial to employers, such as tenacity and the ability to see things in a different light, which can be great for problem solving. But getting and keeping a job can be difficult: autism affects communication skills, so people may struggle during job interviews, misunderstanding questions and being judged for not making eye contact. Once in a workplace, the noise of open-plan offices and anxieties over unwritten social rules can be overwhelming. Jones asked her online network of professional autistic people what they did – and was surprised to wake up the next morning to 450 responses, a number that kept growing. They came from people in every walk of life, but Jones was struck by how many worked in mental health, and how many said their greatest fear was colleagues and employers finding out that they were autistic. “I was receiving hundreds of messages from other autistic therapists, psychologists, practitioners, social workers and clinicians, most of whom have chosen not to disclose their diagnosis in work because they were too afraid of stigma, prejudice, unhelpful myths about autism – and discrimination,” she says. In response, she formed an Instagram group, the Autistic Professional Network. Within days, it had 586 followers. “I felt it was important to set up a group where we can safely network, find others who ‘get it’ and remain anonymous if we wish,” says Jones. “Sadly, the common theme we all share is autistic burnout due to hiding who we truly are.” Masking and camouflaging – terms used to describe neurodiverse individuals who seek to hide or minimise their autism traits to fit in with the neurotypical world – are an uncomfortable and exhausting experience, often linked to mental health issues ranging from stress and anxiety to depression, burnout and an increased risk of suicidal thoughts. It might seem counterintuitive to neurotypical people that neurodiverse people who find social interaction complex should choose a career with empathy and connection at its heart. But, says Jones, it makes perfect sense. “Around 1% to 2% of the UK population is autistic, but in my postgraduate year of around 80 students at least five were neurodiverse: over 6%. We’ve spent a lifetime trying to figure ourselves out, often misdiagnosed with mental health issues and desperate for answers. We’ve become accidental experts in that respect.” Maria, a mental health nurse in her mid-50s, agrees that a career in mental health might seem a curious choice to those who know her. She once found talking to people so difficult it was hard for her to speak at all. “It may seem very strange that someone like me, who had so little confidence, was so very shy to the point of mutism, and who had such difficulties with people, interaction and social functioning, was drawn to a career that requires all of those skills, but I was filled with compassion, empathy and a desperate desire to help people, especially those that were also misunderstood,” she says. “I don’t think I actually realised that everyone else didn’t have this extreme anxiety, constant nervousness and incredibly strong sense of justice and fairness,” she adds. “I think what was really driving me was to stop anyone else having to feel the way I always had, to help people where I had been left to my own devices.” Nadia also became interested in psychology after struggling with her own undiagnosed autism. “I often felt that I didn’t understand myself or others,” she says. “I’ve spent most of my life trying to be ‘normal’ and fit in, which has involved huge amounts of time trying to understand people, and I wonder whether this process of understanding others is continued in my work.” Like Jones, Nadia feels her autism has meant she is better at her job. “Despite the common myth that autistic individuals don’t have empathy, I find the opposite, in that I can really connect with the people I work with, and can feel what they feel,” she says. “My brain is quite analytical and notices patterns, which can be helpful in various phases of therapy (assessment, formulation, treatment). I also find clinical conversations a lot easier to have compared with generic, informal small talk.” But Nadia is also worried that divulging her neurodiversity to colleagues could wreck her career. “There can be a lot of misconceptions about autism, and I worry others will assume I am not competent or capable, that I cannot communicate with others,” she says. Abdullah Shahjan, an autistic therapist who works with the National Autistic Society, agrees that disclosing can be dangerous. “Autistic mental health practitioners who want to be open about their condition are all too likely to experience intolerance and negativity, which could seriously damage their careers. The risk is far greater than in other professions. “Neurotypical mental health practitioners aren’t any different from the general public when it comes to understanding autism: that is, they have a negative perception,” he says. “This is exacerbated by the fact that as mental health specialists, the only openly autistic people they are likely to see are patients in crisis. This will inevitably lead them to link autism with an inability to function. “An added problem is that mental health services are still in their infancy,” he adds. “As a specialism, it’s still struggling to be taken seriously as a science and to define best practice. That means that when an autistic practitioner comes along who doesn’t conform, there’s a risk-adverse defensiveness that kicks in.” Jess Hendrickx is director of Hendrickx Associates, a UK-based specialist in autism spectrum conditions, which provides training sessions to employers within the mental health sector. “We need to get rid of the stigma of being autistic in general but especially in the mental health sector,” she says. “One way to do this is for there to be a wider understanding that autistic people are not flawed or broken, but instead process environments and information differently from non-autistic people. These differences can provide clients with a diverse but equally effective approach. “Giving the wider public more positive information on autism should help to challenge any biases people may have about being treated by an autistic mental health professional,” she says. “This, in line with education and training for all staff and managers in mental health settings, will hopefully encourage more autistic people in the field to speak up, and more people to consider this as a career path.” Of course, not all autistic people experience disadvantage in their workplace, but the fear among autistic people working in mental health about “being out” is widely felt. Oxana is an assistant psychologist. “Being autistic for me means that I am on high alert most of the time,” she says. “I tend to overthink social interactions, notice patterns of behaviour, have an excessive urge to understand systems and organisations. This makes me a good therapist because I ask a lot of questions and facilitate patients to find their own truth. I do not have any preconceived notions of one ‘right’ way to solve their problems.” But she wouldn’t dream of disclosing her autism. “I have witnessed how professionals would discuss someone autistic and doubt their abilities,” she says. “I feel that instead of gaining credibility for going through any mental health or neurodiverse difference, I might actually lose some.” Among autistic professionals who have disclosed their autism to colleagues and employers, however, there have been positive outcomes. Karen is a PhD student studying the support of marginalised groups. “My autism helps me in my work because I am a very empathetic and at times an emotionally sensitive person,” she says. “I’ve been told that makes me very relatable and approachable. “I opened up to my employers about my autism recently because in a meeting I couldn’t string a sentence together and was so ashamed. I blurted it out in tears but it was such a relief. Now I know that they have an understanding of why I am the way I am at times. It helps tremendously.” Jones, who has decided to start being more open about her autism, is hoping for a similarly positive experience. “I recently told a long-term client of mine. It was the first time I’d ever disclosed in a professional sphere and I was understandably worried what she might say. But her response was brilliant: surprised, kind of excited and definitely curious.” Jones is now determined to be completely open about her neurodiversity. “I work with hundreds of autistic professionals who are afraid to disclose in work for fear of judgment, so they mask all day, go home and have meltdowns, and it’s the same again the next day,” she says. “I’m taking a huge risk in putting myself out there but I hope that in the long run it will be worth it, not just for me, but for others like me, so they feel brave in owning who they are too.” Some names have been changed.Officials in Texas are rejecting thousands of mail-in ballot applications ahead of the first 2022 midterm primary votes next month, raising serious alarm that a new Republican law is going to disenfranchise droves of eligible voters. The state’s 1 March primary is being closely watched as the first important testof one of the dozens of voting restrictions GOP-controlled state legislatures enacted in 2021. Last August, Texas Republicans passed a sweeping new voting law, SB 1, that imposes new identification requirements in the mail-in voting process, prohibits election officials from soliciting mail-in ballots, provides partisan poll watchers with more autonomy at the polls and outlaws 24-hour and curbside voting. They claimed it was to reduce fraud, despite little evidence of it being committed in 2020. Critics smell discrimination. The March primary is the first election cycle the new law is in effect as voters go to the polls to choose their party’s nominee for US House races and the state governor, among others. County election officials are already seeing significant consequences from the new rules around mail-in voting. So far, they have rejected 2,202 of the 32,817 applications for mail-in ballots submitted – a 6.7% rejection rate, according to the Texas secretary of state’s office. Texas already has strict limits on who can vote by mail, allowing only those who are age 65 and older, disabled or out of town for the entire election period to do so. Those who qualify can continue to request mail-in ballots until mid-February, and officials and voting advocates are worried that the number of rejections could rise as more people submit their applications. They also say it does not portend well for the general election in November, when turnout will be higher. “It’s already a clusterfuck,” said Charlie Bonner, a spokesperson for Move Texas, a group that works on voter mobilization in Texas. The source of the vast majority of those rejections is a new provision in state law that requires voters to provide either their Texas driving license number or the last four digits of their social security number – or both – on their application for vote by mail. Some voters registered originally with only one of those numbers, and if they now put the other on their application, it gets rejected. “We’re going to lose a lot of voters and I don’t think they’re going to be coming back. I think it was purposely done to try to cull out voters and make it harder for them to participate in our democracy,” said Grace Chimene, the president of the Texas chapter of the League of Women Voters, a non-partisan group that works on voting issues. The rejection numbers in some of the state’s largest counties are extremely high. In Travis county, home of state capital Austin, a little under one-third of the absentee ballot applications were rejected because of problems with the ID requirements. In Dallas and Tarrant counties, election officials have rejected 12% and 16% of mail-in applications already because of ID issues. “The reason why these are happening is to make it harder to vote in Texas and it impacts poor people, it impacts voters of color, Black voters especially, Hispanic voters and disabled voters and right now, older voters,” Chimene said. Advocates also dismissed the idea that the difficulties in Texas are growing pains that will diminish as the state and election officials get used to administering the new law. “Their intent was never for this to be a one-time problem,” Bonner said. “This is working exactly as it was intended – to confuse people, to create simple mistakes that get applications and ballots thrown out … they are trying to create the problems to justify what they have done.” One of the people denied a ballot was Kenneth Thompson, a 95-year-old second world war veteran who registered to vote before the state required voters to provide a driver’s license or social security number when they registered. He told Click2Houston he has never missed a vote, but that now his request for a mail-in ballot was denied twice. His daughter re-registered him to vote to ensure he could cast a ballot in the primary. Bonner said: “It’s one of these problems of when they legislate in conspiracy theories and not actually in fact. Real people get hurt when you are not legislating in reality.” The Texas secretary of state’s office says they are taking steps to lower the likelihood of rejection. In a 20 January video, John Scott, Texas’ GOP secretary of state, released a video encouraging Texans to put both their state ID number and last four digits of their social security number on the mail-in ballot application. The state is also working to update voter records to include both the social security numbers and driver’s license numbers, and recently released guidance to local election officials on how to help voters fix deficient applications. But election officials face another problem. SB 1 makes it a state jail felony for election officials to solicit mail-in ballot applications from voters. That provision has made local election officials wary of what they can say to voters about mail-in voting, said Isabel Longoria, the top election official in Harris county, the most populous in the state. “I’ve got to be able to talk about mail ballots. I’ve got to be able to encourage people here who can vote by mail, we still encourage people to vote by mail if they are infirm in a pandemic … even me saying that in this interview, that may not be legal,” said Longoria, who is suing the state over the anti-solicitation requirement. “How shocking of a world is it where it’s not that I just can’t send mail, we’re even having to tiptoe around how we even talk about mail ballots.” There have been problems outside the mail-in voting process, too. Texas does not have online voter registration, and the Texas secretary of state initially refused to provide the League of Women Voters with thousands of new paper forms they could use to register voters, citing a paper shortage and supply chain problems. After a warning it might be running afoul of federal law, the Texas secretary of state’s office provided the League with 7,000 voter registration forms. “I was irritated. It just didn’t make any sense to me,” Chimene said. “I don’t know what changed. Probably all the pressure of being in the news, made the secretary of state finally provide the forms. No apology.” The Texas Democratic party announced plans in January to print 500,000 voter registration postcards.Malcolm Turnbull has accused Scott Morrison of “a diplomatic debacle of the first order” after new emails showed Australian defence officials reported “good progress” on the French submarine project just two weeks before the deal was cancelled. The former prime minister said the emails – first revealed by Guardian Australia on Monday – showed that “far from the French being aware the project was going to be cancelled, they were being told the project was in good shape”. The defence minister, Peter Dutton, hit back at Turnbull, telling the ABC’s 7.30 program “there was no lying to the French” about the now-scrapped project and his job was not “to please the French government or former prime ministers”. Documents obtained under freedom of information laws show Australia’s defence leadership received positive advice about the project, just weeks before Australia unveiled the Aukus pact in mid-September. The US and the UK are now pledging to help Australia acquire nuclear-powered submarines. The defence department secretary, Greg Moriarty, promised in an email to colleagues on 30 August to “ensure that the good progress to date is part of the advice we take to government”. He said it would also be expressed in a video link meeting between Australian and French defence and foreign affairs ministers the same day. Three days earlier, Gregory Sammut, the defence department’s general manager of submarines, told Moriarty that France’s Naval Group’s offer for the next phase of work was “affordable and acceptable”. Turnbull and Dutton appeared on ABC TV on Thursday night to discuss the emails, which the 7.30 program had also obtained under FoI. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Turnbull said the emails confirm that the submarine program for the new Attack-class submarines “was on track, was in good shape, was progressing well, and was well within its budget”. Turnbull – who announced the deal with France when he was prime minister – said it was “extraordinary” that a project that was on track was “blown up” by the Morrison government. He said Morrison – who he increasingly criticises – had failed to be “truthful and honest”, which had damaged Australia’s diplomatic relationships. “Look, regardless of what you think about the submarines, this was a diplomatic debacle of the first order and the consequences being that it has undermined Australia’s honour, security and sovereignty,” Turnbull said. Dutton said the emails needed to be viewed in context. He said the discussions about switching to nuclear-powered submarine option were “compartmentalised” within the defence department. “There were a single digit number of people who had access to what was a very high level discussion and decision-making process within the government,” he said. Another tranche of documents obtained by Guardian Australia in December showed a defence department investigation into the option of nuclear-powered submarines, launched in 2020, was to be handled on a “strictly need-to-know basis”. Dutton said the government had acted on advice from Moriarty and the chief of the defence force, Angus Campbell, “that a diesel-electric submarine was not going to cut it and would not provide the defences for our nation into the 2030s and 2040s”. “We’ve taken the decision based on the expert advice that is in our country’s best interests and I think the French have moved on,” he told the ABC 7.30 chief political correspondent, Laura Tingle. “You and the ABC haven’t. And the Guardian. And Malcolm.” Labor’s defence spokesperson, Brendan O’Connor, said the government had “botched the future submarines process, while also mishandling the diplomatic side and subsequent fallout from the Aukus announcement”. “While Labor supports the Aukus deal, it shouldn’t detract from this government’s constant bungling of defence contracts,” O’Connor said. “We hope the Aukus agreement, which is still yet to deliver any contracts, will be handled with a lot more care.”Good things come to those who wait. “Are you ready to go in?” Nova Twins guitarist and vocalist Amy Love asks, safe in the knowledge that some of the people jammed in front of the stage have had tickets to this show for more than two years. Having put out their debut album Who Are the Girls? weeks before the UK’s first Covid lockdown, the hype around Nova Twins was kept at a simmer by the feeling that, with live shows largely on the shelf, a key ingredient was missing. Here, with their neon-punk stage gear lit up in striking pinks and greens, everything falls into place. A good rock band is a loud rock band and Nova Twins might be the loudest rock band in the UK. In a packed room, with a ceiling so low that at one point a crowd surfer appears to be walking across it, they fill every available inch of space with finely tuned, bassy heaviness. Love’s leads duck and weave against Georgia South’s undulating bass on the exhilarating opener Antagonist, the duo’s enormous pedal boards twinkling at their feet like prop cities ready for the Godzilla treatment. Backed only by a touring drummer, they dredge remarkable sounds from their instruments in the style of Rage Against the Machine guitarist Tom Morello, putting serious chops and technical wizardry to use on riffs that swerve between crushing heft and glitchy Prodigy-style blowouts. The thunderous precision of South’s work during the one-two of Play Fair and Vortex is a little like someone stopping to calculate the trajectory of the perfect swing before hitting you with a baseball bat. Their latest single KMB – played live tonight for the first time – pairs Love’s charismatic Missy Elliott-esque flow and a monster hook with an addictive bassline, suggesting that there are further exciting twists to come on their second album. The title of Who Are the Girls? repurposed a question that followed Love and South around as women of colour in a scene still dominated by white dudes. Their answer is compelling: this is what the future looks and sounds like.Winning tip: Tatranská Lomnica, Slovakia At the heart of the High Tatras mountain range, this resort has great facilities, spectacular views and a selection of slopes suitable for anyone from families with small children to those seeking a bit of adrenaline. It has the highest and steepest slope in Slovakia among its 12km of pistes (a 6.5km slope down from 2,196 metres). There are plenty of great restaurants and accommodation options, including the very picturesque and grand Hotel Lomnica (doubles from €140 B&amp;B). With two cable cars to some of the most scenic vista points in the High Tatras, a sledge run, hiking trails and numerous spas, there is plenty to do away from the slopes too. Excellent value for money. skiresort.info Erika Vuokatti, Kainuu, Finland The small resorts in the lakes around Vuokatti in Finland are often ignored by experienced skiers. But the pristine slopes, with their beautiful powder and lack of crowds, feel like Europe’s best kept secret. There are only a few hours of light each day in mid-winter, so some slopes are floodlit – if you’re lucky you’ll descend under the Northern Lights. And what the 11km of slopes lack in precipitous drops, they more than make up for with dog-sled safaris, snowshoe hiking, ice-skating, and of course cross-country skiing. Still desperate to get the pulse racing? Try a sauna and a dip in an icy lake. skiresort.info Emma Foppolo, Lombardy, Italy Foppolo, a 90-minute drive north of Bergamo is at the bottom of a valley where the pistes are extremely accessible. With seven ski lifts and 47km of pistes with different levels of difficulty there is something for all ability levels. Ski school is great fun and reasonably priced. If you like cross-country skiing then there is an easy loop of about 3km in the Convento area. Snowboarders are well catered for too. Leisure facilities include shopping, a spa and an ice-skating rink. This is a fabulous resort for a range of skiing abilities, easy to reach from the UK with fabulous snow conditions and often sunshine. Ski passes (adult from €23 a day) can also be used in nearby San Simone and Carona. bremboski.it Jennifer Hocknull Füssener Jöchle, Grän, Austria A gondola takes you up to the edge of the Austrian Alps, with sweeping views over Bavaria from the top. Lovely open skiing in a bowl at the summit of the gondola, served by a quick, six-person chairlift, with a long, tree-lined descent on the other side. It sits in the Tannheim valley, just up from the Haldensee lake, on which you can skate. Far fewer people than the views and the skiing should attract – and for a fraction of the price of the Austrian super-resorts located an hour away. tyrol.com David Fügen, Zillertal, Austria Fügen is the first ski resort you come to heading up the Ziller valley towards Mayrhofen in Austria. Jump off the Zillertalbahn (the train runs between Jenbach and Mayrhofen), take a 10-minute bus ride and soon you are heading up the Spieljochbahn. There are easy beginner-friendly slopes at the top but also, for confident skiers, a superb 7km valley run back to the village. Even more challenging is the black run down to the Panoramabahn Geols gondolas; it’s great to stop at the small hut half way down for coffee or lunch before trying the unpisted ski route nearby. Your lift pass also covers the bigger (and busier) resorts of Hochfügen-Kaltenbach, Zell am Ziller, Mayrhofen and Hintertux. spieljochbahn.at David Coombs Gustavsbergbacken-Östersund, Sweden This is a very small and local ski resort in central Sweden on the shores of Lake Storsjön with two lifts and 1km of slopes for beginners and intermediates, a day pass costing about SEK150 (£12), and ski hire easily available. This a top pick for a quiet beginners’ ski weekend, and if cross-country skiing is more your thing head over to the ski stadium, a 30-minute walk from the town centre. Östersund is a fun university city with excellent bars for the après scene and picturesque chalets with an abundance of traditional features to make a scenic ending to a magical weekend off the beaten track. skiresort.info Jordan Falcade, Dolomites, Italy To most Brits, skiing in the Italian Dolomites means a trip to one of the many resorts forming part of the famous Sella Ronda, a huge but frequently crowded network of pistes encircling the striking Sella massif. Instead, venture south of this circuit, into the heart of the Veneto region’s mountains, and you’ll find a choice of smaller resorts with the same glorious Dolomite views and varied pistes but fewer crowds. My personal favourite is Falcade, part of the San Pellegrino ski area (67 km of pistes), and situated just two hours’ drive from Treviso airport. €50-55 gets you a day pass. The long black pistes, which would be red in many resorts, are particularly excellent. skiresort.info Matt Bilyard Les Marécottes, Valais, Switzerland This tiny Swiss resort has spectacular views from Mont Blanc to Grand Combin. It’s so much cheaper than its bigger neighbours such as Les Portes du Soleil. We found a surprisingly wide range of empty pistes and virtually no queues outside the Christmas week. It is the birthplace of Jérémie Heitz, who learned his world-beating freeride skills in the steep bowls of powder. If you miss the crowded pistes, queues and cable-car crushes, try Vallorcine (20 minutes away) or Verbier (35 minutes away). There is no shortage of local produce and mouth-watering meals, and endless ski-touring opportunities or wonderful quiet walks. There’s indoor swimming and a child-friendly alpine zoo. Martigny station, which links to Geneva in under two hours and beyond, is very nearby. skiresort.info Thomas Godfrey La Clusaz, Haute-Savoie, France La Clusaz is an attractive French village in the Haute-Savoie, within an hour of Geneva airport. Not being a particularly high resort it’s quite easy to get to. It’s the hometown of famous freeskier Candide Thovex, whose amazing point of view films are all over YouTube. We found La Clusaz to be popular with families, groups and couples because there is such a wide variety of runs and accommodation, ranging from around €130 per night per couple. It’s a traditional feeling place with a mixture of old and tasteful new buildings. The ski area is a good mix of blue, red and black runs, with a snowpark and plenty of off-piste for those with the skill and energy. There are excellent restaurants and bars on and off the slopes and the good old 8 à Huit supermarket for those who are self-catering. laclusaz.com Carolyn Massey Isola 2000, Alpes-Maritimes, France It’s wonderful to travel to this resort via Nice, from where it’s a couple of hours by taxi or bus through beautiful scenery to the resort in the Alpes-Maritimes. Accommodation is mostly self-catered, but that’s OK because there are plenty of good spots to eat on and off the mountain and the place is not as expensive as the larger, better known French ski areas. The ski area is not massive but it is varied, fun, well groomed and very pretty. isola2000.com Delyth JonesGood news everyone! This week’s Thursday quiz introduces not one but two – TWO! – brand new regular features, which I am sure are going to prove as popular as the questions about Pokémon and the anagrams always did in the past. There are 15 questions on general knowledge and topical trivia, and along the way there is a hidden Doctor Who reference for you to spot for a bonus point, as well as the ever-welcome appearance of Kate Bush and Ron from Sparks. It is just for fun. There are no prizes. Let us know how you got on in the comments. The Thursday quiz, No 41 If you do think there has been an egregious error in one of the questions or answers, please feel free to email martin.belam@theguardian.com but remember, the quiz master’s word is always final, and he’s very busy getting ready for the Winter Olympics. Sign up for the daily Beijing Briefing from him here.A retired police chief and self-described Reagan Republican with decades of public service, Leonard Moty checked all the boxes to represent his community in one of California’s most conservative counties. But on Tuesday, voters ousted Moty, handing control of the Shasta county board of supervisors to a group aligned with local militia members. The election followed nearly two years of threats and increasing hostility toward the longtime supervisor and his moderate colleagues in response to pandemic health restrictions. While it’s not yet clear who will replace Moty, the two candidates in the lead attended a celebration on Tuesday with members of an area militia group, the Sacramento Bee reported. The recall is a win for the ultra-conservative movement in Shasta county, which has fought against moderate Republican officials and sought to gain a foothold in local government in this rural part of northern California. It also highlights a phenomenon that extends far beyond the region, as experts warn the pandemic and eroding trust in US institutions has fueled extremism in local politics and hostility against officials that could reshape governments from school boards to county supervisors to Congress. “I think it’s going to be a change in our politics. I think we’re going to shift more to the alt-right side of things,” Moty said on Wednesday. “I really thought my community would step up to the plate and they didn’t and that’s very discouraging.” Located more than two hours from California’s more densely populated state capital, Sacramento, Shasta county has long been a conservative bastion and home to a thriving State of Jefferson movement, which advocates for secession from California and the formation of a new state. But it was also the sort of place where people could work through their differences to achieve common goals, said Moty, who had served as a supervisor since 2009. After the pandemic took hold in 2020 and the governor instituted lockdown measures, however, many residents were outraged by the restrictions and what they viewed as the failure of county officials to stand up to the state government. Shasta county was among the least restrictive in California, Moty said, but residents unhappy about state rules and mask requirements began showing up in meetings in large numbers. Moty and other supervisors were soon subjected to levels of anger and hostility once reserved for state officials, in what Lisa Pruitt, a rural law expert at the University of California, Davis, describes as a trickling down effect. “There’s a lot of pent-up anger by a lot of people in rural and quasi-rural places that they’re not getting a fair shake from the government,” she said. “Most of that has been directed at state government. The anger at state officials is now trickling down at local officials because people think ‘my local officials aren’t doing enough’.” Carlos Zapata, a local militia member who helped organize the recall efforts, in 2020 told the board there could be blood in the streets if the supervisors didn’t reject state health rules such as mask requirements. “This is a warning for what’s coming. It’s not going to be peaceful much longer. It’s going to be real … I’ve been in combat and I never wanted to go back again, but I’m telling you what – I will to stay in this country. If it has to be against our own citizens, it will happen. And there’s a million people like me, and you won’t stop us,” he said. The rhetoric was a marked change from anything Moty had seen while in office. “This is not the community I grew up in, I was surprised people would make sort of veiled threats toward public officials and push the envelope,” he said. Disruptions and threatening rhetoric have been seen in public meetings across the country in what experts view as an alarming development. In Oregon, a county commission moved to virtual meetings last month due to anti-mask protesters. A parent in Virginia was arrested after threatening to bring guns if officials didn’t make masks optional. “Distrust in government has permeated the most local levels,” said Colin Clarke, a terrorism expert. “I’m familiar with the indicators of extremism and radicalization. I see them in places I never expected to see them. If you had told me as terrorism expert I’d be talking about school boards, I’d have said you’re crazy.” Anti-government extremists have utilized fears around the pandemic as a recruiting tool, Clarke said. “The whole pandemic was really tailor made to far-right extremists and they’re getting a lot of mileage out of it.” Politics in Shasta county has only become more hostile and contentious. In 2020, voters elected a new supervisor, Patrick Jones, who has been critical of Moty and other supervisors. In January 2021, Jones and supervisor Les Baugh opened the doors to the supervisors’ chambers and allowed members of the public into what was supposed to be a virtual meeting due to Covid cases. Moty has accused Jones, who has been a vocal supporter of the recall, of riling up the public. Jones did not respond to the Guardian’s request for comment. He told KQED: “We’ve been demonized as radicals and various things like this. We are not. We are just simply business owners. We’re mothers, we’re fathers, we’re grandmothers, we’re grandfathers – and we want to return to a county where we grew up: a safe, prosperous county that we can be proud of.” The board elected to hold a meeting last month virtually due to rising Covid cases and threats against Moty and other supervisors. The Shasta county sheriff’s office is investigating what it described as credible threats against Moty and two other board members. One person told Moty that bullets are expensive, but “ropes are reusable”. The Redding Record Searchlight reported this week that an election official said they had been subjected to bullying in the lead-up to the election. Meanwhile, money poured into the county in support of the recall from an outsider, a millionaire, Reverge Anselmo. His $400,000 donation to the gathering committee in the recall is believed to be one of the largest in the county. Polling numbers on Wednesday showed 52% of voters opted to recall Moty. The success of the recall will likely set up more conflict between the local government and the state government, Pruitt said. Moty is done with politics, he says. He plans to stay in Shasta county “for now”, but worries for the future of the area and that it could become a haven for those with extremist views. For many Shasta county citizens, he said, “They’re gonna get a rude awakening.”New York Democrats are plowing ahead with an aggressive effort to rig the state’s electoral maps to give the party as many as three additional seats in Congress, a move that comes as the party has denounced similar Republican-led efforts in other states as anti-democratic. Democrats currently have a 19-8 advantage in New York’s delegation to the US House of Representatives. Their proposed districts, unveiled on Sunday, would give them up to three additional seats, increasing their advantage to 22-4. (There is one fewer seat overall in New York because of population shifts.) The plan puts Democrats in an awkward political position. “Democrats have given up any high ground they had over Republicans on gerrymandering,” Pat Kiernan, the popular local news anchor, tweeted on Sunday. “These maps are the most brazen and outrageous attempt at rigging the election to keep Nancy Pelosi as speaker,” Nick Langworthy, the chairman of the state Republican party, said in a statement. “What they’re doing is textbook, filthy, partisan gerrymandering.” Over the last few months, Democrats in Congress have led efforts calling for an end to excessive partisan gerrymandering – an effort that failed last month when Republicans filibustered a sweeping voting rights bill. They’ve watched as Republican legislatures across the US have carved up district lines to their advantage to help the GOP as they try to take control of the US House later this year. But New York is one of the few places where Democrats have complete control of the process and a chance to gain Democratic seats. Nationally, Republicans have complete control over the drawing of 187 districts and Democrats have control over just 75. More than a third of the districts Democrats will draw are in New York. Here’s how they’re doing it in one of them. “We’re not ignorant of the national implications of our work. But we have a long list of standards under New York law that we are required to comply with and that’s what drove our decision-making,” Michael Gianaris, a top Democrat in the New York state senate, told the Guardian. “It shouldn’t be surprising that a fairly drawn map in a deep blue state winds up electing more people of that persuasion. But that doesn’t mean that’s why the maps were drawn the way they were.” Michael Li, a redistricting expert at the Brennan Center for Justice, said it was hard to buy that the map merely reflected the political preferences of New Yorkers. Joe Biden won about 60% of the statewide vote in 2020, he noted, but the proposal would give Democrats control over as many as 85% of the districts. “It’s a very solidly blue state. But it’s not as blue as these maps have it,” he said. The Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, charged with protecting Democrats’ advantage in the House, did not return a request for comment. Democrats, who hold a narrow super majority in the state legislature, approved the plan on Wednesday without holding a public hearing on the maps – a decision that has infuriated voting advocates. “They’re just muscling it through,” said Blair Horner, the executive director of the New York Public Interest Research Group. Advocates representing minority voters said the new district unfairly splits their communities, making it more difficult for voters there to have influence. Sunset Park, a Brooklyn neighborhood with a high Asian and Latino population, is now split, Mon Yuck Yu, executive vice-president and chief of staff at the Academy of Medical &amp; Public Health Services, told reporters on Tuesday. Yafa Dias, the lead organizer of the Arab Association of New York, said the new lines were “almost comedically gerrymandered”. She noted that her organization’s offices would now be in one congressional district, while the voters they advocated for would be in another. There are notable differences in the gerrymandering strategy New York Democrats deployed compared with the one Republicans have used elsewhere, like in Texas, said Li, the Brennan Center redistricting expert. In Texas, much of the GOP gerrymandering focused on padding Republican advantages in districts that seemed increasingly competitive. Republicans have been so successful at pursuing this aim that just one of the state’s 38 congressional districts was decided within a margin of 5 points in the last election. In New York, by contrast, Democrats have spread out their voters to give them a greater number of districts, Li noted, but didn’t create any new districts that are overwhelmingly safe. It’s a strategy that leaves room for Republicans to win back some of the Democratic districts under the right conditions in the future. “Democrats are betting that their coalition in recent years mostly holds – that they don’t need to draw super Biden districts because their coalition is mostly going to stay intact,” Li said. “Republicans are looking at demographic change and political shifts in the suburbs and they’re scared of the future.” In 2014, New York voters approved a ballot measure to create a 10-member bipartisan advisory commission to draw maps as part of an effort to bring more fairness to the process. But the panel never reached a consensus on a plan and the legislature rejected its proposals, taking redistricting power back for itself. Li observed that the sweeping voting rights legislation Republicans blocked in Congress contained a provision that would have allowed a federal court to step in and quickly stop rigged maps like those in New York from going into effect. “I do think Republicans are right to cry foul. On the other hand, they could have created a stronger process for redistricting, they could have supported the Freedom to Vote Act,” he said. “Republicans are a little bit like the people who said I don’t need to have car insurance because ‘I’ll never have an accident.’”First came the heavy snow in late December that blanketed Seattle and the surrounding area. Then the torrential rain and flooding hit in early January. One by one, four of the region’s main mountain passes were deemed impassable, and a 20-mile stretch of Interstate 5 south of Seattle was closed. It was the first time all five had been closed in more than a decade, leaving the Seattle area virtually cut off from cross-state travel. But it was simply the latest in a series of extreme weather events that have pummeled the Pacific north-west over the past year. In the typically mild-weathered state of Washington alone, it began with heavy snowfall last February, followed by dry, scorching temperatures over the summer that left more than 100 people dead, and then a record-breaking fall rain in the Seattle area. Now, with more intense extreme weather expected in the years ahead, driven by the climate crisis, a bipartisan assortment of Washington state lawmakers has simultaneously introduced a handful of bills this legislative session that, rather than focusing on mitigation and emission reduction, focus on climate adaptation. From a proposal to establish a grant program for farmers and ranchers facing damage from flooding and other natural disasters, to adding climate resiliency planning to water system plans, these innovations are intended to prepare the state for the challenges ahead. “I just think we’re definitely seeing much more extreme weather events and this is going to become the norm, not the one-off,” said Washington senator Mark Mullet, a Democrat, who introduced the proposal to add air conditioners. He said the legislation was inspired by a conversation with a local firefighter who recalled going on three different calls during the heat dome in late June to homes for seniors and finding residents had died from the heat. But these proposals also reflect a broader trend taking shape in the last five years, in which the climatemk movement has increasingly recognized the importance of adaptation, explained Aseem Prakash, professor of political science at the University of Washington and director of the Center for Environmental Politics. The recent Glasgow climate pact doubled the proportion of climate funds earmarked for adaptation. And in October, the Biden administration released climate adaptation and resilience plans that included building supply chain resiliency and increasing protections for workers and communities when it comes to climate change. Prakash explained that even if we immediately start drastically reducing emissions, the effects of the climate crisis are already being felt. “So we have to adapt. I think the climate movement realizes this political and moral necessity to adapt,” he said. “And also, whenever we have floods, extreme heat waves, who suffers? It’s really the poor people, the underprivileged. So there is also a very important climate justice component.” Justin Allegro, director of state government relations for The Nature Conservancy in Washington, said it’s important that it doesn’t become an either-or situation. “It doesn’t make sense to only invest in one strategy,” he said. “We know that the impacts of climate change are going to continue to happen and there’s so much we can do as a state to better prepare and better respond and better create resiliency. And at the same time, every effort to fundamentally reduce emissions quickly and rapidly and equitably is something that we need to do.” In Washington state, Representative Mari Leavitt, a Democrat, introduced a proposal that would create a grant program to help local jurisdictions and federally recognized tribes with the added costs associated with extremely hot or cold weather, as well as unhealthy air quality due to wildfires. She explained that the grants would be flexible to accommodate each area’s distinct needs, but could be used for such things as adding additional cooling shelters and HVAC systems, or even simply providing more fans and water for those in need. “Those extreme weather events will continue,” she said. “And we just weren’t ready and the resources weren’t available, so cooling centers were getting open later, and for limited periods of time.” She gave the example of a cooling center in Lakewood, Washington, about 40 miles south-west of Seattle, which wasn’t set up until a few days after the heatwave started and despite firefighters trying to drop people off in the morning, didn’t open its doors until noon. “I asked the question, ‘Why did it take so long?’ The response I got back was, ‘We were trying to figure out the resources in order to open,’” she said. Another proposal being considered is the outdoor recreation and climate adaptation (Orca) plan, which would direct the projected $4.4bn in revenue between 2023 and 2032 through the state’s recently passed Climate Commitment Act to climate adaptation and outdoor recreation. Currently, the majority of those funds are designated to emission-reducing transportation programs, given the central role it plays in the state’s greenhouse gas emissions. Washington representative Mary Dye, a Republican who is behind the Orca plan, said instead the funds should be used for such things as building structures to protect communities from catastrophic floods and improving forest health to reduce wildfires. “I think that you have to get real and be honest and do good things today that will help our state really be able to adapt to the things that are before us,” she said. But these proposals are still fairly targeted and, apart from Orca, do not have a huge price tag, explained Prakash. “I hope it comes up even more forcefully, because this is an issue we have to confront,” he said. “And this is not to say we should not mitigate. We should certainly mitigate. But we also have to start taking adaptation more seriously, which we haven’t.” Nick Bond, the Washington state climatologist, said it’s clear the state could have done a better job when it came to responding to these extreme weather events. He said: “Hopefully we can learn from it so that when the next one comes along there won’t be as much loss of life, and to figure out just what we can do to reach those folks that don’t have the resources to get themselves out of a threatening situation.”“Oh, nice!” says a father to his son when he learns a package has arrived for him. The son asks what it is. “Well, ha, ha, you’re probably going to think your old man’s lost his damned mind. It’s called Finaplix. Trenbolone acetate. It’s a cattle steroid. They give it to heifers to beef them up before slaughter.” The father doesn’t have an appointment at an abattoir but with a photographer, who will capture him smothered in baby oil “half-snarling and half-beaming” in black bikini briefs as he poses for the final stage of the Body You Choose competition. At the age of 55, he has become a bodybuilder. If the son thinks he has lost his mind, he keeps it to himself. My Father’s Diet, Adrian Nathan West’s debut novel, is slim, sad, comic and sharply observed; it is set among the forlorn malls and soulless suburbs of the American heartland. A fractured family – husband remarried; wife in a relationship; son at college – float in and out of each other’s lives, as cool and listless as the shoppers in those empty malls. The son details, with a dispassionate eye, the changes visible in his father, who suddenly walks back into his estranged son’s life while undertaking an ill-advised search for meaning. In his enthusiasm, he fails to notice his son’s own quiet crisis. The father cuts quite a figure, “tall, with a splayed, reclining stance that brought prominence to his round belly”. From the first page, he memorably fills the frame. “His large, gold-framed glasses gave his eyes a tint of amber. They rested halfway down an unusually shaped nose like a seahorse’s snout. […] They caused him a lot of trouble, and were as often in his hands as on his face.” It is a lovely, living portrait. We get to know him more intimately still; his changing body, his developing habits, his failed relationships. The minor characters are eye-catching, too. There is obese Jerry: “His body was pristine like an egg, of an immutable porcelain white untarnished by hair, rolls, or freckles.” There is creeping Kent Minter: “a short, grey-haired figure with a mealy scarlet face, gelid blue eyes, and disconcertingly white teeth”. West, a superb translator by profession – his translation of When We Cease to Understand the World by Benjamín Labatut was shortlisted for the International Booker prize – writes surgically precise prose. The young man notes his father’s verbal quirks and describes his peculiar gait with the detachment of a doctor examining his patient. When not accompanying his father to and from the gym, the son sits alone in his room and stares at the wall. He dreams of a different life: “My only ambition, from early youth, had been to go somewhere else.” It doesn’t help that his idea of somewhere else is a fiction: the France of trenchcoats and filterless Gitanes. The US small-town atmosphere is well evoked, uncomfortably so: sidewalks that lead nowhere, ugly street signs, food that is either “fried or smothered with cheese” – even the red wine has a “faintly mucosal texture”. It’s a long way from Paris. Sadly, we never learn the result of the Body You Choose competition. It is hard to imagine it will make much of a difference. In fact, the last we see of the father, he is gorging on junk food while the son looks mournfully on. It is one of many affecting scenes. West’s achievement, in this subtle and delightful book, is to have rendered failure in strikingly handsome terms. • My Father’s Diet by Adrian Nathan West is published by And Other Stories (£10). To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Haley Hodges was working as a temp at a medical staffing agency in Iowa when she found out there were complications with her pregnancy and she was forced to cancel a few shifts. The cancellations led to her being placed on probation and her wages being slashed. The pandemic has led to a huge surge in temporary hiring, according to a report by the National Employment Law Project (NELP) and Temp Worker Justice that highlights the struggles many of those workers face. “I was struggling with pre-eclampsia [a pregnancy complication characterized by high blood pressure] and I had made my employer aware that my pregnancy had become high risk. We agreed I would continue to work until I couldn’t,” said Hodges. After her obstetrician called her into the hospital to induce labor, she called her agency and told them what was going on. They seemed understanding at the time, she said. “It wasn’t until after [the baby] was born that I was informed that I would be placed on probation for having to cancel the remainder of my scheduled shifts for six months,” said Hodges. “My wage would be cut down by $6 an hour and I wasn’t allowed to call in or cancel shifts during probation or I would be terminated.” She worked through the probation period at the reduced wage because she couldn’t afford to lose the job or find another after just having a baby. Hodges’ experience is not an isolated case. NELP’s report, compiled with help compiled with the help of Chicago Workers Collaborative, Mississippi Workers’ Center for Human Rights, New Labor, Warehouse Workers for Justice, and North Carolina Justice Center, details the rapid growth of temp work during the pandemic and the extent to which these workers face low wages, retaliation and wage theft and are misled by staffing agencies about pay or the temp-to-hire nature of their positions. From April 2020 to October 2021, temporary work in the US grew at 2.5 times the rate of all other private sector industries. Revenue in the US staffing industry is projected to have grown by a record 16% in 2021 to $157.4bn. “Sectors where temp work is highly prevalent, like warehousing, are growing as e-commerce booms, and then there’s also industry organizing to grow temp work in sectors like retail,” said Maya Pinto, a senior researcher and policy analyst at NELP and a co-author of the report. “The US lags way behind other industrialized nations in regulating temp work. That lack of regulation has left an opening for the largest employers in the US and sectors like warehousing, manufacturing, and increasingly in retail, to use temporary agencies to squeeze more from workers.” Efforts are being made to give temp workers more rights. Representatives Emanuel Cleaver and Joe Kennedy’s Restoring Worker Power Act is set to be reintroduced in Congress soon and, if passed, would regulate the temp industry and provide temp workers with rights such as pay equity and paths to permanent hiring. Massachusetts, Illinois, California, Washington and New York City have all passed legislation to regulate temp work. Mississippi and New Jersey introduced such bills this year. In the meantime, the army of temp workers keeps growing. An estimated 13 million to 16 million US workers are hired through staffing agencies annually, according to industry estimates. In December 2021, 2.8 million Americans were employed as temporary help and through staffing agencies. The NELP report includes a survey of 1,337 temporary workers in 47 states conducted by Temp Worker Justice, with results revealing the harrowing realities of poverty and abuse these workers regularly face on the job. From 1992 to 2014, Reynalda Cruz worked on a regular basis for temporary staffing agencies in the New Brunswick, New Jersey, area, before taking on a role as an organizer for New Labor, a workplace justice organization based in New Jersey. Cruz said that as a temp worker she, and many other workers, had to work multiple jobs due to the inconsistency of work availability and schedules through staffing agencies. She also had $50 or more deducted from her weekly paychecks to cover the transportation the temp agency provided from its office to work sites. “There were some instances where I was left abandoned at the workplace because they didn’t pick me up or they came late to get me and other workers there. Sometimes they brought us to workplaces and we wouldn’t be needed, but would be forced to wait four to five hours in the cafeteria for the temp agency transportation to pick us up, and none of that time was paid,” said Cruz. “Also they make you show up early, they don’t come to pick you up at your house so you get there at six in the morning and wait until they send you out that day, and you aren’t paid for that time.” Temp workers are more than twice as likely to be paid poverty wages compared to workers in all industries. These workers are often paid less than their direct hire counterparts doing the same work. Staffing and temp agencies receive a cut of an hourly fee they charge host employers, which can range from 30% to more than 150% of the wages the worker receives. In other findings, NELP reports: 36% of workers reported they or their dependents relied on some form of government assistance while they worked through a staffing agency. 24% of workers reported experiencing wage theft through a staffing agency, in which they were paid less than minimum wage, not paid overtime, or not paid the proper amount forhours they worked. 17% of workers reported suffering an illness or injury on the job, and 41% of those workers said they had to cover the costs of medical care themselves. 24% of temp workers said they have never received safety training before beginning a temp position, and 23% said they only sometimes received safety training. 80% of workers reported interest in joining a worker organization such as a union to improve working conditions. 71% of workers reported experiencing retaliation for raising workplace concerns to their management. The survey also found high rates of racial, gender, and age discrimination in temp jobs. Workers also reported that staffing agencies misled them about the chances of being hired permanently or about pay. John Martinez of Orange county, California, started working through a temp staffing agency in October 2021, working inventory for companies such as Oakley. The staffing agency started paying him late a few weeks into his first assignment and he continued having issues in resolving the late pay with the agency in his second temp assignment. “I stopped going because I wasn’t being paid,” said Martinez, who ended up taking a lower-paying job closer to home. “I would have liked to have stayed at Oakley, but my gut said ditch this staffing agency.” Temp workers are often used by employers to replace workers on strike or to deter organizing efforts: Nissan relied on temp workers as the company fought off unionizing efforts by the United Auto Workers and Kroger used temporary workers during a grocery worker strike in Colorado. Though temp jobs are often marketed as an opportunity to be hired directly by an employer, 35% of workers reported their current temp assignment had lasted more than one year and 18% reported their current temp assignment surpassed two years in duration. The vast majority of workers, 72%, reported they have never been hired into a permanent position from a temp position. “That long-term perma-temping is how the industry makes money and that’s why they have these bondage fees charged to host employers to control workers from ever leaving,” said Dave Desario, director of Temp Worker Justice and a contributor to the report. “It’s also why agencies present the idea of temp-to-perm positions, because that convinces people to work for substandard wages because they think something better is on the horizon, without knowing how their movement in the job market is controlled and limited.”Households will face a record energy bill increase of 54% from April after the regulator lifted the cap on default tariffs to £1,971. The energy regulator, Ofgem, lifted the maximum rate that suppliers can charge for an average dual-fuel energy tariff by £693, to reflect the fourfold increase in energy market prices over the last year. The hike means that 22 million households which pay by direct debit will face an average of bill of £1,971 a year for their gas and electricity. Homes using a pre-pay meter, which are typically more vulnerable, will on average face a steeper hike of £708 and an annual bill of £2,017. Jonathan Brearley, the chief executive of Ofgem, said: “We know this rise will be extremely worrying for many people, especially those who are struggling to make ends meet, and Ofgem will ensure energy companies support their customers in any way they can.” The second major increase in energy bills in six months, and the largest on record, is expected to drive millions of households into fuel poverty for the first time. The blow to household finances has prompted the Treasury to offer households a one-off £200 discount on their energy bills this October, which they would be required to pay back in instalments of £40 a year over the next five years. The discount has been offered alongside a £150 rebate on council tax bills from April as part of a £9bn package from the Treasury designed to “take the sting” out the cost of living crisis. “The energy market has faced a huge challenge due to the unprecedented increase in global gas prices, a once in a 30-year event, and Ofgem’s role as energy regulator is to ensure that, under the price cap, energy companies can only charge a fair price based on the true cost of supplying electricity and gas,” Brearley added. The price cap increase is calculated by Ofgem based on the costs faced by suppliers, including buying energy from the wholesale market and levies for maintaining energy network infrastructure and renewable energy projects. The regulator raised the cap to £1,277 last autumn after the UK’s gas market reached a record high in September. Experts have warned that an even greater energy bill hike, to an average of around £2,300 a year, could take effect from October this year after the global gas supply crunch fuelled further energy wholesale price spikes in recent months. Brearley said the regulator was “working to stabilise the market” through a series of proposals to make sure energy suppliers are more financially resilient to major market shocks which it plans to set out on Friday.Australia retained the women’s multi-format Ashes trophy in the first of three one-day internationals, holding England short of a paltry first innings of 205 for nine to win by 27 runs in Canberra. After captain Heather Knight won the toss and chose to bowl, England’s seam attack used a lively surface to suffocate Australia’s scoring until wickets came. But the Australian bowlers responded in kind, turning the screw until the thread squeaked, and despite a last-wicket partnership of 24 that briefly threatened a revival, England were 178 all out with five overs to go. Knight said: “Our mentality in this series has been really good. We haven’t been able to quite get over the line, which is a shame, but we believe we’re good enough to beat them and we’ve gone toe-to-toe with them in a lot of aspects, but we just haven’t quite been able to have that killer instinct and get over the line.” The day at Manuka Oval began with a key match-up: Australian opener Alyssa Healy against England attack leader Katherine Brunt, who dismissed her twice for nought in last week’s Test match. It was no surprise that the start was circumspect. Brunt and strike partner Anya Shrubsole conceded just 34 from the first 10 overs, with Shrubsole dismissing Rachel Haynes from a top-edged pull. It was a far cry from the barnstorming starts that are Healy’s trademark. First-change seamer Kate Cross, unlucky to have gone wicketless in the Test match, bowled Australian captain Meg Lanning in the 17th over with a wicked delivery that leaped inward at the stumps from a wider line, then in the 21st sent a ball the other way to have Healy stumped after wicketkeeper Amy Jones had moved up to stop Healy charging. Between times, left-arm spinner Sophie Ecclestone used flight to draw a return catch and complete the second golden duck of Ellyse Perry’s long one-day career. Australia were 67 for four, scoring at 3.35 per over. Big hitter Tahlia McGrath batted slowly for 14 overs, then was bowled by Brunt for 29 as soon as she started to hit out. Ash Gardner started breezily at a run a ball but ran herself out for 12. Jess Jonassen followed for four. Deliverance came from Beth Mooney, who has made a habit of rescuing Australia from trouble, and batted through until the last ball of the innings to make 73 in a partnership with Alana King of 52. At first, that only looked like the broken-jawed batter helping her team save face. Brunt had taken three for 40, Cross three for 33, and England only needed four runs an over. But Australia’s 18-year-old quick Darcie Brown ignited the response: first her fast outswinger took Tammy Beaumont’s edge to slip for three, then she was on a hat-trick after beating Knight for pace to hit in front of middle stump. Having made 216 runs in the Test match, Knight had this game’s second golden duck. Quiet overs ticked by and mistakes arrived. Lauren Winfield-Hill tried to pull a ball that wasn’t short enough, hitting a catch to deep midwicket for 13. Jones did the same on 16 with a high full toss from McGrath that the third umpire ruled legal. Jones could complain about luck, but in 17 limited-overs innings against Australia she has a high score of 30 and an average of eight. McGrath followed up with an in-ducker to trap Dunkley in front for five. That left England 83 for five, needing 123 more to win. The decisive blow came when Nat Sciver, having held things together with her innings of 45, tried to nudge Brown to the leg side and instead popped up a leading edge. The bowler took off in her follow-through and dived to take a sliding return catch. She later pinned Ecclestone lbw to finish her 10 overs with four for 34. Megan Schutt took her 100th one-day wicket for Australia when dismissing Winfield-Hill, before bowling a perfect leg-cutter that beat Danni Wyatt’s outside edge to hit the top of her off stump. Shrubsole was bowled behind her legs trying to lap-sweep Jonassen, when she only needed to support Brunt who was batting nicely. While Cross hit some hard drives in whittling the required runs down from 52 to 28, the target was too distant. Australia had three false alarms for the last wicket, with a dropped catch, a missed run-out, and an overturned review. But eventually Jonassen held a low return catch, and Mooney’s work was not in vain. England can still tie the series with two games to play, but the trophy will stay. “To retain it with this group is pretty special,” Brown said. “We backed our bowlers to defend that total because we’ve got a pretty good bowling lineup, so we weren’t too fussed about it.”“There is no embargo on Cuba.” This bold claim – made by Florida senator Marco Rubio on the floor of the US Senate last July – has quickly hardened into conventional wisdom across aisles of US Congress and among Rubio’s base of support in the Cuban diaspora. The US blockade is a myth, a bogeyman for the Communist party of Cuba. “Cuba is not isolated,” Rubio said. Those who say otherwise either “don’t know what they’re talking about … or they’re liars. Those are the only two options.” Here in Havana, though, the isolating effects of the US embargo are impossible to ignore. The docks are half-empty: the US has banned all cruise ships, cultural exchange and educational delegations that once drove the largest industry on the island. The Western Union branches are shuttered: the US has banned all remittances through Cuban firms and their affiliates to the millions of Cuban families that rely on assistance from abroad. The hospitals are understocked: the US embargo has forbidden the export of medical technology with US components, leading to chronic shortages of over-the-counter medicine. Even the internet is a zone of isolation: the US embargo means that Cubans cannot use Zoom, Skype or Microsoft Teams to communicate with the outside world. In short, the US embargo impacts every aspect of life on the island – and that is the precisely the point. Sixty years ago on this day, President John F Kennedy introduced Proclamation 3447, Embargo on All Trade with Cuba, designed to isolate Cuba and stop the spread of so-called Sino-Soviet Communism “Every possible means should be undertaken promptly to weaken the economic life of Cuba,” the assistant secretary of state, Lester D Mallory, wrote in an April 1960 memo. The goal of the Kennedy administration was clear: “To bring about hunger, desperation and overthrow of government.” Today, Joe Biden lives up to Kennedy’s legacy and the ambitions of his Cuban embargo. Not only has the president refused to undo the extraordinary sanctions imposed by the Trump administration, reneging on his campaign promise to restore diplomatic relations and leaving Cuba on the list of “state sponsors of terrorism”. He has also doubled down on the embargo, tightening restrictions and imposing a host of new sanctions against the Cuban government. Both the Biden administration and its Republican opposition claim that these measures are targeted at the regime, rather than the Cuban people. But the evidence to the contrary is not only anecdotal. The UN estimates that the embargo has cost Cuba over $130bn in damages – costs that are compounded by the penalties imposed by the US Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) on Cuba’s allies and investors. Between April 2019 and March 2020 alone, OFAC penalties amounted to over $2.4bn, targeting banks, insurance firms, energy companies and travel agencies alike. The effect of the embargo is therefore both local and global: it cripples the Cuban economy and undermines the multilateral system that the US claims to lead. The UN Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) reports that the embargo has had a “direct impact” on its operations in Cuba, citing costs, losses and damages that have resulted in drastic reduction of agricultural output on the island – despite the fact that FAO is “officially exempted” from the embargo. The UN development program (UNDP) cites its own challenges in the implementation of projects like its Global Fund to Fight Aids, Tuberculosis, and Malaria in Cuba – in particular, when Toyota Gibraltar Stockholdings was forced to cancel the supply of vehicles to the UNDP office as a result of tightened US restrictions in 2018. And the UN Environmental Program (UNEP) highlights the ways in which the US embargo “not only affects that Caribbean country but also the subregion and the United States itself”. According to the UNEP, the embargo “eliminates” the possibility of regional cooperation on environmental issues and prevents the diffusion of critical technology to drive a green transition on the island. Critics of the embargo often rely on moral claims to make their case. It is no doubt a strong case: by its own admission, the US aims to “starve” the island of Cuba, and it is succeeding. The US coast guard reports that 586 Cubans have attempted to cross the ocean in the first fiscal quarter of 2022 alone, but the US government – despite its clear intention to inflame outward migration – refuses to welcome them. “Allow me to be clear,” the homeland security secretary, Alejandro Mayorkas, said to Cuban migrants, “if you take to the sea, you will not come to the United States.” But a much broader buffet of arguments is on offer to challenge the Cuban embargo on the occasion of its 60th anniversary. One is legal: Biden has called to “defend the liberal international order”, but his embargo clearly violates the UN charter and the international law it enshrines. Another is geopolitical: for the 29th consecutive year, members of the UN general assembly have voted to end the embargo by an overwhelming vote of 184 to two; with US hegemony on the wane, it can little afford such a flagrant display of unilateral force. And still another argument is democratic: 57% of US voters support lifting the embargo, while only 29% oppose; by enforcing the embargo, Joe Biden has allowed a minority of ageing defectors in southern Florida to dictate the foreign policy of an entire administration. Most of all, though, the embargo fails the test of its own logic. In its comments to the UN general assembly last year, the Biden administration argued that the embargo aims to “support the Cuban people in their quest to determine their own future”. But the Biden administration does not dare to explain how making Cuba poorer, sicker and more isolated supports their quest for self-determination. It is a cornerstone of US foreign policy that growth, wealth, and international integration are pathways to freedom. “Starving” the island of Cuba, then, sounds more like administering torture than paving the way to freedom. In his speech on the Senate floor, Marco Rubio argued that the US embargo is just a scapegoat for the communists of Cuba, a “talking point” for the regime. If that is the case, then, why not lift the embargo and take the talking point away? If communism is a failed system, then why not let it fail on its own terms, and let Cubans see for themselves the true face of their revolution? What is Marco Rubio so afraid of? If we are committed to supporting Cubans’ “quest to determine their own future”, then there is only one way forward: end the embargo, and let Cuba finally live. David Adler is the general coordinator of the Progressive InternationalMurder in Successville, which ran on BBC Three from 2015-17, was one of the more innovative British comedies of the past decade. A hybrid of sitcom, reality show, spoof and grand-scale prank, it starred King Gary’s Tom Davis as DI Sleet, a homicide detective who was helped by a different celebrity sidekick each week. The twist: the celebrity was not given the script, forcing them to improvise, under Davis’s deliberately off-putting tutelage, through a torrent of ridiculous interactions with suspects, culminating in them being asked to identify the killer. It was a startling flash of bottled chaos that deserves to be cherished. It doesn’t deserve the new US remake, Murderville (Netflix), which hacks off the concept’s eccentric rough edges, then makes a mess of the less interesting show that’s left. As the sleeker title implies, Murderville streamlines the idea, and it makes one big change that does have a logic to it. The original was set in a town populated by celebrities, played by impressionists. “Gordon Ramsay” was Sleet’s boss, while “Simon Cowell” was the town mayor and so on, which added another layer of absurdity but complicated the format. Lose that, as Murderville does by having ordinary actors playing ordinary characters, and you can focus on each guest’s encounter with the star of the show – Will Arnett, in a crumpled suit and a moustache that refuses to stay stuck on, as unstable detective Terry Seattle. Another less welcome tweak becomes apparent, however, when you look at the guests. The British show favoured structured-reality stars, radio and TV presenters, and girl/boyband singers. Chucking these non actors into an entirely unfamiliar, immersive situation provoked unpredictable reactions. Mark Wright from The Only Way Is Essex was genuinely terrified, while Deborah Meaden from Dragons’ Den maintained her brusque but fair persona and played it straight. Richard Osman from Pointless had to cope with not being the funniest person in the room. Vicky Pattison from Geordie Shore was the funniest person in the room. Murderville flings all that in the bin. Perhaps, the US doesn’t quite have the same depth and diversity as celebrity Britain, so it can’t cast the sort of self-ironising, famous-yet-normal types who made Murder in Successville such a pleasure. With the exception of former NFL running back Marshawn Lynch, the guests are all seasoned actors or comedians (and even Lynch has acted a bit, in Brooklyn Nine-Nine and Westworld). They’re not nearly uncomfortable enough. They’re just pros doing improv. Still, I hoped they’d get a rhythm going with Arnett – replacing the disturbing, hilarious pseudo-bullying of the original with the miraculous plate-spinning feat that is semi-scripted comedy when it clicks. Sadly not. Mediocre comedy is depressing to watch, but mediocre improvisation is excruciating, and almost every Murderville scene is torturous cringe. Arnett just doesn’t have the skills: he is unable to drive the action with any authority, corpses far too often, and has a knack for throwing his guests lines to which there can be no amusing answer. Consequently, all sorts of dead ends and false starts have made the final edit. There are even outright no-nos, such as Lynch looking through the fourth wall to ask the crew for guidance, and Arnett trying to steer a scene back on track by interrupting Sharon Stone and prompting a supporting actor to speak instead. In fairness to Arnett, even the predetermined elements haven’t been properly thought out. Each episode, for instance, has a scene where the celebrity wears a hidden earpiece and must repeat whatever Arnett tells them to say. This old prank has rewarded everyone from Chris Morris to Ant and Dec, but the earpiece-wearer normally embarrasses themselves in front of someone who isn’t in on the joke. Using the gag in a staged scene, where the stooge is talking to an actor, makes no sense. With the too-bland regular cast (Lilan Bowden as a pathologist with no distinguishing characteristics; Haneefah Wood as the police chief who is also Seattle’s weary estranged wife) offering Arnett limited assistance, everything rests on the guests. Sharon Stone is strongly reminiscent of Deborah Meaden with her no-nonsense calm, while Conan O’Brien effortlessly bosses his instalment, making Arnett and everyone else crack up. Kumail Nanjiani’s mix of amiability and sharpness probably works best, creating several nice clashes with Arnett, notably the one where he tries to force him to perform in a Pakistani accent. Even in Murderville’s rare good moments, though, it’s just people we expect to be funny, being quite funny. Where’s the fun in that?Facebook shares fell 25% on Thursday – wiping over $200bn (£147bn) off its value – after the company reported its first ever drop in daily user numbers. The huge collapse – more than value of McDonald’s – came after Mark Zuckerberg’s newly rebranded social media empire, Meta, said daily active user numbers at its main app – a key growth target for investors – fell to 1.929 billion in the three months to December, from 1.93 billion in the previous quarter. The symbolic loss of about 1 million users, the first in 18 years, contributed to a share price rout in after-hours trading on Wednesday that resumed on Thursday. On a call with investors Zuckerberg he was “proud” of the work the company had done last year but acknowledged the company faced tough competition for attention from rivals including TikTok. “Facebook’s big problem is competition for attention – there are only so many people and so many hours in a day and we’re already close to saturation point,” said Neil Wilson, chief markets analyst for trading platform markets.com Reporting its first quarterly earnings under its new name, Meta revealed it had spent $10bn on its vision of the future – the “metaverse” – and warned it faced “headwinds from both increased competition for people’s time and a shift of engagement”. As well as Facebook, Meta owns the photo and videosharing app Instagram, the WhatsApp messaging service and the Oculus virtual reality hardware business. After a boom during the pandemic, markets have punished formerly hot tech companies including Netflix and PayPal for disappointing results. While Meta’s revenues were slightly higher than expected at $33.7bn for the last three months, the drop in daily active users has grabbed investors’ attention. Facebook’s growth has stalled in the US and Europe but the latest falls came from Africa and Latin America. Across all of Meta’s businesses including Facebook, the number of daily active users rose from 2.81 billion to 2.82 billion. Facebook announced it was changing its corporate name to Meta last October. Co-founder Mark Zuckerberg wants to refocus the company on ambitious plans to build a virtual reality “metaverse”. Meta also revealed for the first time how much it had spent so far on its new strategy. The company’s Reality Labs division, which makes virtual reality goggles, smart glasses and other yet-to-be-released products spent more than $10bn in 2021. The spending dragged down quarterly profits by 8% and Zuckerberg has indicated that there is much more spending to come. The company set out a series of issues that could affect growth in the near term, including platform and regulatory changes, as well as tough comparisons to a year when online advertising was boosted by the pandemic. The move also followed a series of crises at the company, which has been blamed for promoting fake news worldwide, stoking hostilities and invading privacy. “Although the direction is clear our path ahead is not yet clearly defined,” said Zuckerberg. “Last year was about putting a stake in the ground about where we are heading. This year is about execution.”From its title, to its lyrics – which variously advise listeners to treat “every day as an image of a moment that’s passed”, “put the baggage down” and count one’s blessings compared to those who “find their way in a hearse” – to the warped version of Big Ben’s chimes that open a track called We Go Back, Animal Collective’s 11th album is a record that feels obsessed with the passing of time. And why wouldn’t it be? The US quartet have been together nearly 20 years. It’s 13 years since their commercial and artistic peak, 2009’s Merriweather Post Pavilion, on which a band who had always wobbled unsteadily along the line that separates the impressively exploratory from the hopelessly self-indulgent hit a graceful stride. That is an album that now feels redolent of a different age, worthy of nostalgic retrospective pieces on American music websites, hymning the “the pre-algorithm era of tastemaking guided by the prominence of MP3 blogs”: an era in which Animal Collective looked like they might cross over to mainstream acceptance. Certainly, the nature of its success suggested it was attracting attention far beyond its usual constituency: Beyoncé reworked a line from its standout single My Girls on her universally lauded album Lemonade. While some of their peers grasped the opportunity (Kevin Parker of Tame Impala, whose similarly psychedelically inclined debut InnerSpeaker appeared in Merriweather Post Pavilion’s wake, has become a regular pop world fixture, collaborating with Lady Gaga, Kanye West and Mark Ronson) Animal Collective appeared to let the momentum dissipate. They worked on two films: the absolutely dreadful would-be arthouse flick ODDSAC and the rather pretty Tangerine Reef, which set their music to footage of marine life. The band’s members released eight solo albums between them. The follow-ups to Merriweather Post Pavilion, the cluttered Centipede Hz and 2016’s frantic and abrasive Painting With were more coolly received: Beyoncé has not, as yet, lifted anything from either of these. But then, Animal Collective always were adherents of the Grateful Dead – they sampled 1974’s Unbroken Chain on an EP released just after Merriweather Post Pavilion’s success; band member Dave “Avey Tare” Portner contributed vocals to Dead percussionist Mickey Hart’s 2017 solo album – and they seem to have decided Garcia and co’s way of doing things suited them too: operating at a slight remove from whatever else is happening in the music business, buoyed by a fanbase big on the FLAC file equivalent of live tape trading. For better or for worse, the sense of a band preaching to the choir permeates Time Skiffs. With its lyrical references to matters temporal (“why are we in such a rush?” wonders Car Keys; “I cut my pace, no more racing urges,” offers Strung With Everything, “how many days do we have?”; while on Prester John, even the sight of a dried-up leaf leads the narrator to consider it had “a good long run, with a world of good intentions by it”) it often feels like it’s addressing an audience who have been with Animal Collective for many years: noughties hipsters now staring down the barrel of middle age and grappling with the realisation that one’s time on Earth isn’t as limitless as it once seemed. Even Walker, a eulogy for the late Scott Walker stirs Animal Collective’s own mortality into the mix: “Appreciate you cannot wait … we’ll see you out there”. Musically, there are lovely tunes – particularly the lazily gliding closer Royal and Desire – but there’s little of the head-turning WTF factor that marked out Merriweather Post Pavillion, or its predecessor Strawberry Jam, and nothing resembling a breakout hit along the lines of My Girls. There’s still a lot of cavernous echo applied to everything, but the sound feels relatively stripped back – the heady, enveloping psychedelic swirl of those albums is absent. On the plus side, so is Painting With’s spectacularly irritating trademark vocal style, in which Portner and Noah “Panda Bear” Lennox duetted by singing not alternating words, but alternating syllables of each word. In fact, the sonic mood often feels less psychedelic than strangely New Age-y, sounds associated with a genre that appealed to hippies who had outgrown the lysergic mayhem of their youth floating over Lennox’s rolling drum patters: keyboard riffs that twinkle like light on water; noises that recall gamelan instruments or things made of bamboo being struck with beaters, or – on the intro to Cherokee – some kind of hammered dulcimer; the minute of ambient synth, flickers of pedal steel guitar and what sounds like clanking wind chimes that opens Strung With Everything. Time Skiffs isn’t a straightforward album by most artists’ standards: that its patchworks of sound, lengthy instrumental interludes and slowly uncoiling song structures represent Animal Collective dialling things down says more about their past oeuvre than anything else. As it is, it feels like an act of quiet consolidation rather than a breakthrough, aimed squarely at existing fans, unbothered by grabbing anyone else’s attention. “How are we doing now?” asks Car Keys, over and over again, as if checking in on an old friend, a line that sums up both Time Skiffs’ limitations and its charm. This week Alexis listened to Arlo Parks – Softly Softly isn’t a huge leap forward from Parks’ debut album, but it’s lovely nonetheless: a breakup song that’s oddly buoyant and uplifting.If you’d like to ask the Guardian consumer team a question about the new energy price cap and what impact it will have on you and your household, please get in touch. If you have any questions about the cap, the rise in energy bills and the cost of living crisis, please get in touch and our experts will try and provide the answers. How to get in touch You can send us your questions by filling in the form below. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.Keir Starmer has accused Boris Johnson of contaminating faith in democracy by trying to “devalue the rules so they don’t matter to anyone any more”, and hit out at the government for being too preoccupied with party allegations to deal with a looming cost-of-living crisis. The Labour leader said ministers were “intent on saving themselves, not serving the country” and called out Johnson for making “repeated lies from the dispatch box”. After it was revealed 12 gatherings in Downing Street and across Whitehall were being investigated by Scotland Yard, Starmer said No 10 was “in paralysis” and suggested he thought Johnson had knowingly broken strict Covid laws. The prime minister has said people should wait for the Met’s inquiries to conclude, but is under mounting pressure from Tory MPs who are continuing to submit no-confidence letters. In a speech on Thursday at Edelman, Starmer vowed that he would lead a Labour government that abided by the “Nolan principles”, seven key standards that holders of public office are already expected to observe: selflessness, integrity, objectivity, accountability, openness, honesty and leadership. “I shouldn’t have to pledge to honour these principles but, sadly, I feel I do,” Starmer said. “It isn’t that the prime minister thinks the rules don’t apply. He absolutely knows that they do. “His strategy is to devalue the rules so they don’t matter to anyone any more. So that politics becomes contaminated. Cynicism and alienation replace confidence and trust. So that the taunt ‘politicians are just in it for themselves’ becomes accepted wisdom. “It is a strategy to sow disillusion; to convince people that things can’t get better, government can’t improve people’s lives, progress isn’t possible because politics doesn’t work. “But I’m not going to play the prime minister’s game. I simply refuse to accept that Britain can’t be governed better than this.” Starmer said he would not “simply shrug my shoulders at the dishonesty and disrespect on the basis that it is ‘priced in’” with Johnson. He also accused the prime minister of issuing “repeated lies from the dispatch box” in parliament – a statement MPs are usually unable to make from the Commons given the strict rules about not accusing someone else of deliberately misleading the house. It comes after Johnson vowed to fight on as prime minister and lead the Tories into the next election, which could be as late as 2024, suggesting he hoped to remain in post until 2029. However, a Conservative MP and former cabinet minister said Johnson had already lost the trust of “large parts of the population”. David Davis, an ex-Brexit secretary, told Times Radio: “The problem is the prime minister is losing or has lost the trust of a large part of the population, which is important for the administration of law, that people should follow what the government says, and so on.” Three further MPs announced publicly they had submitted no-confidence letters in Johnson on Thursday, meaning the numbers are gradually increasing toward the threshold of 54 needed to trigger a ballot on the prime minister’s premiership. Johnson has brushed off suggestions he attended any gatherings that constituted parties, though apologised earlier this week after the interim findings of a report were published by senior civil servant Sue Gray. Gray’s report has not been published in full because of the ongoing Met inquiry, but a brief “update” on her investigation criticised “failures of leadership and judgment” at the top of government. Johnson said he was “sorry for the things we simply did not get right and sorry for the way this matter has been handled” and that it was “no use” trying to argue whether events broke the rules or not because he understood “the anger that people feel”. He also spoke of reviewing the civil service and special adviser codes of conduct – but neglected to include the ministerial code.The Serpentine Gallery’s annual summer pavilion will take a spiritual turn this year, in the form of a cylindrical Black Chapel, designed by Chicago-based artist Theaster Gates. Taking inspiration from the kilns of Stoke-on-Trent, the wooden structure will rise up to a great domed roof, punctured by a central oculus, illuminating a circular space for reflection and musical performances. “Coming out of Covid, I thought how nice it would be to have a place of quietude,” said Gates. “It’s a place for people to be with their thoughts and rest, a sacred chapel where you can sit and be reflective. It should give you the ability to touch your inside self.” The pop-up Pantheon, which has been designed with the help of Adjaye Associates, will feature a large bronze bell at its entrance, salvaged from the St Laurence church on Chicago’s South Side, which was demolished in 2014. It will be used to signal concerts and events in a wide-ranging programme, including a planned performance by Gates and his band, the Black Monks. “I want it to be a chapel for new music,” said Gates. “Gospel, alt-jazz, avant garde sounds, the history of British black music, Gregorian and Benedictine chants – all the things me and my band are into.” The programme is still to be confirmed, but Gates said he is speaking to Corinne Bailey Rae, the Otolith Group and Phoebe Collings-James, and wants to invite “vocal ensembles and the great choirs of London”. He hopes to record in the space, too, and produce vinyl records with his label, Black Madonna Press, a sub-label of the Vinyl Factory. Although artists have collaborated on the London gallery’s pavilions in the past – including Olafur Eliasson with architect Kjetil Thorsen in 2007, and Ai Weiwei with Herzog &amp; de Meuron in 2012 – this is the first time that an artist has been given top billing (David Adjaye’s firm is credited with “architectural support”). The selection of Gates was delayed by a year, so that it could coincide with his wider multi-venue project in London, The Question of Clay, which has seen his work exhibited across the V&amp;A, Whitechapel Gallery and White Cube, exploring the history, craft and racial politics of ceramics. “I always wanted to capstone the clay project with this vessel-like structure that would allow great things to happen,” said Gates. He had planned to build the pavilion from bricks, echoing his 2017 project for the Walker Art Center in Minneapolis, Black Vessel for a Saint, but it proved too expensive and environmentally unfriendly for the temporary structure. Instead, the pavilion will be made from a frame of slender timber and steel trusses, which will form a circle of columns, supporting the 16-metre diameter roof, with further trusses radiating from the 11-metre-high oculus, like the spokes of a bicycle wheel. Images give the impression of an industrial space, like being inside a miniature gasometer. The frame will be clad with plywood and covered with a waterproof membrane – lending it a similar finish to Peter Zumthor’s enigmatic 2011 pavilion – while the lower levels will be lined with black-stained timber boarding, inside and out, visually anchoring the structure to the ground. Shallow ramps will lead in and out of two doorways, placed off-centre, while a large freestanding wall inside will separate a cafe area from the space for reflection and performance. The three-metre oculus, meanwhile, will be open to the elements. “It will be a feature when it rains!” said Gates. “That’s just part of the beauty. I love that idea that nature will come in. And we’ve got great drainage!” He says the title of the pavilion, Black Chapel, acknowledges the role that sacred music and the sacred arts have had on his practice. It is also a nod to a project with the same name he produced in 2019 for the Haus der Kunst in Munich, commissioned by the late curator Okwui Enwezor, who also invited him to participate in the 2015 Venice Biennale. “I first took the St Laurence bell to Venice,” he said, “so now I’m going to bring it to London to honour Okwui, and all these great people in my life who have encouraged the relationship between art, architecture and the sacred.” The artist is no stranger to architecture, having restored and converted several vacant buildings into cultural institutions with archival collections on the South Side of Chicago. He is now part of a team working on the International Slavery Museum in Liverpool, with Adjaye and Asif Khan, and he has an advisory role on the Barack Obama Presidential Center, also planned for Chicago’s South Side. “As artists, we’re novices to architecture,” he said. “So we can sometimes make suggestions that are slightly different. I’ve been looking at the way African Americans hijacked modernism, and added old colour and old patterns to create this kind of hybrid design philosophy.” He sees the Serpentine Pavilion as the start of a new architectural enquiry. “I feel like it’s really the beginning of my investigation into spherical structures,” he said. “I’m moving from smaller vessels to bigger and bigger vessels.” Serpentine Pavilion: Black Chapel is at the Serpentine Gallery, London, from 10 June to 16 October.Sue Gray’s interim report into events at No 10 finds “failures of leadership and judgment”. Exactly whose failures are left hanging, for now. I’m a serial Boris supporter. As an MP, I backed his abortive leadership bid in 2016 and his victorious campaign in 2019. I was drawn to his brand of Brexity, one-nation Conservatism. I doubt any of us backed him because we’d spotted a paragon of virtue. We were clear eyed about him then, we must own the consequences now. Indeed, a sense of vicarious liability for the man we advanced has probably stayed the hand of several MPs in recent days. But the Conservative party is notoriously unsentimental. It likes to be a winning machine. Dark arts are always in scope. The calculus my colleagues are now grappling with is whether Boris is ultimately an electoral asset or liability. It seems a tipping point in either direction has not yet been reached. But if and when the men and women in grey suits do end up calling time on the PM, he will be entitled to leave with head held high. Guardian readers can spit as many tacks as they like, but he delivered Brexit. Only Boris could. He won a jaw-dropping election victory, seizing votes in districts that had eluded my party for decades. To the uncomprehending fury of the fashionable London left, UK politics will never again be the same. The judgment calls on Covid have – generally – been the right ones. OECD data points to the UK’s economic recovery leading the G7 in 2022. These are things that have real life consequences for people I represent, who live way outside the M25. I am not attempting to belittle or distract from partygate. Integrity and honesty should be at the very heart of government alongside leadership and judgment. Law makers simply can’t be law breakers. The parliamentary Conservative party may hand Boris his P45 if the Met or Gray’s definitive report collar the PM. But I’m guessing the point of danger for Boris will be in May. Then we will probably have a perfect storm – the widely predicted midterm council election hit, with disposable incomes falling as energy costs bite, national insurance rises, and inflation erases any uptick in wages. What to do? The usual deputies’ head may roll, obviously. Then there’s the rumoured bandolier of eye-catching policy announcements that researchers believe will appeal particularly in so-called “red wall” seats. These deliverables, the young ones calculate, will shore up the PM’s position among wavering MPs. But government must never be a self-licking lollipop. For example, it’s all very well calling in the navy to sort out the Channel crisis. Mobilising the troops always look good. But unless the fundamentals are changed – and they have not been – the problem is simply kicked down the road and, in this case, the navy’s reputation with it. No, the key to any reset can only be an unrelenting focus on driving through manifesto commitments. No gimmicks, no smoke and mirrors – for example around what is and is not a new hospital and, for goodness sake, no more mayors. Two years of this parliamentary term have been lost to Covid. That means the government has to work twice as fast to ensure big-ticket items such as social care, and a truly epic deal on new homes, raising them up from the nation’s brownfield sites in a way not seen since the early 1950s, are under way by the time voters next have an opportunity to pass judgment. Andrew Murrison is the Conservative MP for South West Wiltshire, and a former minister of state for international development and the Middle EastChildren with mental health problems are dying because of failings in NHS treatment, coroners across England have said in what psychiatrists and campaigners have called “deeply concerning” findings. In the last five years coroners have issued reports to prevent future deaths in at least 14 cases in which under-18s have died while being treated by children’s and adolescent mental health services (CAMHS). The most common issues that arise are delays in treatment and a lack of support in helping patients transition to adult services when they turn 18. Coroners issue reports to prevent future deaths in extreme cases when it is decided that if changes are not made then another person could die. Dr Elaine Lockhart, the chair of the Royal College of Psychiatrists’ faculty of child and adolescent psychiatry, said the findings were “deeply concerning” and every death was a tragedy. She said there were too often lengthy delays and services were under strain as demand rises and the NHS faces workforce shortages. “In child and adolescent mental health services in England, 15% of consultant psychiatrist posts are vacant,” Lockhart said, calling for more support, investment and planning to grow staff levels. Among the cases issued with reports to prevent future deaths were those of: Sky Rollings, who died four days after being admitted to hospital. Pressure was applied for her to be transferred after she turned 18 and no longer qualified for child and adolescent mental health services (CAMHS). Instead of receiving the standard six-month transition, the college student was given six weeks. Mary Bush, who was assessed three weeks later than she should have been. There was a delay in Mary receiving psychological therapy, and she was still on the waiting list at the time of her death aged 15. Sam Gould, 16, who took her own life in September 2018. A coroner said “systemic weaknesses and failings” in communication between healthcare agencies probably caused her death. Becky Romero, 15, who died at her home in Bristol. The coroner ruled she died as a direct consequence of neglect by the NHS, because the service that was supposed to help her did not have enough resources. Tom Madders, the director of communications and campaigns at the charity YoungMinds, said: “It goes without saying that when young people seek help for their mental health they should be looked after, kept safe and helped to get better.” Madders raised concerns over waiting times and a high threshold for treatment. “Some young people start to self-harm, drop out of school or become suicidal before they get help, and those who transition into adult services face a lack of support,” he said. He called for more investment and early intervention. Another recent case flagged by coroners was that of Ellis Murphy-Richards, 15, who killed himself shortly after walking out of a counselling session on 30 September 2020. Concluding the inquest last year, the coroner Sonia Hayes raised concerns about the care the transgender teenager received hours before his death. He had tried to take his own life the night before. Hayes sent a report to prevent future deaths criticising the fact that an NHS worker had had to deal with the situation alone and that a psychiatrist had deviated from a care plan. She said there was no contingency plan being in place to deal with a young person who refused help. Speaking to the Guardian, Ellis’s mother, Natasha Murphy, said her “honest mistake was trusting CAMHS”. She said she felt she would have managed to look after Ellis and protect him as she had over the previous few years. Murphy felt her son was not taken seriously. A Department of Health and Social Care spokesperson said: “Every loss of life is a tragedy and the impact on families can be devastating. We are committed to looking after children and young people’s mental health and ensuring they have access to safe, appropriate care.” The department said that through the NHS long-term plan it was providing an extra £2.3bn a year to expand mental health services, meaning 345,000 more children and young people would be helped by 2023-24. In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org.In their final conversation with counsellors, Sailor, who identified as non-binary, felt weighed down. The 14-year-old described the mass of emotions in them as growing by the day, and felt they had nowhere to turn for help. Their parents, Jason and Monika, struggle to get the words out when they think of their child feeling so alone. Despite a referral to the NHS a year before Sailor died, no official help or assessment took place. The teenager ended up taking their own life in September last year after visits to accident and emergency owing to self-harming. “Our child was first referred by the school in October or November of 2020 and then later by a GP,” says Sailor’s mother, Monika. She says that at the end of June the family ended up in hospital after a particularly bad cutting incident that left them concerned. “The psychiatric nurses gave a safeguard plan which involved locking up sharp items. There was no mention of suicide,” Monika says, adding that in later calls with health experts exercise was suggested as a solution. Sailor’s parents hunted for solutions but private counsellors refused to take a child who self-harmed. “They were considered too high-risk and counsellors were worried about being sued if something bad happened … Both Jason and I over a period of months tried several times a week to get Sailor help and it was difficult. How hard can it be when you say you have a 14-year-old who is self-harming, has obsessive compulsive disorder and wants to identify as gender neutral. “If you cannot get help for a young person dealing with all these things, it’s not surprising what happened. But it is heartbreaking as Sailor’s death was so avoidable.” To get a quicker assessment, Jason and Monika would need to wait until “absolute crisis”, professionals said. Sailor’s mental health deteriorated over lockdown but Jason says he feels a lack of funding is no excuse for poor support. “If you are in an organisation that is cash-strapped then work out how to best serve the people you need to,” he says. Sailor struggled with school shutting and opening up and was more stable when at home. They were popular but their OCD symptoms could be triggered by going to school due to a lack of control. “The humanity of this whole thing gets lost. From the perspective of mental health services it’s another person on a list, and to triage a child you wait until someone tries to kill themselves. But at this stage there’s a 50/50 chance of saving their life and in Sailor’s case it was too late. Our child died.” Monika says Sailor was “not a difficult teenager” and was “not hard work”. “They were creative, artistic and musical. I am not saying this because they were our child, it’s true. Sailor was not demanding and difficult like teenagers can be. We never fought, and I am a hothead,” she says. The parents say it was hard to hear Sailor’s final comments. “Sailor was saying there was no one there to help them, and all Sailor wanted was to be taken seriously by a doctor or children’s services,” Jason says. In the UK, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international suicide helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org.Come on Pilgrim is the greatest debut album by anyone, ever. Discuss. mungoslut I will partially agree, at least to appear humble. But seeing as I’m not so humble … I was listening to Murmur by REM a lot just before Come on Pilgrim and that was hugely influential on me as a songwriter. I’m going to be cocky and say: we were even better than Murmur. I’ve had many a pub argument where I defended my position that I’d take the Frank Black back catalogue over Pixies. Which are you most proud of? SpoctorDooner I suppose I’m most proud of the Pixies catalogue because that’s what I’m known for. I’m glad for the paradigm of an actual band where everything has to go through a strong filter with a certain amount of compromise and humility. That can be difficult to deal with when you’re a young, cocky rock musician and still an idiot. What was it like performing with David Bowie? alyslinn I was very nervous. There were all these other greats, like Robert Smith, Sonic Youth and Lou Reed, so I certainly felt the most junior. But Bowie and his band were very gracious and accommodating. It was his 50th, and what are you going to give someone like that for their birthday? So I re-recorded [Bowie track] Fashion, but using the original lyric, which I understood was “fascist”. My friend John Flansburgh from They Might Be Giants brought some musicians to a recording studio in New York the day I sang with Bowie. I burned two copies: one my ex-wife probably still has, and the other copy I gave to birthday boy. What’s the strangest thing you’ve ever seen? Porcinho I used to have this dog who was fixed, so it didn’t have any testicles. And I had this cat who was also fixed, so it didn’t have a lot of sexual energy. They’d hang out on my bed with me, and often, when I would wake up, the cat would be performing fellatio on the dog. It’s not necessarily what you want to see before you’ve had your morning coffee. I won’t tell you their names because I don’t want to embarrass them. They read all my press. No one in Pixies ever speaks during a concert – not even a thank you. What’s the thinking? thejungpretender I have nothing against people who talk between songs. I’m just not very good at it. You become very self-conscious when someone’s tuning their guitar or there’s a pause in the show. It makes you nervous, so you ramble and make stupid jokes into the microphone. I’d listen back to early recordings; most of the time you couldn’t understand what I was saying, and if you did understand, it was stupid, so I just felt like an idiot. Kim [Deal, former Pixies bassist] was much better at talking to the audience, but when we got back together, she fell out of habit. Now it’s a better psychological place for everybody: for me, for the show, for the reverence of music and the gathering of people. How do you manage to keep screaming night after night? Have you ever shot your voice? eightyseventh I used to blow it out a bit when I was younger, so I took singing lessons from an opera guy in LA, who taught me an old bel canto opera trick: to look like you’re delivering 100% while actually giving 40%. If you’re wearing an operatic Viking costume for four hours, that’s a long time to be belting it out. It’s the same in a rock band. I’ve learned how to hide the appearance of restraint. Please elaborate on the inspiration behind Monkey Gone to Heaven. Virke7 I guess it’s loosely inspired by the so-called human dilemma of existence, our existential problem on whether we can survive as a race. But it’s told without any agenda or judgment and mixes in some very loose biblical, sing-songy things because, you know, “The devil is six and God is seven” rhymes with heaven. It’s a nursery rhyme with mythological folk imagery. In oversimplified evolutionary terms, we are descended from apes and monkeys, so they are the animal we metaphorically most relate to because of this evolutionary kinship. So that’s why it’s not a bird or a fish gone to heaven. Do you believe in God? SimonBlackFromPoland Well, as my father used to reply to the same question: we could probably talk about that all day long. I’ve always been interested in the UFO imagery that pops up throughout your oeuvre. I remember an interview where you spoke about a UFO sighting on the American Great Plains when you were a kid.PeterSaucer The best reference I can give is a Frank Black and the Catholics B-side called Le Cigare Volant, which means flying cigar. There’s a delicious Californian wine called Le Cigare Volant, very similar to Châteauneuf-du-Pape – my favourite wine, although I don’t really drink any more. If you do drink, I recommend Le Cigare Volant from the north of Santa Barbara. Anyway: the flying cigar is the classic description of unidentified flying objects, and I did observe a flying cigar with my brother when we were quite young. It was broad daylight, very slow moving, very close to us and had no markings. I recount the story in more poetic terms in song. What would visitors from another planet make of your music? Kevink2000 I imagine they would probably deduce a lot of information about who I was as a specimen of my species. They’d figure out how old I am, what sex I am, probably my age. But I expect they might find the music a little more distressing. Have you discovered any music in the past few years that has really inspired you? PhilClements The new Sleaford Mods album that came out last year is really fucking great. I listen to that a lot. What’s your favourite album by the Fall? TheFall2007 I Am Kurious Oranj. I was fortunate to go to two of your Brixton Academy shows when you reformed Pixies in 2004 – perhaps the best atmosphere of any gig I have been to. What are your memories? radiofour The first memory that comes to mind is that we were going to do all of our big numbers, including Hey, but I wasn’t really convinced that I was playing the guitar riff correctly. Fortunately [Pixies guitarist] Joey Santiago’s brother Bob, who has performed with Pixies, was at the first show and said: “Yes, that’s because you’re playing it wrong,” and showed me how to play it. So I’m grateful to Bob for steering me on what was a potentially a small thing, but kind of a big thing too. Know any good jokes? eendean Here’s one I learned from my grandfather. What’s the difference between a duck? One leg is both the same. I don’t understand it either. What is a debaser? JonBroster I guess it means: one who debases. A debaser. It was an attempt to introduce a new word into the lexicon, but I don’t think it’s been successful, else I would have heard about it. Kim Deal once gave a 16-year-old me a pair of your shoes after a gig in 1989. Do you want them back? ismightier I appreciate the offer but they probably have value to the person who has them. They might be vintage by now! A Japanese clothing dealer once offered me $500 cash on the spot for my tennis shoes, but they had more value to me as a pair of shoes that day. You don’t walk around the big city in bare feet. I was like: “I need my shoes. Sorry.” Are you friends with Kim Deal or do you guys hate each other? POlskiBus I mean, we’re always friends. You don’t be in a band together and not be friends. I don’t recall when I last spoke to her, and I’m not very good at Christmas cards. We did a lot of tours together, we wrote together and we made all those records together … but nothing is for ever. You’re sort of damned if you do and damned if you don’t. If you don’t get back together, people say: “Oh, that’s a bit sad. What are your memories? What are your regrets?” And if you don’t break up and stay together, everyone says: “Oh, are you guys still together, doing that same old shtick?” Have you ever written a song that made you think: “How will I ever top that”? JamesDonnelly Oh, sure. Every time I write a song that I’m pleased with. I’ve put together about 40 songs for the current Pixies record. A couple of times I even surprised myself, but I think it’s a common experience in songwriting. You write something that you’re pleased with and your first thought is: “I just wrote the best song I ever wrote.” But to say “I’m never going to write another song that good” would be quite an epiphany, so I’m not inclined to make that kind of statement. Have you ever felt like saying: “Fuck this shit, I’m going to live in a cabin in the woods”? HomerGoetznutz Sure. We all have our fleeting thoughts of: I never want to do what I do all the time ever again. I think we mean well when we speak to ourselves in that way, but it’s easy to have these kinds of epiphanies that aren’t necessarily that accurate. Where is your mind? upyerbum The mind is less debated than the existence of soul. The mind seems to be finite, with a beginning, a middle and an end, and then it leaves ghosts and residue. The mind is not in your brain; it’s reported by your brain, so the notion is that it’s not actually your brain, but it’s not your soul or your so-called art either. • Pixies Live in Brixton, an 8LP/CD box set, is released on 25 FebruaryThe remains of a woolly mammoth, rhinoceros, bison, wolf and hyena have been found in a cave system uncovered by a digger during the building of a new town in the south-west of England. Experts said the find at Sherford, a 5,500-home development on the outskirts of Plymouth, was “exceptional” and gave an astonishing glimpse into the megafauna that roamed what is now Devon between 30,000 and 60,000 years ago. More than 200 clusters of bones have been carefully removed from the cave and they will be examined to try to help paint a picture of what life was like in ice age Britain. The samples taken from the site have so far uncovered: Partial remains of a woolly mammoth, including a tusk, molar tooth and other bones Partial remains of a woolly rhinoceros, including an incomplete skull and lower jaw A virtually complete wolf skeleton Partial remains of hyena, horse, reindeer, mountain hare and red fox Bones of various small mammals such as bats and shrews. It is anticipated that further bones of small mammals will be identified during post-excavation laboratory analysis. Whether all of the creatures uncovered at Sherford coexisted or lived at different points over a much longer time span is uncertain. One theory is that some of the creatures fell into a pit and were unable to escape, and carnivorous scavengers followed and met a similar fate – or the animals died elsewhere and the bones washed into the area over a period of time. Understanding the range of mammals present, particularly herbivores, will also provide an insight into the plants that may have existed at the time. Danielle Schreve, professor of quaternary science at Royal Holloway University of London, was one of those who crawled into the cave to help supervise the recovery work. “It’s really extraordinary to go into a cave and find remains of things like woolly mammoth tusks,” she said. “It’s pretty special.” Schreve said it was probably the most significant find of its kind since the discovery of the Joint Mitnor cave in Devon more than 80 years ago. The animal bones and environmental samples have been recorded and removed from the ground and are undergoing academic analysis and conservation. It is expected that the full archive of remains will return to Devon, into the care of The Box, Plymouth’s revamped museum. Developers have said the area where the remains were found would be conserved and nothing would be built on top, but the entrance to the cave will be sealed. Rob Bourn, the managing director of Orion Heritage and lead archaeologist on the project for the Sherford Consortium, said: “This is a major discovery of national significance, a once in a lifetime experience for those involved. To find such an array of artefacts untouched for so long is a rare and special occurrence.” Bourn said the south-west of England was very different in the time of the mammoth. “It was an area where mammoths and other creatures thrived, roaming great distances across a landscape that looked very different to today, with glaciers not far away in south Wales and a volatile climate prone to huge floods.” Duncan Wilson, the chief executive of Historic England, said: “This discovery is exceptional. To have found partial remains of such a range of species here in Devon gives us a brilliant insight into the animals which roamed around ice age Britain thousands of years ago, as well as a better understanding of the environment and climate at the time.”In an east London pub, the Glory, Adam All is pulling bras out from the pockets of his purple suit as he sings on stage. Cheeky, fun and dapper, he wears a glittery waistcoat over a gold satin shirt, his pink bow tie matching the shade of his rectangular glasses. All is a drag king; that is, usually a cisgender woman, transgender man or non-binary person performing in male or masculine drag on stage. This can include singing, lip-syncing and dancing. While drag queens have broken into the mainstream, largely thanks to the success of RuPaul’s Drag Race, their kingly counterparts have been confined to a more underground existence. Tonight, we are in a basement. Still, things are changing. Since starting out in Southampton in 2008, All is now part of a thriving scene of drag kings across the UK. Being a king is his full-time job. “There are far more of us now, and we are smashing down doors left, right and centre,” he says. Tonight’s event, an open mic for drag kings, is sold out – as was the launch event for new drag king collective KingDom, in the same venue the night before. Armed with swagger, charm and – at times – gyrating hips, drag kings seek to do anything from dismantling the patriarchy and toxic masculinity, often by taking on male stereotypes, to covering mental health, sexuality and gender identity. “The message is much more about nutritious masculinity and looking at how positive that can be for all of society,” says All. This, however, can be a difficult task, explains drag king Chiyo, who describes himself as a “professional hustler”. “With the art of being a drag queen, you get feminine energy, which is beautiful and elegant,” he says. “But, drag kings, we work with masculinity, which is toxic and boring and gross. So we have to find a way to make masculinity not only entertaining, but not toxic, and show people what healthy masculinity can look like.” In London, LGBTQ+ venues – including the Glory, She Soho, Royal Vauxhall Tavern and Phoenix Arts Club – are increasingly hosting drag-king-specific events, such as annual battle Man Up, showcase Kings of Clubs, and drag king cabaret BOiBox (run by All and his wife Apple Derrieres). Other top names in the capital include Prinx Silver, Don One, Oedipussi Rex, Izzy Aman, Christian Adore and the drag king collective Pecs. “Drag kings are just lovely, so supportive, always gassing you up, always showing up for you,” says Beau Jangles, who started performing as a drag king after going to a workshop run by Pecs in 2018. Since then, Jangles – his name inspired by the dancer Bill “Bojangles” Robinson – has been making waves. In December he performed in a Dick Whittington drag pantomime in the West End of London. “Without doing drag king-ing I wouldn’t have realised that I’m non-binary as quickly,” he explains. “It was very important to me when I was figuring out my queerness, as a way of tapping into the masculinity that I had been told I wasn’t allowed to.” Outside the capital, drag kings are also enjoying success. There is Brighton’s Sammy Silver, Newcastle’s Baron LaVey and, in Bournemouth, two kings who are surely among the best-named in the country: Dandy Issues and Well Hung Parliament. In Cardiff, there is Justin Drag; in Bristol, Oliver Assets and Fluxx Wyldly front the Brizzle Boyz drag king night; and, in Birmingham, Christian Gay and Victor Velvet have created drag night Kings ‘N’ Things. On the Manchester circuit, Mark Anthony is putting a male spin on burlesque, known as “boylesque”. In Glasgow, Dorian T Fisk is at the forefront of a burgeoning Scottish scene, and has been running his Shut Up and King workshops since the start of the pandemic. He wants to see drag kings on an equal footing with the queens. “A lot more show bookers are booking kings, so we’re starting to even out a little bit,” he explains. “But there is a lot of work to be done. We’re still getting queen-only lineups … I’m seeing some of that change happen in Scotland. We’ve proven that people will come and pay to see drag kings on stage.” Based in Derby, Romeo De La Cruz has performed around the UK with the aim of empowering LGBTQ+ people. “For me, it’s to bring, not just drag, but queerness to places where you don’t have that representation,” they say. “It’s about branching out into areas where we need to be showing people that may not have that representation to feel like: ‘Do you know what, there is someone else I can relate to. There is someone else like me. I’m not alone.’ I really enjoy that.” Back at the Glory, All dedicates his final song to Karen Fisch, a veteran drag king performer who is in the audience. What does the future look like for drag kings? “I can see all sorts of exciting things happening for kings,” says All. “I want to say that there will be similar representation of kings as queens in the mainstream. People are demanding change. So it can’t not happen. But how far that goes will be up to whether or not all the right pieces click into place at the right time.”Best film Belfast Don’t Look Up Dune Licorice Pizza The Power of the Dog Outstanding British film After Love Ali &amp; Ava Belfast Boiling Point Cyrano Everybody’s Talking About Jamie House of Gucci Last Night in Soho No Time to Die Passing Outstanding debut by a British writer, director or producer After Love – Aleem Khan (writer/director) Boiling Point – James Cummings (writer), Hester Ruoff (producer) [also written by Philip Barantini and produced by Bart Ruspoli] The Harder They Fall – Jeymes Samuel (writer/director) [also written by Boaz Yakin] Keyboard Fantasies – Posy Dixon (writer/director), Liv Proctor (producer) Passing – Rebecca Hall (writer/director) Best film not in the English language Drive My Car The Hand of God Parallel Mothers Petite Maman The Worst Person in the World Best documentary Becoming Cousteau Cow Flee The Rescue Summer of Soul Best animated film Encanto Flee Luca The Mitchells vs the Machines Best director Aleem Khan (After Love) Ryûsuke Hamaguchi (Drive My Car) Audrey Diwan (Happening) Paul Thomas Anderson (Licorice Pizza) Jane Campion (The Power of the Dog) Julia Ducournau (Titane) Best original screenplay Aaron Sorkin (Being the Ricardos) Kenneth Branagh (Belfast) Adam McKay (Don’t Look Up) Zach Baylin (King Richard) Paul Thomas Anderson (Licorice Pizza) Best adapted screenplay Sian Heder (Coda) Ryûsuke Hamaguchi (Drive My Car) Eric Roth, Jon Spaihts, Denis Villeneuve (Dune) Maggie Gyllenhaal (The Lost Daughter) Jane Campion (The Power of the Dog) Best actress Lady Gaga (House of Gucci) Alana Haim (Licorice Pizza) Emilia Jones (Coda) Renate Reinsve (The Worst Person in the World) Joanna Scanlan (After Love) Tessa Thompson (Passing) Best actor Adeel Akhtar (Ali &amp; Ava) Mahershala Ali (Swan Song) Benedict Cumberbatch (The Power of the Dog) Leonardo DiCaprio (Don’t Look Up) Stephen Graham (Boiling Point) Will Smith (King Richard) Best supporting actress Caitríona Balfe (Belfast) Jessie Buckley (The Lost Daughter) Ariana DeBose (West Side Story) Ann Dowd (Mass) Aunjanue Ellis (King Richard) Ruth Negga (Passing) Best supporting actor Mike Faist (West Side Story) Ciarán Hinds (Belfast) Troy Kotsur (Coda) Woody Norman (C’mon C’mon) Jesse Plemons (The Power of the Dog) Kodi Smit-McPhee (The Power of the Dog) Best original score Being the Ricardos Don’t Look Up Dune The French Dispatch The Power of the Dog Best casting Boiling Point Dune The Hand of God King Richard West Side Story Best cinematography Dune Nightmare Alley No Time to Die The Power of the Dog The Tragedy of Macbeth Best editing Belfast Dune Licorice Pizza No Time to Die Summer of Soul Best production design Cyrano Dune The French Dispatch Nightmare Alley West Side Story Best costume design Cruella Cyrano Dune The French Dispatch Nightmare Alley Best makeup and hair Cruella Cyrano Dune The Eyes of Tammy Faye House of Gucci Best sound Dune Last Night in Soho No Time to Die A Quiet Place Part II West Side Story Best special visual effects Dune Free Guy Ghostbusters: Afterlife The Matrix Resurrections No Time to Die Best British short animation Affairs of the Art Do Not Feed the Pigeons Night of the Living Dread Best British short film The Black Cop Femme The Palace Stuffed Three Meetings of the Extraordinary Committee Rising Star Award (voted for by the public) Ariana DeBose Harris Dickinson Lashana Lynch Millicent Simmonds Kodi Smit-McPheeLin, 73, Newcastle Occupation Retired social worker/university lecturer Voting record Lin voted Labour under Jeremy Corbyn, but has left the party because she thinks Keir Starmer is moving too far to the right; in the EU referendum she voted remain Amuse bouche Lin is a co-owner of a semi-professional football club Bill, 70, Morpeth Occupation Project manager, retired Voting record Bill voted for Harold Wilson in 1970. Then he had an election hiatus, returning in 2005 when he voted Conservative as a protest against Tony Blair going to war in Iraq. After that, he voted Tory again, “then Ukip came along and I thought: yeah, let’s go with these” Amuse bouche Bill once ran the San Diego marathon dressed as Elvis Presley For starters Lin We talked about trans issues. I talked about men in prison saying they were women and transferring into women’s prisons; cases where women had been abused. I explained about women’s safe spaces being eroded and how we weren’t allowed to discuss it. He didn’t know about it and wasn’t particularly interested. Bill I haven’t got a duck in the paddling race for the trans thing. Do whatever you want to do, live and let live. Lin It’s all bonkers in a way, like the push to stop people talking about mothers. Now they’re “birth-givers” or “womb-havers” or whatever. Bill We agreed about free speech – you have to debate the daylight out of it, otherwise you close everyone down. The big beef Lin We talked about immigration. I was really affected by the people drowning in the Channel – I felt angry. We are one of the richest countries in the world, and there’s no legal safe route for people to come here. They’re doing these desperate things, paying thousands of pounds to greedy bastards, and taking such risks. Bill It was terrible – how can anyone say it isn’t? What you’ve got to separate is those people unfortunately dying, and the overall situation. My stance is: no immigration across the board. What good is it to the people in the UK? We need to be more self-sufficient. The NHS needs more doctors. We should be training people who are in the UK now, rather than filching off other countries. Lin I said I wasn’t bothered about the interests of the UK – I have a more internationalist perspective. Who is the “we”? Does it include all the people who have come as immigrants in the past, their children and their children’s children? Or does it only include white men from up the road in Morpeth, where there is probably a Chinese restaurant, an Indian restaurant, and that’s it. Bill I’ve worked in Angola, and the Middle East – I’ve seen the disparity between the people who have and the people who don’t. My fear is that lower-earning people in the UK would start sliding that way as too many people come in. Social services cannot cope, the health services are struggling. There should be a referendum on immigration. Sharing plate Lin We agreed the House of Lords should be abolished. He’s a republican, and I’m not a monarchist. And we agreed there should not have been a war in Iraq. Bill Neither of us like Tony Blair. Lin I wouldn’t call it common ground. For afters Lin We got on to football and I said I thought taking the knee was an important token gesture and demonstrated to fans that footballers don’t support racism. Bill I don’t care whether they take the knee, but how do you measure if it’s been effective? And is it not getting like a cult? Everyone should be treated fairly. Lin I asked him whether he would do something if he heard someone being racially abused in the restaurant. And he said no. That kind of “live and let live” approach means he doesn’t have to engage with things that make him uncomfortable. Bill I don’t believe in getting involved in arguments with people. I don’t want to get punched in the face. Takeaway Bill She seemed to be extreme left in a way that didn’t solve anything. She regards herself as a citizen of the world, and I thought: we’re back in the 60s, get in the minivan and fire up the doobies. Lin The food was good, but I couldn’t wait to leave. Additional reporting: Naomi Larsson • Lin and Bill ate at Gusto in Newcastle Want to meet someone from across the divide? Click here to find out moreAfter last year’s event was overshadowed by the controversy surrounding Noel Clarke, the British Academy of Film and Television Arts (Bafta) are hoping that it can regain credibility with its 2022 edition, for which the nominations have been announced. Science-fiction blockbuster Dune leads the way with 11 nominations, while the Jane Campion-directed western The Power of the Dog follows with eight, and Kenneth Branagh’s autobiographical drama Belfast has six. In 2021, Clarke had been given Bafta’s outstanding contribution to British cinema award, but shortly afterwards the Guardian revealed 20 women had made allegations of harassment and bullying against him, and the award was suspended. (Clarke denies sexual misconduct.) Bafta subsequently announced that it would not hand out honorary awards until after a review had been conducted. In a press briefing, Bafta chair Krishnendu Majumdar said the decision to review the decision-making process behind its honorary award had been taken before the Clarke scandal, while Bafta deputy chair Sara Putt added: “We wanted to make the process more rigorous … It’s about people we should know, rather than people we do know.” The Clarke scandal also overshadowed the progress Bafta appeared to make over the diversity of its award nominees, after a series of rule changes in response to years of complaints. In 2021, four women were nominated for best director and the majority of acting nominees were non-white. This year, the numbers are not quite so spectacular, but three women – Jane Campion, Julia Ducournau and Audrey Diwan – are up for best director, out of six nominees, while seven of the 18 acting nominations are people of colour, including Will Smith, for best actor for King Richard, and Tessa Thompson for best actress for Passing. Putt said Bafta was “very excited” about the diversity of its nominees, while Majumdar said: “We’re delighted to be able to shine a spotlight on such a phenomenal breadth of stories and performances.” Majumdar also drew attention to the achievement of British independent film After Love, the directorial debut of film-maker Aleem Khan, which scored four nominations: for outstanding British film, best actress for Joanna Scanlan, and outstanding debut and best director for Khan. Mainstream cinema is well represented, with most nominations going to the epic Dune adaptation, directed by Denis Villeneuve. It scored heavily in the behind-the-camera categories, including nominations for best special visual effects and best cinematography, as well as best film and best original screenplay for Villeneuve. The recent James Bond film No Time to Die also did well, with five nominations including outstanding British film and best special visual effects, as did Steven Spielberg’s remake of West Side Story, including best supporting actress and actor for Ariana DeBose and Mike Faist. However, the current awards-season powerhouses The Power of the Dog and Belfast, which are expected to dominate the major prizes at both the Baftas and the Oscars, feature heavily in the headline awards: both are up for best film, while several principal cast members – Benedict Cumberbatch, Kodi Smit-McPhee and Jesse Plemons for the former, and Caitríona Balfe and Ciarán Hinds for the latter – all have acting nods. One surprise omission from the lineup is the Princess Diana biopic Spencer, starring Kristen Stewart, which was expected to do well after its successful launch at the Venice film festival last year. However, it failed to secure a single nomination, including Stewart for best actress, which may have saved Bafta president Prince William from an awkward encounter. Olivia Colman, a Bafta best actress winner in 2019 for The Favourite, was passed over this year for her lead role in the Elena Ferrante adaptation The Lost Daughter, for which she is currently considered an Oscar front-runner. Also completely omitted is The Souvenir Part II, which, like predecessor The Souvenir from director Joanna Hogg, received no nominations. The Black Cop, directed by Cherish Oteka and commissioned by Guardian Documentaries, is nominated for best British short film. Following the Oscar win for the Guardian’s documentary Colette, this is the first time a Guardian film has been nominated for a Bafta. The Guardian’s editor-in-chief Katharine Viner said: “The nomination is a real honour and a testament to the talented team behind this powerful film.” Oteka said: “It has been heartwarming to see The Black Cop connecting with audiences.” Bafta has already announced the line-up for its Rising Star award, voted on by the public, which includes Bond actor Lashana Lynch and Smit-McPhee. The winners will be announced at a ceremony at the Royal Albert Hall, London, on 13 March, with Rebel Wilson acting as host. After the virtual event conducted under social distancing conditions in 2021, Bafta say they are planning an in-person ceremony, with a “full” audience, while conforming to government guidelines.The Black Cop, a short film commissioned by Guardian Documentaries and supported by the BFI Doc Society Fund (awarding National Lottery funding), has been nominated for a BAFTA Film Award. Announced today (Thursday 3 February), The Black Cop has been revealed as one of the five films nominated in the British Short Film category at the 75th British Academy Film Awards. The winners of the 2022 BAFTA Film Awards will be announced on Sunday 13 March. This is the first time a Guardian-commissioned documentary has been nominated for a BAFTA Film Award. The nomination from BAFTA follows on from the success of several other Guardian documentaries, including Colette that won the best short documentary Oscar last year and Black Sheep, which made the Oscar shortlist in 2019. The Black Cop, which is free to watch on the Guardian website, is an intimate portrait of Gamal ‘G’ Turawa, an ex-Metropolitan police officer, who explores his memories of racially profiling and harassing Black people and homophobia in his early career. Now an openly gay man, Turawa’s story is a multi-layered one and sits in the centre of three pivotal moments in recent British history, from the Black communities’ resistance of oppressive policing, to the push for LGBTQIA equality and the aftermath of the west African ‘farming’ phenomenon, where white families took care of Black children outside the remit of local authorities. Cherish Oteka, director and producer of The Black Cop, says: “It is a huge honour to have this important and nuanced story recognised by BAFTA. My work aims to provide a platform for often-marginalised communities to tell their stories on their terms. I have made documentaries that explore identity, discrimination, and institutional bias, but never through the lens of someone who sits on all sides of the conversation. In one person and one story we present a villain, victim and hero and begin to understand the potential that we all have in being any one of these, even all three. It has been heart-warming to see The Black Cop connecting with audiences in this way.” Katharine Viner, editor-in-chief, Guardian News &amp; Media says: “It’s wonderful to see this complex and important story resonate with audiences and for the Guardian’s documentary to be recognised by BAFTA. The nomination is a real honour and a testament to the talented team behind this powerful film.” Lindsay Poulton, head of documentaries, Guardian News &amp; Media, says: “At the Guardian, we are always looking for surprising routes into important, contemporary stories. We are delighted to have had the opportunity to support this story of identity and acceptance, and are proud of the creative and thoughtful documentary that Cherish and the filmmakers have created. It has been a pleasure to witness this film spark insightful conversations at film festivals all over the world and receive this recognition from BAFTA. The Black Cop is a reflection of the Guardian’s documentary strand, helping to bring different perspectives and new ways of thinking to compelling and vital journalism”. Lisa Marie Russo. executive producer for the BFI Doc Society Fund, says: “The BFI Doc Society Fund champions diverse voices and creative approaches to documentary storytelling. The Fund is delighted that this dynamic and deeply original film continues to strike a chord with audiences and now, Bafta voters. Congrats to director/producer Cherish Oteka and producer Emma Cooper for the nomination in this super competitive category, which includes both documentary and fiction films.” Guardian documentaries have won critical acclaim around the world, including an Oscar in 2021 for Colette. Guardian Documentaries play at film festivals around the world and have been recognised with numerous awards, including a Grierson, as well as award wins at the Cannes film festival, Sheffield Doc/Fest and the Aesthetica Short Film Festival. The Black Cop has been screened at Raindance Film Festival, British Shorts Film Festival, Aesthetic Short Film Festival, Out On Film, Atlanta’s International LGBTQ Film Festival, The Pan African Film &amp; Arts Festival, American Black Film Festival, and Leeds International Film Festival. The Black Cop is directed by Cherish Oteka and produced by Emma Cooper. Executive producers for the Guardian are Ekaterina Ochagavia and Jess Gormley, and for the BFI Doc Society Fund is Lisa Marie Russo. The commissioning editor is Lindsay Poulton. A full list of the 2022 BAFTA Film Award nominations can be found here. Notes to editors About Guardian News &amp; Media Guardian News &amp; Media (GNM) publishes theguardian.com, one of the world’s leading English-language news websites. Traffic from outside of the UK now represents around two-thirds of the Guardian’s total digital audience. In the UK, GNM publishes the Guardian newspaper six days a week, first published in 1821, and the world’s oldest Sunday newspaper, The Observer. BFI Doc Society Fund Since 2018, Doc Society has been the BFI’s delegate partner administering National Lottery funding for independent British documentary filmmaking and has distributed over £4.2 million to British independent documentary films. The BFI Doc Society Fund supports creative and hybrid feature documentaries with bold cultural and social ambitions, and short films by diverse, emerging voices from all over the UK. The fund has supported 44 independent documentary features to date, including Maya, African Apocalypse, Locked In, Bank Job, Men Who Sing, PolyStyrene: I Am A Cliche. The films have screened internationally and been nominated for and won The Grierson Awards, BIFA Awards, BAFTA and RTS. Key partners include BBC Films, Doc Society’s Climate Story Fund, Creative Scotland, Ffilm Cymru, Field of Vision and Northern Ireland Screen. 41 short films, including Grierson and Emmy award winners, have been funded through the Made of Truth film fund, supported by the BFI Lottery Fund and BFI Network. They have screened at international festivals including Sundance, London, IDFA, Sheffield, TIFF amongst others and been distributed &amp; exhibited by Guardian Docs, Nat Geo, POV &amp; the V&amp;A. The BFI Doc Society Fund also facilitates a dedicated support programme aimed at building connections with documentary filmmakers across all corners of the UK and provides professional development opportunities for grantee filmmakers. For more information, contact khadija@docsociety.org / Twitter: @TheDocSociety / www.facebook.com/TheDocSociety / Instagram: @thedocsocietyWhen the leaders of China and Russia meet in Beijing this Friday shortly before the opening ceremony of the Winter Olympics, observers of the bilateral relationship will be looking for insights into how this 21st century quasi-alliance is reshaping the postwar world order. It was 50 years ago this month, on 21 February 1972, that the historic handshake between Richard Nixon and Mao Zedong changed the geometry of the cold war. Historians called the visit “the week that changed the world”. It later influenced Washington’s subsequent movement towards détente with Moscow. Yet, half a century on, with talk of another cold war – this time between the US and China – on the rise, Moscow and Beijing are, instead, inching closer. Amid the unfolding crisis in Ukraine, Beijing last week publicly seconded Moscow’s “security concerns” regarding Nato. On Thursday, it released a statement saying its and Russia’s foreign ministers had coordinated their positions on regional issues of common concern, including Ukraine, Afghanistan and the Korean peninsular. “This will be their 38th [meeting] since 2013, [and] is uniquely significant because of the foreign policy challenges each leader is facing at the moment,” David Shullman, senior director of the Global China Hub at the Atlantic Council, said of Vladimir Putin and Xi Jinping. “Putin appreciates Chinese public expressions of support for Russia’s position on Ukraine that demonstrate the Kremlin is not isolated internationally,” he said. “For China, Putin’s visit is an important demonstration of support at a time when the US, UK, and other countries are undertaking a diplomatic boycott of the Games.” This week’s meeting will be Xi’s first in-person interaction with a foreign leader in nearly two years. China’s propaganda machine is already in full gear ahead of the event. In state media, the name of the Russian president tops the official list of foreign dignitaries. Earlier this week, the state news agency Xinhua in a long article extolled the friendship between the two countries. “China-Russia leaders’ ‘Winter Olympics appointment’ opens a new chapter in the bilateral relations,” the headline declared. The article has since been republished by other major state-owned websites in the last few days. The Xi-Putin meeting will be closely watched in Washington as well as other major western capitals. Inevitably, according to analysts, the issue of Ukraine will loom large. In 2014, in a show of defiance against fierce western criticism over the annexation of Crimea, Putin turned to Xi to look for an alternative. Beijing showed its support by signing a $400bn, 30-year gas deal. As the crisis in Ukraine brews, Russia is once again facing international pressure and is seeking foreign allies in its standoff with the west. In the current situation, Russia “needs China much more than the other way around”, said Alexander Gabuev, the chair of the Russia in the Asia-Pacific Program at the Carnegie Moscow Centre, during a roundtable discussion on Wednesday. Describing the mood in Moscow, Gabuev said: “China is very pragmatic and has a lot of leverage … China’s bargaining position is strengthened day by day, so it’s better to sign a deal with China now rather than tomorrow.” Putin will enter the meeting with Xi looking to do just that. The Kremlin is embarking on the rare foreign visit with a docket of 15 contracts and agreements it wants to sign with the Chinese leadership, including a joint statement that will “reflect the common views of Russia and China on key global issues, including security issues”. It appears the Kremlin will seek formal Chinese support in its conflict with Nato countries. “Beijing supports Russia’s demands on security guarantees, China shares the stance that security of one country cannot be ensured by means of damaging another country’s security,” said the Kremlin aide Yuri Ushakov, adding they were calling for the “creation of efficient mechanisms of ensuring security in Europe through negotiations”. In an article published in the Chinese state news agency Xinhua, Putin also noted joint efforts to expand payments in national currencies and create “mechanisms to offset the negative impact of unilateral sanctions”. US lawmakers have threatened to impose the “mother of all sanctions” if Russia launches a new invasion of Ukraine. Putin will be accompanied by a handful of top diplomatic and energy officials, including his foreign and energy ministers and the Rosneft chief executive, Igor Sechin. That indicates that economic and energy cooperation are likely to be a focus of the talks on Friday. Ushakov said the two sides would also discuss plans for the Power of Siberia 2 pipeline, which would allow Russia to redirect gas away from Europe via its controversial Nord Stream 2 pipeline and sell it instead on the Chinese market. However, even if the two sides do strike an agreement, the pipeline would take years to build. The summit will mark Putin’s third trip abroad since the outbreak of coronavirus in late 2019. The two leaders are expected to hold talks on the morning of 4 February and then have a private lunch that “will help them have a maximally open discussion about the most important international and bilateral issues”, Ushakov said. Last month, Beijing announced that the bilateral trade between China and Russia reached nearly $147bn last year – more than twice the figure of $68bn back in 2015 after western sanctions. Last week, senior diplomats from both countries agreed to step up coordination on Asian affairs, in the latest move that signalled even closer ties amid western pressures. “Both Xi and Putin will underscore (yet again) that their relationship is the best it’s been in history and that the two countries continue to deepen strategic and economic ties, with the subtext being that no amount of US-led efforts to derail their leadership or strategic interests will succeed,” said Shullman. Prof Sharyl Cross, the director of the Kozmetsky Center at St Edward’s University in Austin, Texas, agreed. “The two leaders will emphasise their burgeoning bilateral security and economic ties and common perspectives on a range of global security issues presenting a challenge to American global influence and the liberal international order,” she said, adding that Xi and Putin were likely to also include discussion of the role of Nato in Europe. Cross said both Moscow and Beijing would stand to benefit from division among democratic nations and the transatlantic security alliance in responding to the Ukraine conflict. “The United States and its allies should be thinking about how to avoid driving these two major powers closer and ways simultaneous challenges on the part of both Russia and China in different regions (Europe and Asia) might be managed,” she said. But Shi Yinhong, a professor of international relations at Renmin University in Beijing, downplayed the significance of the forthcoming meeting. He said he did not expect anything new to come out of it. “China has said what it has said about recent events. Beijing’s statements can be seen as very much pro-Russia, but with some major reservations,” he said. “For example, China has never committed to any military involvement in case of a war. And likewise, despite Putin’s previous support for Beijing’s position on Taiwan, he had never committed to be involved militarily in case of a major conflict [between China and the US], either.” For Shi, the type of foreign dignitaries that descended in Beijing this week is, instead, more telling about the current state of affairs on the eve of the 50th anniversary of Nixon’s visit to Beijing. These leaders range from Putin to Egypt’s president, Abdel Fatah al-Sisi, to the president of Kazakhstan, Kassym-Jomart Tokayev. “From those who diplomatically boycotted the Winter Games and those who came to Beijing, we can see some indication that the world is indeed heading towards the direction of bi-polarisation.”Fifa will request more details about the appointment of a coach accused of sexually abusing and harassing female players in Barbados after it was suggested that he was given “positive recommendations” to take over as director of football in St Kitts and Nevis by the president of the Barbados Football Association. Ahmed Mohamed, a former Somalia defender who has managed Barbados and the US Virgin Islands, was appointed by Atiba Harris – the president of the SKNFA – in September. According to Harris, Mohamed stepped down as technical director of the BFA last year for “family reasons” and was chosen after Harris “reached out personally” to the BFA president, Randy Harris, who is the president of the Caribbean Football Union (CFU) and a vice-president of Concacaf. Mohamed left his post in Barbados in February 2021 after 27 players from the senior women’s team signed a letter at the start of that month urging the BFA to investigate claims made by one of their teammates. It understood that she alleged the coach raped her at a hotel when she was 18 and that she previously received a series of unwelcome text messages from him. The player also claimed that she was threatened by senior members of the BFA after attempting to report her clams to the police. Another player alleged that Mohamed sexually abused her over a period of three years, starting when she was 13. Last February some players also started an online petition demanding a “thorough investigation be carried out immediately”, after no immediate action was taken. “We didn’t put his name because we were afraid,” said one player who did not want to be named. “In our country, it’s hard for someone to claim that kind of thing, especially in sports.” Mohamed left his post three weeks later, although his identity was not made public by the BFA after Randy Harris said he had been “legally advised not to”. Harris, re-elected unopposed as president of the CFU last year, refused to say whether Mohamed had resigned or been sacked. “We have policies in place to make clear that we will not accept any form of misconduct or inappropriate behaviour,” he said in a statement. “We will always act in the best interests of our organisation and of football in Barbados.” Randy Harris, asked whether he would like to comment about the claim he recommended Mohamed, replied: “No sir.” Neither Atiba Harris nor Mohamed responded to questions from the Guardian. Dave Browne – the father of the St Kitts captain Phoenetia, who plays for the German second division club SC Sand – said during a phone-in show on Freedom FM last week that he was “deeply concerned” about the situation. “He has been accused of sexually abusing girls – we can’t take that lightly,” Browne said. “As a father of one of the players, I’m very concerned from all angles that the girls could be in danger. Atiba Harris needs to come and tell us why he has appointed him. He owes it to the nation.” Harris appeared as a guest on Freedom FM on Monday to defend the appointment. “We did our due diligence regarding Mr Mohamed,” he said. “I reached out personally to the president of CFU [Randy Harris], who is also the vice-president of Concacaf, and also other officials within Concacaf and Fifa. We had positive feedback, positive recommendations and we decided to move forward. Those allegations that were made by the gentleman that called in – would the immigration in St Kitts and Nevis let somebody into the country, award them a work permit in such a high position, knowing that something like that was on their back? You tell me.” Harris added: “[Mohamed] actually resigned for family reasons. Ahmed is a great guy, a great technical person who is going to do wonders for our country within football. I have every confidence in him.” A spokesperson from Concacaf said: “At no point has anyone from the St Kitts and Nevis FA contacted the Concacaf administration to seek information regarding this individual, or any other prospective employee.” A Fifa spokesperson said: “Given the seriousness of the allegations, Fifa will contact the relevant member associations to request more details about this matter. When it comes to misconduct and abuse in football, we wish to reiterate that Fifa takes any allegations reported to it very seriously.” Atiba Harris, a former defender who retired last year, said that restructuring the SKNFA had been his priority since he was elected in August. “I came back here to St Kitts after finishing my career professionally to contribute back to football and society,” he said. “We selected a team around us and you know you’re going to have some good ones and not so good ones. Yes there are going to be some changes – some people are going to take it the wrong way but changes need to be made to move forward.” In November Jeffrey “Pedro” Hazel’s contract as technical director of the SKNFA was terminated with immediate effect, along with those of three other senior officials. It is understood that Hazel, who guided two of the country’s women’s sides to the final stages of Concacaf qualifying for the first time last year and had a year left on his contract, has launched a legal action. • This article was amended on 7 February 2022. Ahmed Mohamed previously managed the US Virgin Islands, not the British Virgin Islands as an earlier version incorrectly said.Europe could soon enter a “long period of tranquillity” that amounts to a “ceasefire” in the pandemic thanks to the less severe Omicron variant, high levels of immunity and the arrival of warmer spring weather, the World Health Organization has said. In an upbeat assessment, Hans Kluge, the WHO’s Europe director, said the region was in a position of “higher protection” that could “bring us enduring peace”, even if a new, more virulent variant than Omicron should emerge. Kluge said the 53-country region – which includes the UK – had recorded 12 million new coronavirus cases last week, the highest single weekly total of the pandemic, with about 22% of all tests returning a positive result. However, hospital admissions, although growing, were not rising at the same rate and the number of patients in intensive care was not increasing significantly, he said. The number of deaths across the region was also starting to plateau. Kluge said “a large capital of vaccine-derived and natural immunity, a favourable seasonality pause and a lower severity of the Omicron variant” meant governments now had “a singular opportunity to take control of transmission”. This opened up the prospect of “a long period of tranquillity and a much higher level of population defence” against any fresh resurgence in infection rates, he said. The optimistic forecast comes days after Kluge said it was “plausible” the region was “moving towards a kind of pandemic endgame”. But Kluge stressed on Thursday that authorities must use the respite constructively, by continuing vaccine and booster campaigns, protecting the most vulnerable, promoting individual responsibility and intensifying surveillance to detect new variants. “I believe it is possible to respond to new variants that will inevitably emerge without reinstalling the kind of disruptive measures we needed before,” he said. But he added it must now be a top priority to ensure all countries are equally well protected. “This demands a drastic and uncompromising increase in vaccine-sharing across borders,” Kluge said. “We cannot accept vaccine inequity for one more day – vaccines must be for everyone, in the remotest corner of our vast region and beyond.” On the eve of World Cancer Day, the WHO regional director also noted the “catastrophic impact” the pandemic had had on people with cancer as health systems struggled with screening, diagnosis and treatment during the past two years. During the early stages of the pandemic, he said, diagnosis of invasive tumours fell by 44% in Belgium, colorectal screenings decreased by 46% in Italy, and in Spain the number of cancers diagnosed in 2020 was 34% lower than expected. The situation in many countries had improved since then, he said, but “the knock-on effect of this disruption will be felt for years” and any respite from the pandemic must be used immediately to reduce backlogs for chronic care services.The US shouldn’t chill out The wound from the failure to qualify for the 2018 World Cup is still raw, elite sport is a business of marginal gains and the USMNT is often forced to play road games in heat, humidity and at altitude. But the choice of freezing St Paul for this game exuded insecurity when the US should have projected strength. A nation that beat Mexico three times in 2021 felt it should make the worst team in the qualifying group – one that is winless with eight losses in 11 qualifiers – trek to the frozen north in the hope of demoralising them and to ensure they’d have less support in the stands than if the match was played in California, Texas or Florida. This was underdog behaviour and a gratuitous, contrived gut check given the talent gap between the sides. The spectacle of players in head and face coverings and the goalkeeper Matt Turner being told by the referee to take off his handwarming quarterback pouch was absurd. It was also an irresponsible choice as the windchill dipped to -14F (-25C) at kickoff. The Canada-adjacent location reduced the travel time for Gregg Berhalter’s side after their loss in Ontario last Sunday but at the cost of the weather raising the injury risk given the strain that low temperatures place on the body. Not to mention the threat to fans and stadium workers from conditions the National Weather Service described as “dangerously cold”, with the chance of “frost bite in as little as 20 minutes for those without sufficient clothing”. Indeed, two Honduran players had to come off, reportedly to be treated for hypothermia. The “Snow Clasico” is legendary but the frost fetish has gone too far. It’s the World Cup, not the Winter Olympics. After this, and Canada’s hosting of Mexico in frigid Edmonton last November, it’s time for Fifa to set minimum temperature rules in the interests of safety and fair play. Canada will qualify for Qatar with games to spare When you’re hot, you’re hot – as they don’t say in Minnesota in February. While the USMNT’s record deep freeze dominated the American agenda, Canada are in such scorching form that they’re scoring by accident. In one of the strangest goals of this (or any) qualifying campaign, the ball arced over the goalkeeper and into the net from an acute angle after a deflection hit the 38-year-old captain, Atiba Hutchinson, in the back while he was lying on his side and facing away from the goal. If that opener for Canada in their 2-0 away win over El Salvador was a fluke, their table-topping status is not. They’ve won six successive games and are the only unbeaten team in the Octagonal. John Herdman’s men are eight points clear of fourth-placed Panama with three fixtures left. Jonathan David’s solo injury-time clincher was a goal more reflective of the team’s character: direct, fast, self-assured and gleefully seizing the moment. Even if the scoreline suggests it was an easy game, it was tough to adjust from Sunday’s win over the US in freezing conditions in Hamilton to the heat and humidity of San Salvador. “This was one of the toughest places I have ever been,” Stephen Eustaquio said after the game. “Hard grass, hard environment, the weather was very hot. ... A lot of noise everywhere. But we stood together. We had some hard moments during the game, but at the same time we knew it was normal and we wanted a nine-point window and we got it.” The Americans have one foot in Qatar While Canada are all but assured of a place at Qatar 2022, the US aren’t in a bad position themselves even if this has been an uneven qualifying campaign so far. Berhalter’s team were effective on Wednesday and the bold decision to name the out-of-sorts Christian Pulisic among the substitutes paid off when he scored soon after coming off the bench. But Honduras are so bad that it would be rash to attach great significance to the performance and premature to declare an end to the squad’s persistent difficulty with scoring in first halves and from set pieces. The US have found the net 16 times in 11 qualifiers and seven of those goals came against Los Catrachos. Turner didn’t get to warm his hands by making a save. It was so easy that Berhalter snapped a selfie with fans late in the second half as the US led 3-0. Still, the result means the US can feel confident ahead of a tricky concluding trio of fixtures next month: away to Mexico, home to Panama and on the road against Costa Rica. Canada are almost out of reach but three more points will probably be enough for the US to qualify automatically as one of the top three. Panama’s 1-0 loss to Mexico left them four points adrift of the second-placed US. However, the plausible scenario of the Americans losing to Mexico next month while Panama beat Honduras would send stress levels soaring. If that scenario plays out avoiding defeat in Orlando against Panama will be imperative before a tricky trip to Costa Rica for the final qualifier. Acosta and De la Torre enhanced their reputations The midfield pair impressed on Wednesday with Yunus Musah on the bench and Tyler Adams injured and looked like viable back-up options. De la Torre was kinetic in his first international start while Acosta was involved in all three goals. His free kick was superbly headed in by Weston McKennie for the opener. Another Acosta set-piece was turned in by Walker Zimmerman later in the first half. An Acosta delivery led to the third goal as well, as Berhalter’s side finally figured out how to score from set pieces in this qualifying campaign. Dallas is a contender to host a semi-final in the 2026 World Cup and it’s having a big say in 2022 as well thanks to the city’s MLS club’s impressive youth development. Acosta, McKennie and 2013 first-round draft pick Zimmerman were among five FC Dallas alumni named in the US starting XI, with a current Frisco-based young player, Jesus Ferreira, making a substitute appearance. (Not forgetting the injured Chris Richards.) The pipelines in Texas aren’t only delivering oil. McKennie is a man for all seasons The freezing temperatures in Minnesota meant it was not a night for delicate touches on a lumpy, concrete-hard surface. The ball must have felt like a rock, if numbed toes could feel it at all. Yet McKennie’s jinking run and delicate pass to set up a chance for Tim Weah in the 50th minute was a highlight. With Pulisic a spectator until after the hour mark, McKennie ran the show and scored a soothing early goal. It would be no surprise if the Juventus midfielder is the US’s most indispensable player in Qatar, if they make it, this autumn/winter. Without the kind of midfield control that McKennie can provide, Pulisic’s influence on games is liable to be sporadic against strong opposition.Thanks for your texts and emails, sorry I couldn’t get to them all but they were very welcome in the wee small hours. Australia have retained the Ashes and the series rolls on to Melbourne for the two final ODIs. England can pull off an unlikely draw if they manage to win ‘em both. Heather Knight will be planning to do just that of course. Hats off to Australia, they ran out deserved winners today, Beth Mooney and all of the bowlers were exceptional. Geoff’s match report will land with a satisfying thud any moment now. Goodbye! Here is that winning moment: ‘Stoked’ you might say for Jess Jonassen who picked up the final wicket and a piece of Ashes history/ a place on the highlights reel with that caught and bowled wicket of Cross at the end. Here’s hoping her partner was snap happy again and got a decent picture that she can use to replace this one. Here’s the Guardian’s own Pat Cummins: Not quite done, England can still draw the series if they take the last two ODIs. The series now says goodbye to Canberra and rolls on to Melbourne. The Manuka* Oval has hosted some dramatic moments over the past few weeks. On the tellybox they are debating that Amy Jones wicket and the No-Ball that wasn’t. Ebony Rainford-Brent sums it up neatly though, “When the crunch moments came, Australia seized them and that made the difference.” *Have to confess that until this week I had always thought Manuka was pronounced MAN-OOO-KA, like the posh honey some people rub on their kneecaps rather than MAR-NIC-A to rhyme with arnica…that some people also rub on their knees. It’s hardly earth shattering stuff. Australia proved too good in the end, their record in ODI cricket is scarily good. England will be frustrated, a bit miffed that they had the game in their hands for a period there and could have put more pressure on the Aussies. Australia win by 27 runs. They retain the Ashes and lead England 8-4 in this series. England buckled slightly in that run chase but largely as a result of tight Aussie bowling. Heather Knight is up: “I thought the bowlers did an outstanding job...we didn’t get a partnership together, we lost wickets regularly and it was quite hard to score. We are focused now on drawing the series.” Meg Lanning: “I’d like to congratulate Beth Mooney on that innings, that was the difference there between the two teams.” She gives a shout out to Darcie Brown and Tahlia McGrath too. “The most exciting thing for me is to see different players stepping up, the young kids coming through.” 45th over: England all out 178. Jess Jonassen picks up the final wicket of Cross, who offers a return catch and the sharp chance is snaffled low to the floor by Jonassen. The Aussies celebrate in a huddle of yellow. Well played! 44th over: England 176-9 (Brunt 31 Cross 16) A direct hit and it was all over as Brunt scrambles for her ground. The throw just missed by an inch and crunched into the stump mic. Nearly, nearly for Australia. 43rd over: England 174-9 (Brunt 29 Cross 16) Schutt bowls to Cross who ramps her nonchalantly for four. This is a great little cameo from Cross. There’s one more off the over too. England inching. Australia searching. 42nd over: England 169-9 (Brunt 28 Cross 12) This final pair are batting more aggressively and it is bringing dividends. DROP! McGrath bangs one in short and Cross pulls her in the air... straight to Ellyse Perry who shells it! Victor Meldrew scenes. Perry can’t believe it. Cross then picks up a boundary with a flick away off McGrath. Still we go on. 41st over: England 163-9 (Brunt 27 Cross 7) That’s it surely! Cross is given out lbw to Jonassen and it looks BANG in front of middle peg. HOLD ON... Snicko shows a tiiiiny spike and the umpire has to reverse the decision. Cross is reprieved! And she duly boshes the next ball for four back over Jonassen’s head. England still breathing, just. 40th over: England 158-9 (Brunt 27 Cross 2) Australia on the hunt for this final wicket, England clinging on. Who will snare the last one and get themselves a piece of Ashes history? Bowled around her legs! Jonassen picks up Shrubsole - who tries to be too cute with a paddle sweep and loses her leg pole. Kate Cross walks out as the last batter once more and this time the game, and series, is almost certainly gone. 39th over: England 146-9 (Brunt 26 Cross 1) 38th over: England 153-8 (Brunt 24 Shrubsole 1) Decent over for England as they get seven runs from Tahlia McGrath’s latest - including a thick edge from Brunt’s blade that rolls away for four through deep third. 37th over: England 146-8 (Brunt 18 Shrubsole 0) England need all the experience of this pair to keep themselves in this Ashes series. Jonassen’s over goes for three. 36th over: England 143-8 (Brunt 15 Shrubsole 0) Darcie Brown finishes her spell, taking 4-34 off her ten overs. Anya Shrubsole joins Brunt. I wonder if these two will throw caution to the breeze and play a few shots, see if they can get England somewhere close to this total. Bang in front and Ecclestone is on her way. England are creaking here. Brown has picked up four wickets, a fantastic spell from the tyro quick. 35th over: England 142-7 (Brunt 14 Ecclestone 3) Four singles off McGrath. Something’s brewing here. 34th over: England 138-7 (Brunt 12 Ecclestone 1) A couple of wides down the leg side from Darcie Brown, striving a bit too hard for that lethal in-ducker. Ecclestone gets off the mark with a pinched single. Told you Cross was good didn’t I? 33rd over: England 134-7 (Brunt 11 Ecclestone 0) Wyatt had looked positive at the crease - a big loss for England but well bowled by Megan Schutt who speared one through her defences. England only have three wickets left in the hutch and that target of 205 is sliding out of sight. Schutt sneaks one through Wyatt! 32nd over: England 126-6 (Wyatt 18 Brunt 10) Ash Gardner with the first over back after the beverages, she serves up a full bunger and Wyatt’s eyes are ablaze as she smears it for four through mid-off. Nicely done. 31st over: England 119-6 (Wyatt 13 Brunt 8) Megan Schutt looks dangerous as she whirls a few past the edge and into the gloves of Healy who is stood up to the stumps. And it is time for a drink. Tense stuff in Canberra. The sky behind the spatula-esque floodlights is glowing pink. Is that good luck or bad luck? Ominous for local shepherds obviously but could this next passage of play see the Ashes seized by Australia? Just enough time to brew up and then we’ll be here for the final stages of this game. 30th over: England 116-6 (Wyatt 12 Brunt 6) Wyatt charges Perry and it’s a DROP! Tough one to be fair to Perry, pinged back straight at her in her follow through and she can’t cling on. Good intent from Wyatt who drives for a couple and then sneaks a quick single to backward point off the last ball. 29th over: England 113-6 (Wyatt 10 Brunt 5) Darcie Brown is bowling very frugally, England are watchful - they are ahead of the required rate but keep losing wickets. Ellyse Perry is coming back into the attack. Just what you need, right? 28th over: England 110-6 (Wyatt 10 Brunt 4 ) The debate over the Amy Jones dismissal is a’rumbling. 27th over: England 106-6 (Wyatt 9 Brunt 2 ) Katherine Brunt is the new batter and she has a job on here. Australia in the hunt for four more and to wrap things up in this first ODI. Oh no! Not good for England, Brown gets one to just stick in the pitch and Sciver is helpless as she sees the ball ploop up off the leading edge into the clutches of a full stretch Brown in her follow through. Cripes. 26th over: England 103-5 (Sciver 45 Wyatt 8) Ooof! Cut in half! McGrath gets her magician act on and splices Danii Wyatt in two with a ripping in-ducker. It beats everyone and rolls away for four byes. Wyatt isn’t too fussed though, she cracks a cut shot away for four more off the very next ball. Chuckles 25th over: England 94-5 (Sciver 44 Wyatt 4) Halfway stage. Australia need 5 wickets. England need 112 runs. Where’s your money? 24th over: England 91-5 (Sciver 43 Wyatt 3) McGrath keeps it tight, just a couple from the over. 23rd over: England 89-5 (Sciver 42 Wyatt 2) Darcie Brown is back into the attack. England need a partnership to get them closer to this target. 22nd over: England 85-5 (Sciver 40 Wyatt 1) Danni Wyatt is at the crease. England have it all to do. I’ll crunch the numbers and put up the latest equation in two tics. Rapped on the pads and given. Dunkley thinks about a review but decides against and walks off disconsolate. England have lost two quick ones and are teetering once again. The Aussies have a pinky round the Ashes trophy. 20th over: England 83-4 (Sciver 39 Dunkley 5 ) Sophia Dunkley is the new batter, she immediately cuts Alana King away for four, helped by a miss-field at deep point. Nine off King’s first over. A tight call but given and Jones trudges off. She looks crestfallen, perhaps knowing that whatever the height she should have clobbered it for six. Jones plinks a full toss from McGrath to deep square leg...but was it above waist height? It looked marginal and we’re going upstairs to have a butchers. 19th over: England 73-3 (Sciver 36 Jones 16) Jones again lofts Jonassen down the ground for four. There’s seven off the over, a good one for England. Whisper it but this pair are batting well. 18th over: England 66-3 (Sciver 34 Jones 11) McGrath into the attack (still gives me the willies to type that...) she gets one to lift, like a cobra if you will, off a length with her second - there’s nothing Healy can do about that and they scamper a bye. Three off it all told. The bins are out. But I fear the lorry/truck has been and gone. The bin man only calls once round here. 17th over: England 63-3 (Sciver 32 Jones 11) Back after drinks with Jonassen and she nearly skids one through Amy Jones with the very first ball... yikes. She then tosses one up and Jones scampers down the track and plops her for four back over her head. Nice batting from England’s keeper. 16th over: England 59-3 (Sciver 32 Jones 7) England pick up four off Perry’s over and drinks are called. Back in a sec, Go Go GO! 15th over: England 55-3 ( Sciver 29 Jones 6) This pair just ticking over. The run rate is still very manageable for England, it’s those early wickets that have given them the collywobbles. Jess Jonassen is into the attack and is looking quite probing. We’ll have one more and and then it’ll be drinks/a bin dash. 14th over: England 52-3 ( Sciver 26 Jones 6) Sciver picks up three more as England continue the re-build job. I’m still half thinking about the bins. 13th over: England 49-3 ( Sciver 23 Jones 6) Three singles taken as we hear news that Beth Mooney is off the field with a tight quad. She won’t be back on in this match. Fingers crossed she can recover in time for the rest of the series, you wouldn’t bet against her. Nails she is. 12th over: England 46-3 ( Sciver 21 Jones 5) Ellyse Perry into the attack and it’s a tidy start for the pre-eminent all-rounder. Just a single off it. She made only her second ever ODI first baller earlier, reckon she’ll be wanting to make amends with the ball in hand. 11th over: England 45-3 ( Sciver 20 Jones 5) Amy Jones is the new batter and she’s off the mark with a streaky edge through the slip cordon for four. England will take ‘em any which way. Oh that is unlucky, of sorts. Winfield-Hill smokes a pull shot but it is straight down the throat of Ash Gardner on the square leg boundary. Strife for England. 10th over: England 39-2 ( Winfield-Hill 14 Sciver 19) Another whipcrack pull for Sciver who looks in fine fettle. 9th over: England 33-2 ( Winfield-Hill 13 Sciver 14) A wide and a single off Schutt, the ball is still darting about. A quiet over, but not quite quiet enough for me to don the slippers and run outside with the binbags. It’s a weeks worth too. Gah. Concentrate. It’s ok. It’ll be OK. 8th over: England 31-2 ( Winfield-Hill 13 Sciver 13) A glorious pull shot from Sciver skims across the turf to the boundary. That’s a nerve settler. I can hear the bin men outside and I don’t think I did them last night... I can smell trouble. And bins. 7th over: England 24-2 ( Winfield-Hill 13 Sciver 6) Counterpunch from the gals in pale blue, Sciver drives Schutt for four and Winfield-Hill gets in on the act with a back-foot drive of her own to the boundary. How good was Kate Cross with the ball? Don’t take my word for it (but do take this lot’s) 6th over: England 13-2 ( Winfield-Hill 7 Sciver 1) Sciver is watchful, it feels like her wicket is crucial in this run chase, she was so impressive with the bat on the final day of the Test match. 5th over: England 10-2 ( Winfield-Hill 5 Sciver 0) A maiden from Schutt. All a bit tense after that last over. 4th over: England 10-2 ( Winfield-Hill 5 Sciver 0) Sciver survives the hat-trick ball! Just. She had a nibble at the out-swinger and very nearly gave a nick. England have to dig in here. Knight’s wicket is the big scalp. Knight goes for a golden duck! Pinned in front from an in-ducker from Darcie Brown who is on a hat-trick! That was stone dead, Knight just walked off. A rueful shake of the head. The Aussies are ticking. England in all sorts. Sciver strides out to face the hat-trick ball... Big snick and pouched in the slips - Australia have their first and Beaumont has to go. 3rd over: England 8-0 (Beaumont 1 Winfield-Hill 5) Tidy over from Schutt and she pins Winfield-Hill on the pads with the final ball, BIG APPEAL! But the umpire is unmoved. They don’t call for a review and were right not to, the DRS showing it was sliding past leg. There is movement there with the new ball for Schutt. England looking watchful so far. 2nd over: England 6-0 (Beaumont 0 Winfield-Hill 5) A tight start from Brown with five dots before going a tad too full off the last and Winfield-Hill caresses it through the covers for England’s first boundary. OBO stalwart Guy Hornsby is on the little blue bird: I feel ya Guy, this could have a few twists and turns yet. 1st Over: England 2-0 (Beaumont 0 Winfield-Hill 1) A single and a wide as Schutt just loses her radar in her first. It’ll be Darcie Brown at the other end. Here we go - Megan Schutt has the ball and Tammy Beaumont and Lauren Winfield-Hill are at the crease. Play! Thank you Geoff and hellOBO. Jim here picking up the reins from a sleepy south London. It’s game on in Canberra, can England haul down this target and keep the Ashes ticking? Get me on the email and the twitters with your thoughts and theories. Whilst we wait for the players to emerge here’s some lunchtime reading from none other than Pat Cummins: The climate crisis is wreaking havoc but sport can be a part of the solution Important stuff. And could he be more of a dreamboat? That was quite the bowling performance from England’s seamers today. They hit their lengths, maintained their line, and made sure Australia could not cut loose at any stage. There was movement from the pitch and in the air, and the pressure started to tell. Of course Australia could bowl just as well, but this is still England’s game to lose. That’s me done, James Wallace is with you for the chase. 50th over: Australia 205-9 (Schutt 1) There was nothing left to lose. The first ball is a bit short, but mid-on is up, so Mooney launches herself at the ball to flat-bat it over the infield. Back foot in the air. Then gets a shorter ball and rides it over backward point for four more. Tries to triple up with a cut shot through the off side, but it’s stopped for a single. That brings about the King wicket, a single behind square for Megan Schutt, and the Mooney wicket last ball. On the last ball of the match Mooney falls. Shuffles down, carves over mid-off, but Winfield-Hill moves well to her right and takes a fine overhead catch. Saves four runs in so doing. Last over. Swipes across the line, misses, has the ball hit the underside of her thigh while she’s down on one knee, then back onto the stumps. 49th over: Australia 195-7 (Mooney 64, King 18) Sciver’s turn to bowl now. Mooney walks at her, tries to dig it down the ground softly enough to get back for two runs, but King says no. Drives a single herself to hand the strike back. Mooney does her backpedalling uppercut, but gets it higher than long, and Beaumont keeps her to a single. Yorker from Sciver, dot ball! King can only block it. Big swipe gets a run to wide long-on. Pull shot keeps strike for Mooney. Five runs from the over. 48th over: Australia 190-7 (Mooney 61, King 16) Three overs to go. Brunt with two of them. Brunt bowls short, Mooney whacks a single. King drives and can’t beat mid off. Pulls and can’t beat mid on... and she’s dropped. No run, but Sciver was right in position, knelt down, and had the ball jar out of her hands. She falls to the ground in frustration. A little bobble over the keeper gets King off strike with a scrambled bye. Mooney guides one run. Three from the over, two off the bat, great work. 47th over: Australia 187-7 (Mooney 59, King 16) Tied down for a couple of deliveries is King, before she lays into a crisp cover drive against Sciver, splitting the two infielders for four. Pulls a single fine off the glove to follow. Mooney is almost standing off the pitch to the leg side in her efforts to find room to hit to the off side, where there is no one on the boundary. Can only get one run. But King leans back and pounds a pull shot that goes between the boundary riders. 46th over: Australia 177-7 (Mooney 58, King 7) Ecclestone over the wicket to the left-handed Mooney, who tries the reverse sweep but misses, the ball flicking her pad flap and spitting up to hit Jones in the grille. No run. Nor from the next ball as Mooney charges and drives back to the bowler. Stays home, clips leg side, and loses strike. King aims a huge leg-side wallop and misses, wanting a piece of the spin while it lasts. Can only drive a single from Ecclestone’s final ball, with two runs from the over, and 1 for 36 from her ten. 45th over: Australia 175-7 (Mooney 57, King 6) Good short ball from Sciver, beats Mooney who backed away to aim at it. Mooney responds next ball, backing away again to slice an open-faced drive over point. What a shot. Sciver follows Mooney, who shovels to leg and some good running from King allows her to get back for two. Then a single fifth ball, letting King race another two reasons after a walk-across leg glance. 10 from the over. 44th over: Australia 165-7 (Mooney 50, King 3) Ecclestone to King, who blocks the first ball and then watches the second turn past her outside edge. Left-arm spinner, turning it away from the right-handed bat. Aims a big drive at the fourth ball and edges it into her boot, that stings. Then gets one down the leg side for a couple of leg byes, followed by a short ball pulled for one. 43rd over: Australia 162-7 (Mooney 50, King 2) Beth Mooney aims a huge swipe towards the leg side and only drags it to mid on. Next ball, same shot, and this time she gets it, over mid-on for four. Follows with a single to midwicket to raise her fifty. Her team would be nowhere without this one. 42nd over: Australia 156-7 (Mooney 45, King 1) Alana King out to bat with nine overs to come. One more from Shrubsole. King slices away a cut shot nicely, but saved by the sweeper. Mooney cuts one run off her stumps. Shrubsole finishes with 1 for 44. 41st over: Australia 152-7 (Mooney 42) Bold shot from Mooney, knows they need more now, so she shuffles forward and drives Cross over mid-off for four. Tries it again the next ball, but Cross shifts back the length and Mooney edges it dangerously towards Beaumont at backward point. Jams a run to long leg, then with one ball to come Jonassen gets a huge leading edge, trying to push through midwicket, and it goes high before landing in the hands of Beaumont at cover. Cross finishes her 10 overs with outstanding figures of 3 for 33. 40th over: Australia 147-6 (Mooney 37, Jonassen 4) Shrubsole with two overs to go, and Mooney shapes to go big through the leg side again, but drags it down to mid-on. No run, then a single to midwicket. Two left-handers together in the middle. Jonassen plays a shot a ball, but keeps finding the field. One run from the over! 39th over: Australia 146-6 (Mooney 36, Jonassen 4) Jess Jonassen gets motoring quickly, as she did in the Test. Pulls Cross to deep midwicket, and Dunkley knocks the ball back but lets her foot touch the rope while doing so - four runs. 38th over: Australia 141-6 (Mooney 35) All the work to do for Mooney, then... Another one goes, a donation by Australia. Gardner has walked out, looked great immediately, but now is walking back. Mooney drops the ball towards midwicket and runs with the shot. Gardner is dozing and doesn’t respond, then starts late. Mooney, halfway down, sees the hesitation and stutters for one stride, which makes Gardner stutter as well. Only for a step, but it’s enough, as Knight throws in to Jones who takes off the bails with Gardner a few inches short. 37th over: Australia 137-5 (Mooney 33, Gardner 10) Kate Cross comes back. Heather Knight hasn’t bowled a single over of herself, as England’s sixth bowler. But the seamers have done so well that she wants to keep them running. Cross delivers, keeps things really tight, only gives away two singles. The second of those hits Gardner at the non-striker’s end, might have been worth more if her bat hadn’t got in the way. 36th over: Australia 135-5 (Mooney 32, Gardner 9) Loves the cut shot, does Gardner, who took Ecclestone for plenty in the Test match, and Ecclestone feeds her two short ones. Wyatt saves the first one with a tumble on the rope at deep point, but the second one goes finer for four. Did I say fast starter? She’s on 9 from 9 as she takes a couple of singles. Compare that with anyone else today. 35th over: Australia 126-5 (Mooney 31, Gardner 1) Now Gardner has to find a way to settle. Usually a pretty fast starter but she defends the first four balls before nudging a single square. There it is! As McGrath is starting to look dangerous, Brunt chops her off. Drops a little short, McGrath’s eyes light up, she’s getting ready to pound that through the off side. But Brunt bowls a cutter, rolls her fingers savagely so that the ball stays low and moves sharply in, scooting under the bat and knocking the stumps akimbo. 34th over: Australia 125-4 (Mooney 31, McGrath 29) Australia have scored more in the last five overs than they did in the 15 before that. Mooney keeps it going, backing away and then almost jumping at a short ball to uppercut it over the keeper. 33rd over: Australia 119-4 (Mooney 26, McGrath 28) More McGrath, as Brunt drops short and McGrath clobbers the pull shot. Wyatt runs and dives and can’t stop it at backward point. Then Brunt tries the slower ball that has gone very wrong on several occasions lately, and this time it dishes up a slow high full toss for Mooney to pull to the fence. 32nd over: Australia 109-4 (Mooney 21, McGrath 23) Shot, Bethany! Shrubsole comes back on to bowl, and Mooney plants her front foot, gets a clean swing, and launches the first ball over midwicket for six. McGrath gets strike, winds up, and drags four through long on. Two singles, a dozen off the over, and that’s Australia’s best of the innings. 31st over: Australia 97-4 (Mooney 14, McGrath 18) Katherine Brunt is back. This is interesting, the main threat with five overs to go. Knight wants a wicket, she doesn’t want to let these two build on the work they’ve done. They’re really struggling for scoring pace though: Mooney 14 from 40 and McGrath 18 from 39 by the end of Brunt’s over. 30th over: Australia 96-4 (Mooney 13, McGrath 18) Sciver bowls down leg side, might have clipped Mooney’s pad but the umpire gives two extras as the ball bounces off Jones. Then Ecclestone throws down the stumps from mid-on as McGrath takes a quick run, but she’s home. Five from the over, as Mooney lumps away a pull shot off the top edge that doesn’t land too far short of the fielder at long leg. Drinks. 29th over: Australia 91-4 (Mooney 12, McGrath 16) There she goes! McGrath charges and melts Ecclestone back over the bowler’s head. Then rotates strike and Mooney plays a late cut, fine of Beaumont at backward point and away to the rope. Nine from the over, unfathomable luxury. 28th over: Australia 82-4 (Mooney 8, McGrath 11) England get a bonus review as the umpires go upstairs for a stumping appeal, which means that according to the review process now, they check for an outside edge as well. The ball just missed Mooney’s bat. Doesn’t beat it the next time, as Mooney glides a single. Then McGrath is nearly bowled! Leans back, tries to clout Sciver off a length through cover, gets some movement back in, and under-edges it past her stumps for two. Another push to point for a run means four off the over, which is a big one by recent standards. 27th over: Australia 78-4 (Mooney 7, McGrath 8) Tahlia McGrath at last comes to life, swinging one of her meaty cover drives away, but Cross tumbles away on the boundary to keep the scoring to two. The only runs from the over. Ecclestone convinces Knight to go upstairs to the umpire review chair, hoping the contact was pad first as McGrath stretched her foot forward. Umpire Eloise Sheridan picks up an inside edge. Ecclestone still doesn’t believe it, thinking it was pad into bat, and she walks off at the end of her over muttering and shaking her head. 26th over: Australia 76-4 (Mooney 7, McGrath 6) Sciver is delighted to keep wheeling away, bowling a length just outside off stump and letting the Australians bat it away. Three singles. 25th over: Australia 73-4 (Mooney 6, McGrath 4) What is the plan here, Australia? Obviously trying to calm things down and consolidate, but the scoring is becalmed. Two singles from Ecclestone’s over of spin, at the halfway mark. 24th over: Australia 71-4 (Mooney 5, McGrath 3) Blocking away is McGrath, as Sciver bowls, and this over concedes only a wide. Sciver has bowled three overs for four runs. 23rd over: Australia 70-4 (Mooney 5, McGrath 3) The screws keep tightening until the threads squeak. Cross goes very straight to McGrath, attacking the stumps to deny any room to swing. One run from it. 22nd over: Australia 69-4 (Mooney 5, McGrath 2) The new headliner for Australia is Tahlia McGrath. Big job ahead of her here. Only a single from Sciver’s second over. 21st over: Australia 68-4 (Mooney 5, McGrath 1) Another one that sizzles away from the bat! Mooney this time the player left groping at thin air. Australia four down and going at 3.24 runs per over. Brilliant from Jones! She made the call to come up to the stumps when receiving the seam of Cross, and it has brought the wicket. Cross beat Healy in the previous over, making her stretch forward. This time she does so again with another good ball, moving away, and Healy’s back toe is dragged out of her ground. Jones knows it, sees it, and punches off the bails before Healy can get that foot down. A keeper done by a keeper. 20th over: Australia 67-3 (Healy 27, Mooney 5) Some good work on the boundary from Shrubsole on this occasion, as Sciver bowling her first over gets glided by Mooney to deep third. Shrubsole slides across and taps back the ball just in time. Those two runs the only score from the over. 19th over: Australia 65-3 (Healy 27, Mooney 3) Healy gets a short wide ball and reaches over the top of it to slap it into the ground for a single. Mooney guides a run, then Jones appeals for a caught behind that Healy missed. Cross concedes two. Australia going at 3.42 an over! This is 1980s stuff. 18th over: Australia 63-3 (Healy 26, Mooney 2) Runs for Mooney immediately, reaching out to guide Ecclestone to deep third for two. Golden duck! For just the second time in her long ODI career, Perry is out first ball. Ecclestone flights the delivery, Perry wants to defend it but is done in the air, pushes too early, and chips it back to the bowler. 17th over: Australia 60-2 (Healy 25) Celebrations! Kate Cross produces a high-quality delivery to end her over. It’s just back of a length, just outside off stump. The sort of ball that Lanning has diverted behind point off the back foot thousands of times in her life. The Australian captain shapes to do just that, but the ball cuts in rather than going straight. It moves a long way, hitting middle stump after starting outside off. Bowling, Kate. 16th over: Australia 54-1 (Healy 24, Lanning 23) Ecclestone continues, and Lanning keeps using her feet to make room and attempt carves through the off side. Suggesting that the spinner is still bowling too short. Gets a single to the sweeper, then Healy dances but finds cover. Another one-run over, as drinks come onto the field. 15th over: Australia 53-1 (Healy 24, Lanning 22) Cross runs in, strong and lean, really putting a sprint into her approach. Amy Jones has come up to the stumps now to keep Healy in her ground. It works, keeping the scoring to one from the over. 14th over: Australia 52-1 (Healy 24, Lanning 21) Here comes Sophie Ecclestone, the left-arm spinner who so often leads England’s attack. She bowled too short in the Test match, and her first over here is too wide of off stump, coming around the wicket to the right-handers. Only three singles. 13th over: Australia 49-1 (Healy 23, Lanning 19) The TV commentary is already suggesting that England (with six bowlers) are short a bowler, and that Brunt could be batting at No7. The persistent delusion that Brunt is an all-rounder is one of the strangest things in English cricket. It has been going on since about 2015, despite the constant feed of evidence to the contrary. Cross bowls a good over here, gets through five balls for a run and a leg bye, but Healy greets the sixth ball by running down the pitch, treating it like spin, and turning a good length into a half-volley to loft straight for four. 12th over: Australia 43-1 (Healy 19, Lanning 18) Shrubsole continues into a sixth over, which Lanning welcomes by sending a perfect straight drive away for four. That brings up 4000 ODI runs for Meg Lanning, second-fastest in 89 innings behind Belinda Clark’s 86. 11th over: Australia 39-1 (Healy 19, Lanning 14) First bowling change, with Kate Cross coming on from the Manuka Pool end. On off stump for the first two balls, a touch straighter for the third, and Lanning throws her hands through the length ball despite it not quite being full enough, the Australian captain ending up in the flamingo pose as she golfs her shot down the ground for four. 10th over: Australia 34-1 (Healy 19, Lanning 9) Shrubsole to close out the first ten, but she errs in line, and Healy whips the straight ball behind square for four. Healy stays very quiet after that though, defending five balls as Shrubsole gets her radar back. A modest 10-over score, but Healy is still going at close to a run a ball, and Australia have wickets intact. 9th over: Australia 30-1 (Healy 15, Lanning 9) Another beauty from Brunt! Might have been some cross-seam, and the ball jags back in to beat Healy’s inside edge and miss off stump. Healy jabs a single out of her pads, with some luck, then Lanning gets one cutting back to hit the thigh pad. Not a single controlled shot in that over. England have kept Australia very quiet. 8th over: Australia 28-1 (Healy 14, Lanning 8) Shrubsole nearly gets through! The inswing again, and Healy just gets an inside edge on it, past leg stump for four. Lanning gets an inside edge as well, squarer for one run. Australia living dangerously. 7th over: Australia 22-1 (Healy 10, Lanning 7) A good five balls from Brunt, who has Lanning trying to pull off a length and nearly losing off stump, then a ball that seams in and beats Lanning on the inside edge. The loose ball of the over though is an attempted slower ball, I fancy, and Lanning dismisses the full toss through cover. 6th over: Australia 18-1 (Healy 10, Lanning 3) A single nudged behind point from Healy, allowing Lanning the chance to clip Shrubsole’s inswinger off her pads for two. Gets another run via an inside edge, that ball still swerving. 5th over: Australia 14-1 (Healy 9, Lanning 0) No run from Brunt’s first over, two boundaries from her second, and now back to denying runs from the bat in her third. A wide is the only score. Lanning is facing, and is happy to stay circumspect as Brunt hones in on the off stump. 4th over: Australia 13-1 (Healy 9, Lanning 0) Healy races down to the striker’s end while the ball is in the air, so Lanning doesn’t have to face immediately. Healy sees out the rest of the over. Gone! Another one to the top edge, after so many wickets fell that way in the Test match. A bit short from Shrubsole, and Haynes likes to pull off a length so she’s very happy to pull that one from just above waist height. She mistimes it though and it lobs up for the wicketkeeper. 3rd over: Australia 11-0 (Haynes 4, Healy 8) Now Healy goes! Her first ball facing Brunt, gets width and carves it over backward point. Shrubsole is at deep third but messes up the stop and lets it through for four. Then Haynes has a go, driving Brunt straight down the ground to the rope. 2nd over: Australia 3-0 (Haynes 0, Healy 3) Shrubsole to Healy, gets the inswinger booming immediately, big shout for lbw but it would have been hooping down the leg side. Slight inside edge on that too. Healy nudges a couple to leg, a run to the off, but doesn’t go big. 1st over: Australia 0-0 (Haynes 0, Healy 0) Rachael Haynes takes first ball, after Healy made a pair of ducks in the Test match. Brunt gets it swinging into the left-hander’s pads, and Haynes blocks out the over. One ball holds its line past the outside edge. The state of the series, remember, is that England need to win all three ODIs in order to win the series and take back the Ashes. Australia can retain the trophy with one win, and win the series with two. Just about ready to start here. So, Australia giving the young quick Darcie Brown another run after she didn’t bowl too many overs in the fourth innings of the Test. Megan Schutt returns to swing the new ball. King debuts in her third format in a couple of weeks. England change from five specialist bowlers in the Test to four in the ODI. Sciver and Knight will need to fill in the other overs, maybe Dunkley too. Sophie Ecclestone gets a batting promotion, she was way too low in the Test and I reckon that cost them the run chase. Australia Alyssa Healy + Rachael Haynes Meg Lanning * Ellyse Perry Beth Mooney Tahlia McGrath Ashleigh Gardner Jess Jonassen Alana King Megan Schutt Darcie Brown England Tammy Beaumont Lauren Winfield-Hill Heather Knight * Natalie Sciver Amy Jones + Sophia Dunkley Danni Wyatt Katherine Brunt Sophie Ecclestone Anya Shrubsole Kate Cross Heather Knight gets the choice, and decides she would rather chase than set a target. As we head into the three 50-over matches to end this multiformat series, the women’s Ashes contest is well balanced. Which seems strange given we’ve only had a result in one match. A solitary T20 at the start of the series. The next two were washed out, and the Test was a draw, but a draw that could not have been more thrilling, and one that has left everybody who follows women’s cricket feeling energised and optimistic. The players have had a couple of days to decompress, and now have to get their heads in the one-day game. Right after this is the one-day World Cup, too, so it will all be 50-over cricket through the next couple of months. What to expect? England batted really well in the first T20 but were overwhelmed by Australia’s superior firepower. England batted really well for a while in the fourth innings of the Test match but fell away. If they’re to challenge here, they’ll have to go one step better. Bearing in mind the Australians recently ended a record four-year winning streak of 26 one-dayers in a row.The International Olympic Committee president Thomas Bach has promised to support tennis player Peng Shuai if she calls for an investigation into her sexual harassment allegations. Speaking at a press conference in Beijing, Bach also revealed that Peng would enter the closed-loop system at the Games – which requires a series of negative PCR tests – for a face-to-face meeting with him in the coming days. “We will have the meeting,” said Bach. “I am very happy and very grateful to Peng Shuai. She will enter the closed loop to have the meeting that she also wants. Once the Covid procedures have finished we will have that meeting.” Concerns have persisted for Peng ever since the former women’s No 1 doubles player alleged that a former Chinese vice premier, Zhang Gaoli, had sexually assaulted her in the past. After that post, she was absent from public view for nearly three weeks. The IOC then set up a call with Peng to establish she was safe. Later in December she then claimed that she had never accused anyone of sexually assaulting her, adding that a social media post she had made had been misunderstood. Zhang has not commented on the matter. Bach said that a face-to-face meeting was a logical next step to establish whether what Peng was saying via a teleconference was repeated in real life. He added: “It’s not only a sign of respect but a necessity to respect her and listen to her and how she sees the situation, how she wants to live her life.” “We are step by step trying to find out if she wants to have the inquiry,” he said. “Of course we would also support her in this, but it must be her decision. It’s her life, it’s her allegations. “We have heard the allegations, we have heard the withdrawal. We will have this personal meeting and continue this conversation. And then we will know better also about her physical integrity, her mental state, when we can finally meet in person.” Many believe that Peng is being restricted by the Chinese government and is unable to speak freely. However, Bach said he didn’t believe that was the case. “We know from her explanations during the video conferences that she is living here in Beijing,” he said. “She is reporting that she can move freely, that she is spending time with her family and friends, And now we will be able to do the next step in a personal meeting to convince us in person of her well being and her state of mind.”It shouldn’t work, and maybe it shouldn’t even have got made. But it does and it has: and Joanna Hogg has given us an amazingly luminous self-portrait of the film-maker as a young woman: metatextual, confessional and autobiographical. And in two parts, what’s more, demanding our attention and getting it (the first part came out in 2019). The Souvenir is a movie that has defied the laws of film industry gravity, and those big names in the credits don’t in themselves explain this: a film that has floated free of what might be expected commercially or in any other way and carries itself with a marvellous austere artistry and compositional flair. And the sunbursts of emotion in the musical soundtrack gave me enough vitamin D to last the rest of the year. In this second part, I found the things that were a challenge the first time around, such as its tendency to the opaque (although not unexpected for this director), have melted away, and the return of these characters is like the return of old friends and old lovers. Honor Swinton Byrne is back as Julie, the insouciantly well-off young film student who we saw in the previous film having a tragic amour fou with a mysterious, complicated man called Anthony (Tom Burke) of destructive and predatory habits. Now Julie must creatively exorcise his devastating presence in her life and to that end, worries her film-school examiners by proposing to abandon the worthy docu-style study of working lives in Sunderland that she was supposed to be working on, going instead for a wild new personal fantasia, a non-narrative Bildungskino of the mind and heart. It sounds a bit Fellini-esque, and Hogg’s own film about it has a little of Almodóvar. But when we finally see the finished graduation film, there are moments of Powell and Pressburger, directors whom Anthony had affected to admire. Tilda Swinton is back as Julie’s amiably grand and patrician mother Rosalind (allowing us once again to savour the fact that she is Swinton Byrne’s mother in real life); she allows Julie to live rent-free in the smart little pied-à-terre the family has in Knightsbridge and keeps on getting pestered for large amounts of money so Julie can make her graduation film. Hilariously, Rosalind has been inspired by her daughter to take a creative class of her own, in pottery, and is terribly proud of a wonky little “Etruscan” pot she has made – and the awful fate of this artefact made me jump out of my seat and hide my eyes at the same time. And non-professional James Spencer Ashworth is back, wonderfully playing Julie’s lovable, sweet-natured dad William. As Julie’s life and studies progress, Swinton Byrne shows us how Julie is growing up, going into therapy to deal with her anxiety and loneliness, accepting a sexual proposition from one of the actors, and also getting tougher, arguing for the camera positions she wants from the recalcitrant DP and having to let down actor mates who had assumed she was going to cast them in her film. Ariane Labed and Harris Dickinson play the people she actually chooses to do the Julie and Anthony roles, although dizzyingly – and perhaps inevitably – it is Swinton Byrne and Burke whose faces we see on screen. And Hogg appears to be using Julie’s movie-set version of the flat as the “real” thing. Richard Ayoade is again on glorious form playing the dyspeptic and ultra-opinionated fellow film student Patrick who makes a very cruel joke about his editor’s baldness. (Did Ayoade improvise that bit?) For the first film, I found myself wondering, Ayoade’s presence aside, at the austere absence of comedy or irony that might with any other film-maker be an important part of telling Julie’s story. (I said it might have made the subject for an early novel by Muriel Spark or AN Wilson.) For this second film, the keynote is still certainly seriousness – intellectual seriousness and artistic seriousness. We are not invited to find anything precious or indulgent in Julie’s life, and in some way, of course, Anthony’s awful fate guards against that reaction. Yet perhaps it simply a function of a second film making the characters more familiar, but the bloodstream-temperature of the movie is heightened; for me, there was less detachment. I found myself more invested in everything that was happening. This second part makes its own kind of emotional sense and retrospective sense of the first film, too. As ever with movies like this, some of what you might call the reading pleasure comes in wondering what has been taken from the director’s own life, what has been changed, what has been suppressed or misremembered. (I wondered this, a little, about her first film, Unrelated from 2007.) With a film about a film about a life, the puzzlement-slash-pleasure is redoubled. This rich and mysterious film is a real achievement. • The Souvenir Part II screens at the Cannes film festival on 8 July.The Covid-19 vaccine developed by Novavax has been approved by the UK regulator for use in people over the age of 18. The vaccine will not be immediately widely available as its use as part of the UK’s vaccination programme will be considered by the independent Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation. Clinical trials suggest two doses of the Novavax jab have an efficacy of about 90% against symptomatic Covid, similar to the other approved UK vaccines. A recent study by Novavax suggests its protection holds up much better against Omicron than most other vaccines, raising the prospect that it may be able to provide broader protection across variants in future. June Raine, the chief executive of the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA), said: “Our approval of Nuvaxovid today follows a rigorous review of the safety, quality and effectiveness of this vaccine, and expert advice from the government’s independent scientific advisory body, the Commission on Human Medicines.” The decision is expected to address travel issues for Britons who took part in trials of the Novavax vaccine, initially leaving them ineligible to travel to certain countries because the vaccine had not been approved by the UK regulator. The government announced in October the thousands of UK trial participants would be offered the Pfizer/BioNTech jab; the latest decision should resolve the situation for those who did not take up the offer. Sajid Javid, the health secretary, said: “It is great to see our world-renowned medicines regulator approve another Covid-19 vaccine. I want the UK to be the best place in the world to conduct clinical trials. It’s a testament to the country’s first-rate research and development capabilities for vaccines – with tens of thousands of people taking part in clinical trials here in the UK, contributing to the invaluable research that shows our vaccines are safe and effective.” Novavax’s offering is a protein-based vaccine that uses more established technology than some others, similar to the flu jab and routine childhood vaccines against whooping cough or meningococcal infection. There is early evidence that it could have reduced side-effects, with trial data appearing to show lower rates of fatigue, headaches and muscle pain. Public health experts hope that these factors could convince as yet unvaccinated people who are sceptical of new technology or worried about side-effects from other vaccines to get a shot. Prof Sir Munir Pirmohamed, the chair of the independent Commission on Human Medicines, said: “Nuvaxovid is distinct from other Covid-19 vaccines currently in use in the UK as it uses recombinant protein-based technology which has been used for many years in the development of vaccines to prevent other illnesses, for example hepatitis B.”The Bank of England has raised interest rates for a second time in three months, to 0.5%, as it warned that surging energy bills would push inflation higher than expected, to more than 7% by April. Warning that families faced the biggest fall in their disposable income for three decades this year, the Bank’s rate-setting monetary policy committee voted by a narrow majority to raise its base rate from 0.25% to tackle soaring inflationary pressures. Signalling a growing split on the nine-member committee (MPC), four members voted for a more aggressive increase to 0.75% to tackle rising prices and bring them more swiftly back to the Bank’s 2% inflation target. In a downbeat assessment of Britain’s economic prospects, Threadneedle Street forecast families’ disposable incomes would shrink by 2% this year, the biggest drop since comparable records began in 1990. The pound rose on the international currency markets by 0.3% against the US dollar to trade close to $1.36. Financial markets are likely to view the vote as a measure of the central bank’s determination to take an independent stance in its mission to reduce inflation, with MPC members setting aside the negative impact that higher borrowing costs are likely to have on the economy’s ability to grow. All members of the committee voted to start the process of reducing the Bank’s £895bn quantitative-easing bond-buying programme, built up over the past decade since the 2008 financial crisis, which was added to during the Covid-19 pandemic. The MPC said it would choose not to reinvest the proceeds of maturing bonds, in a process that would reduce its stock of assets by £70bn over the next two years. The move to raise rates to 0.5%, which was widely anticipated by City economists, comes after the official measure of annual inflation hit a 30-year high of 5.4% in December, an increase fuelled by a sharp rise in household energy bills and supply chain logjams pushing up the cost of the weekly shop. Against a backdrop of rising household energy prices, the Bank said inflation was on course to peak close to 7.25% in April, a sharp adjustment to its previous forecast of 6%. The central bank said it would continue to raise rates this year and next, to 1.5% by mid-2023. Officials said rising gas prices were the main factor driving the jump in inflation over the next few months to its highest level since August 1991. A tight labour market, in which wages jumped amid an increase in job vacancies to record levels, was another factor pushing up the prices of goods in the shops, the MPC said. The interest rate rise followed Rishi Sunak’s announcement of plans to give all households a repayable £200 discount on their energy bills in response to Ofgem, the energy regulator, increasing the dual-fuel price cap by £693 from April, to £1,971 a year. Low-income households will also receive further support under the chancellor’s plans. Illustrating the last-minute nature of Sunak’s rescue deal, the Bank was briefed before the announcement, but too late for the possible impact to be included in any of its forecasts. Asked if the government’s cost-of-living rescue package had been factored in to its inflation forecast, Bank officials said it was only able to make an assumption about a possible deal. The MPC said uncertainty about the economic impact of the Omicron variant of coronavirus had declined, and its consequences for jobs and growth were likely to be more limited than feared in December. Despite concerns over the renewed wave in the pandemic, the Bank raised interest rates from the record low of 0.1% to 0.25% in December. However, Threadneedle Street said the economy was expected to slow over the next two years and unemployment was set to rise. Despite current record numbers of job vacancies, it said unemployment was likely to increase from the current level of 4.1% to 5% in 2023, while forecasting a slowdown for GDP growth to 1.25% next year and 1% in the general election year 2024.Good morning. Yesterday Joe Biden announced that the US will deploy more than 3,000 US troops in Germany, Poland and Romania as Russia continues to build up its forces around Ukraine. Russia’s deputy foreign minister has since responded, calling the move a “destructive step”. Alexander Grushko said the increased troops would “increase military tension and reduce scope for political decision”, and would “delight” Ukrainian authorities. Russia had been moving 30,000 combat troops and modern weapons to Belarus over the last few days, Nato secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, said today. It is Moscow’s biggest military deployment to the country since the end of the cold war. This comes as the west continues to deploy a flurry of diplomatic efforts – yesterday Boris Johnson, the United Kingdom prime minister, warned Vladimir Putin in a phone call that he will make a “tragic miscalculation” if he invades Ukraine. France’s Emmanuel Macron was set to speak to Putin on Wednesday night as well, their third conversation in less than a week, while the German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, said he would meet Putin in Moscow soon. Turkish president Recep Tayyip Erdoğan will fly to Moscow to offer himself as a mediator between Ukraine and Putin. A wild card of Nato diplomacy, Turkey was criticized by both Russia and Ukraine last year – Putin was unhappy when Turkey sold drones to the Ukrainian army, while Ukrainian politicians have been angered by a gas pipeline that takes gas from Russia to Turkey. Joe Biden commits to reducing cancer death rate by 50% over the next 25 years To reignite the “moonshot” initiative against the deadly disease that was first announced in 2016 when he was vice-president, Joe Biden has announced a 25-year timeline for reducing the cancer death rate by 50%. “We can end cancer as we know it,” Biden said. “I committed to this fight when I was vice-president. It’s one of the reasons why, quite frankly, I ran for president. Let there be no doubt, now that I am president, this is a presidential White House priority.” Biden’s son, Beau, died of brain cancer in 2015. Four men charged in overdose death of actor Michael K Williams Actor Michael K Williams died of acute drug intoxication in September and was found by family members in his penthouse apartment. At the time, the death of the Wire and Boardwalk Empire star was ruled an accident. A federal prosecutor announced yesterday that Williams overdosed on fentanyl-laced heroin, and four men have been charged in connection with his death. “This is a public health crisis,” the prosecutor said. “And it has to stop.” Trump risked disaster with praise of Palestinian leader in Israel meeting In a new book, Donald Trump’s ambassador to Israel, David Friedman, recounted how the former president “knocked everyone off their chairs” in a meeting with then-president of Israel Reuven Rivlin in May 2017, when he criticized the then-prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, for being unwilling to seek peace while Mahmoud Abbas, the Palestinian leader, was “desperate” for a deal. “Although the meeting was private and off the record, we all envisioned a headline tomorrow that Trump had praised Abbas and criticized Netanyahu – the worst possible dynamic for the president’s popularity or for the prospects of the peace process,” Friedman wrote. “Fortunately, and incredibly, the event wasn’t leaked.” In other news … US special forces have killed 13 people in a hunt for high-ranking jihadists in north-western Syria, an operation the Pentagon described as “successful”. The International Space Station will plummet to a watery grave in 2031 after more than 30 years in service, when Nasa plans to “de-orbit” it out of commission. A Northern California county is on track to be run by a militia-aligned group after voters in the conservative outpost ousted a retired police chief from his role on the county board of supervisors. Tainted cocaine has killed at least 20 in Argentina and sent dozens more to the hospital. Authorities are investigating whether the drug had been intentionally cut with a toxic substance. Stat of the day: Exposure to one nasal droplet is enough to become infected with Covid-19 Researchers conducted a landmark trial in which healthy volunteers were intentionally given a dose of Covid-19 and found that exposure to a just one nasal droplet is sufficient to become infected. The trial, conducted by scientists at Imperial College London, was the first to have monitored people during the entire course of infection. Don’t miss this: The gaslighting of Covid longhaulers More than two years into a deadly pandemic that has irrevocably changed the course of history, individuals suffering from long Covid – the long-term, lingering effects of coronavirus, long after any initial flu-like symptoms have abated – are still fighting for recognition and find themselves often still trying to convince skeptics that their symptoms are real. Climate check: We didn’t start the fire Wildfires today are grabbing headlines across the world with their destructiveness, erratic behavior and size. However, fewer fires are actually burning today than ever before – but that’s not a good thing. In shunning indigenous traditions of burning excess vegetation as a method of land management, fires have become stranger and less predictable. Want more environmental stories delivered to your inbox? Sign up to our new newsletter Down to Earth to get original and essential reporting on the climate crisis every week Last Thing: ‘We have to be visible’ For nearly 30 years, the small mountain town in northern Colombia, El Carmen de Bolívar, was infamous for the violence perpetuated by the police and paramilitary against the LGBTQ+ community in the area. These days, members of the community are remembering their history and reclaiming their place in their home, living their lives more visible than ever – even in the face of lingering prejudice. Sign up First Thing is delivered to thousands of inboxes every weekday. If you’re not already signed up, subscribe now. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.comWaitrose is ditching free newspapers for loyalty card-holders from 22 February in the latest example of supermarkets cutting costs amid surging inflation. Members of the myWaitrose scheme can claim back the cost of a range of newspapers if they spend £10 with the supermarket. In a letter to its 8.5 million scheme members, Waitrose said it would replace the current deal with more personalised offers, which would change each week. A spokesperson said: “We’re improving the myWaitrose programme to offer customers personalised discounts on the products they buy most. “While the newspaper offer was enjoyed by some of our customers, in reality it was only being used by around 5% of members. The new approach will mean that all members can make greater savings by receiving benefits tailored to them.” The change caused outrage among some of the the supermarket’s shoppers, coming just under a year after the retailer stopped offering free coffees to MyWaitrose members in stores. The retailer said the coffee deal was paused during the pandemic but did not give a date when it may return. One shopper tweeted: “What?! Waitrose are stopping their #myWaitrose newspaper offer!! And their list of consolation offers are not comparable! The paper with the myWaitrose Saturday shop has been the cornerstone of our family’s weekend for YEARS! Not happy with this at all. I want to know why?!” Several loyalty-card holders said the free paper was their main reason for membership. One tweeted: “Austerity has finally arrived at Waitrose No more free newspapers with your shopping! I used to walk down to Waitrose a few times a week for top ups and the free newspaper was a real bonus, now the local Tesco will do just fine.” Supermarkets are searching for ways to cut costs to try to keep a lid on shop prices, as inflation hits food and non-food items in the UK. Heavy competition across the industry, particularly from the discounters Aldi and Lidl, is forcing other supermarkets to keep down prices despite rising costs of basic commodities and ingredients, transport, energy and fuel. This week, Tesco announced it would stop selling music and films in its supermarkets by the end of this month, shut deli counters, close down its small Jack’s chain and stop night shifts in dozens of stores in an attempt to keep costs down. The latest shake-up at Waitrose follows a series of tweaks to the terms of its loyalty-card scheme over the years. In 2017 it required scheme members to buy something before pouring themselves a free hot drink. That came after long queues formed at its self-service machines as the original generous deal enabled even those who were not making a purchase to pick up a free drink. Before that, Waitrose told those who wanted to a free hot drink in one of its cafes that they also had to buy a “treat” – such as a sandwich, cake or biscuit. The latest change to the loyalty scheme may also be a blow for the newspaper industry, with redemptions accounting for up to 10% of some titles’ weekend sales in the supermarket, according to the trade journal RN. RN quoted one industry insider saying that Waitrose pick-ups were particularly important for weekend sales of the Daily Mail, Telegraph and Sunday Times.The Super Bowl, the NFL’s ultimate coronation and by far the most watched event in America, is a little over a week away. Yet you wouldn’t know it because Brian Flores’s explosive lawsuit against the league and its clubs alleging racial discrimination in its hiring practices continue to take the NFL zeitgeist by storm. The Flores complaint, which lays out the disturbing history of racism in the NFL, includes extensive data supporting the notion that qualified Black candidates have long been passed over in droves for head coach, coordinator, and general manager openings. The NFL currently has just one Black head coach in Mike Tomlin. One, despite 70% of NFL players being Black. One, even though many of these players strive to become coaches and executives in the league upon retirement. Thirty-two teams. One Black head coach. But the other piece of Flores’s complaint may be even more difficult for the league to ignore. Flores alleges that Dolphins owner Stephen Ross offered to pay him $100,000 per loss in 2019 in hopes of securing the No 1 draft pick in the 2020 draft. Flores claims his refusal to comply was the beginning of the end of his time in Miami. The Dolphins won five games that season despite unloading a litany of key players, including safety Minkah Fitzpatrick and left tackle Laremy Tunsil. Ross denied these claims in a statement that read, “I take great personal exception to these malicious attacks, and the truth must be known. [Flores’s] allegations are false, malicious and defamatory.” Ross’s statement, late Wednesday night, came a full day and half after the allegations were made public. The NFL was hastier with its reaction, claiming Flores’s 58-page lawsuit was “without merit” just two hours after it was released. The notion of not investigating an owner who is alleged to have attempted to undermine the very fabric of competition was appalling. But after Flores’s media blitz where he emphatically repeated the claims for the world to hear the league reversed course and has now opened an investigation. Former Browns head coach Hue Jackson piled on, claiming that team owner Jimmy Haslam incentivized losses and was quite satisfied with Jackson’s 1-36 record during 2016 and 2017, which led to them gaining the No 1 draft pick in 2017 and 2018. The Browns have denied the charge calling any such claims “completely fabricated”. Paying a coach for poor performance may or may not be about race though the idea of a white owner thinking the Black coach would be acquiescent to his demands is quite plausible given the history of the NFL, and well, America. And many have noted in the last few days that when Black head coaches are given jobs, it’s often on teams with little chance of competing. This, the theory goes, allows teams to say they are committed to diversity but also means they can replace the Black head coach with a white one once things go wrong and a high draft pick has been secured. If any aspect of tanking under the behest of an owner is proven to be true, the NFL will be rocked in a way it has never experienced. Suck for Luck and Tank for Trevor might make cute hashtags and inspire fun social media banter. And sure, there reaches a point in every season where Jets fans, the first example that comes to mind, are ready to throw in the towel. But there’s a difference between viewing your position in the NFL draft order as a silver lining and intentionally plotting to lose. Tanking is the term we use but really this act of defying basic principles of competition deserves a far more potent moniker. NFL players put their bodies through the wringer in ways we can’t even imagine. The ramification is a career span that averages just 3.3 years. Every game is an audition. The idea that a player would spend a season or even a play intentionally trying to lose so a wealthy owner can get richer by selling more season tickets and jerseys with a splashy draft pick is repulsive. 49ers long snapper Taybor Pepper, who spent the 2019 in Miami under Flores, shared his thoughts in a now deleted tweet: “I’ve been quiet about my experience in Miami and still probably won’t go into details until my football career is over. Knowing that my EMPLOYER was actively trying to sabotage the season, again, makes me sick to my stomach. WHERE IS/WAS THE INTEGRITY.” There is no integrity if owners are out there incentivizing their coaches to lose. Zero. If true, the league as we know may be a thing of the past. The NFL is usually mired in some sort of controversy – Colin Kaepernick, concussions, domestic violence. Somehow, the league always weathers the storm, and keeps piling up the revenue. But if what Flores and Jackson are alleging (and perhaps others will come forward) is true it’s a slap in the face to every person involved in the league from fan to player to concession worker. These allegations are not dissimilar to the 1919 Black Sox scandal, when the Chicago White Sox were accused of taking bribes from a gambling syndicate to throw the World Series. That scandal created turmoil for Major League Baseball and led to the first appointment of a commissioner to restore integrity. It’s impossible to predict the exact fallout the league could be facing if these claims are backed with evidence. The league could enact massive fines and strip picks from the Dolphins in addition to forcing Ross to sell the team. It could also disincentivize teams from tanking by moving from a draft to a lottery like the NBA. But the deeper issue is the game itself. The beauty of sport and especially the NFL with its salary cap is that nothing is predetermined. But if we find out that it has been rigged all along, how can we consume the league in the same way? The NFL’s ability to survive scandal after scandal is almost a sport of its own. Somehow the league continues to thrive in large part thanks to high-budget TV broadcasts, fantasy football, the league’s marketing machine and its global ambitions, but most of all because of its product. If that product is proven to be tainted, the NFL will finally be faced with a scandal it can’t slither out of. And even if the tanking allegations are not proven true or Flores settles the lawsuit, the seeds of mistrust have been planted.For more than half a century the modest clock has been respectfully protected – wrapped in dusters – by the family of the man who pulled it out of the rubble on that terrible day. Now the Aberfan school clock, which stopped at 9.13am on 21 October 1966, the precise time an avalanche of coal waste crashed into classrooms and homes, claiming the lives of 116 children and 28 adults, is to go on display at a Welsh museum. Mike Flynn, whose father was one of the rescuers who rushed to Pantglas junior school, handed the clock over to the permanent collection of Amgueddfa Cymru – National Museum Wales on Thursday. The clock will be put on display in the “Wales Is” gallery at St Fagans National Museum of History in Cardiff from 16 February, a permanent, tangible reminder of one of the most tragic days in Welsh history. Flynn described how his late father, also Mike Flynn, a postal worker and a paramedic in the Territorial Army, was among those who went to help as news began to emerge that slurry, coal waste and tailings had poured from the hillside into the village. He said: “My father travelled up from Cardiff to Aberfan. I was only seven but remember the day vividly. I got back from school and both the front and back door was open. My father was supposed to be there but was absent. Then the disaster was all over the news. It was quiet, eerie.” Flynn Sr plucked the clock from the rubble and handed it over to the police. After the inquiry into the disaster, the clock was returned to the family, and it has emerged only once in public since then, for the 50th anniversary of the tragedy in 2016. Like many victims, families and rescuers, Flynn Sr was deeply upset by what he saw that day. “He didn’t talk about it but he was profoundly affected,” his son said. Flynn Sr decided to do what he could for his own community, including taking residents of children’s homes out on trips. He kept the clock in the box it had come back in from the inquiry, and after he died it was passed to his son for safekeeping. “We kept it wrapped in dusters and clingfilm,” Flynn said. Flynn, 61, a technical director for an electrical company, is delighted that the museum is taking the clock in. “It is the most appropriate place for it. The clock is a very poignant reminder of what happened. It seems to encapsulate that moment in time. It’s an emotive piece. My family has been the custodians of the clock for 55 years but we always felt it was owned by Aberfan and the Welsh community.” Sioned Williams, the principal curator of modern history at St Fagans, said: “We’re very grateful to Mike for donating the clock. It means a great deal. There aren’t many objects that survive to tell the story of the Aberfan disaster. It’s an opportunity for us to tell a very important story. We hope to collect many more items linked to the disaster.” The clock may be an historical artefact but the issue of coal tips has not gone away. The Labour-led Welsh government continues to call on Boris Johnson’s UK administration to allocate long-term funding for the tips that still threaten communities across Wales. The Welsh government argues that extreme weather caused by the climate crisis is making many of the tips unstable and believes at least £500m to £600m will be needed over the next 10 to 15 years to make them safe. Only this week there were heated exchanges in the Welsh parliament, with the Tories saying the Labour government had to pay for the tips to be made safe, and the Welsh first minister, Mark Drakeford, insisting the UK government had to help. Lee Waters, the Welsh deputy minister for climate change, said: “The issue is a live one. We really worry that history will repeat itself if we don’t make these tips safe. We’ve got 40% of the UK’s coal tips in Wales. This is not something that has happened since we’ve had devolved powers. It’s a legacy of Britain’s industrial past and Britain has a responsibility to put it right, not just Wales.”You thought you had a challenging lockdown? Imagine this scenario. The onset of a global pandemic coincides with your first experience of living alone. You have just separated from your partner and are heartbroken. Your industry is wiped out by Covid and all your engagements are cancelled. Oh, and your OCD flares up. It sounds bad, right? But not so bad that Catherine Bohart didn’t think she couldn’t get some banging standup out of it. “I am, if anything, an oversharer,” she says. “I just say what happens to me, all of the time. And for the last two years, [lockdown’s] been what’s happening.” The show, This Isn’t for You, opens at the Leicester comedy festival on 9 February. After last year’s festival “pivoted”, as they say, online, a successful Leicester event (it’s the UK’s second biggest comedy gathering behind Edinburgh) this time round will mark a significant staging post on the industry’s route back from Covid. It also launches a five-month tour for Bohart, whose career was in the ascendant until Covid put life on pause. Her two shows so far have made waves; the first, Immaculate, was released last year as part of Soho Theatre Live on Amazon Prime Video. Her face was familiar as one of Nish Kumar’s sidekicks on TV’s The Mash Report, where she explained border issues in her native Ireland to a Sesame Street-style puppet, and offered a guide to being “the kind of immigrant British people don’t mind so much”. She was also one half of fringe comedy’s hippest couple, with fellow comic, Edinburgh best newcomer nominee Sarah Keyworth. In some parallel universe, Bohart’s next show might be about being coupled-up. “I was writing a show about my men-free life,” she says. “Because I live in a very queer bubble, I was dating a woman and we were moving into a house together. But I no longer live with that person, and this show is now about … well, heartbreak, and control.” It tells the story of her mental health journey through lockdown, but with laughs. “Because the lesson of the last few years,” says the 33-year-old, “is that the universe thinks it’s funny that we endeavour to control our lives.” The issue of control may be more critical to Bohart than most: she lives with – and once spent four months in hospital for – obsessive compulsive disorder. “Because of my OCD, I actually took to lockdown well,” she says. “I was amenable to being a little hamster person. Morning time, eating time, sleeping time, working time, then go again: I quite liked the patterns and rules and controls.” The problems started when the rules relaxed. “When everybody else was like: ‘We can go back out into the world!’ I was like: ‘Do we have to go back into the world?!’ It was quite confronting and I felt incredibly anxious.” Lockdown was also uniquely solitary for Bohart, who had hitherto “never spent any time alone”. And bereft, too: “Like all comedians, there was a 24-hour period where everything went. It was that dramatic: ‘Oh, there goes my next six months’ earnings.’” What sustained her (apart from a temping job and teaching via Zoom) was a weekly online show, Gigless, she put together while theatres were closed. “It gave me hope on two fronts,” she says. “One, comedians were funny – and it was a big thing to see that this hadn’t broken us. And two, having a loyal and excited 100 people every week watching my stuff. That gave me a sense that what I was doing was worthwhile.” Being a standup had never been Bohart’s plan. She grew up in Dublin, the daughter of a Catholic deacon – a relationship dissected in her 2018 debut. Comedy did not loom large: “We had only two channels on my TV until I was 18. I thought that three comics existed: Tommy Tiernan, Dylan Moran and Joan Rivers.” She trained to be an actor, but ended up temping for a property firm. She was 27 before she stepped behind a mic, encouraged by a group of female comics she had booked to perform at a corporate event. “They said: ‘You’re gobby. Are you like this when you’re sober? Do you want to come do a new material night?’ So I did.” Neither was it a deliberate choice, says Bohart, to mainline knotty intimacies in her work. “But anything except the truth feels like filler to me,” she says. “Maybe it’s being an Irish person? My experience of Irish people is an inability to do small talk. It’s like: ‘Hello, what’s your trauma? Do you want mine?’” The oversharing modus operandi also came about because “the stuff my early audiences found interesting was the stuff that had been difficult for me in my life. Suddenly, being a woman was a good thing, being a queer person was a good thing, being foreign and from a religious background and having a mental illness were good things – in terms of making me distinct and giving me something to talk about.” Bohart’s comedy ambitions are focused on simply getting funnier (“We all want that, right?”) and “being less questioning in my content”. “I’m often asking questions in my standup,” she says, “and not always answering them. And I want to. I think it’s an arrogance to stand on stage for an hour and not reach any conclusions. But I hope I’m decades away from being the best comic I’ll be.” Such are the aspirations of a comic now emerging from a Covid-era chrysalis, with a sitcom in the works, a tour on the starting blocks and a newfound zeal for the job she fell into. “After what we’ve been through,” says Bohart, “I am more excited to do comedy – but less confident it’s a certainty – than I’ve ever been. So I guess it’s just about enjoying it while it’s happening,” she concludes, happily abandoning control – “and about getting a pension, which I must remind myself to do.” Catherine Bohart: This Isn’t for You tours from 9 FebruaryWednesday until 5 June.20. The Man Who Loved Women (1977) This worldly comedy of love is an example of how Truffaut always aspired to something lighthearted with even a touch of Lubitschian comedy. But it’s a very 70s piece of work in its knowing and slightly louche celebration of male romantic conquest (it got a Hollywood remake directed by Blake Edwards with Burt Reynolds). Charles Denner plays Bertrand, a guy who loves all women with the passion of a connoisseur or a collector; at his funeral, the service is thronged with his female admirers. 19. The Mischief Makers (1957) This short was Truffaut’s first serious work (if you discount his initial student-exercise short film, A Visit), a 23-minute piece of startling confidence and maturity in which almost all of Truffaut’s themes are laid out: the innocence and guilt of childhood, young love, the scary mystery of sex, and the glory of cinema itself. Over a hot summer, five brattish lads are larking about – and start spying on a young woman (played by the future French movie icon Bernadette Lafont in her first role) and her boyfriend. The game turns nasty. 18. Love on the Run (1979) The adventures of Truffaut’s alter ego Antoine Doinel came to an end in this fifth and final film in the Doinel series – after The 400 Blows (1959), the short Antoine and Colette (1962), Stolen Kisses (1968) and Bed and Board (1970), clips and outtakes from which surface here like flashes of memory. Doinel is now a thirtysomething guy, getting divorced from his wife and becoming tormented with Vertigo-ish obsessions with a woman who looks like his former partner. Jean-Pierre Léaud’s performance has become enigmatically reserved, prematurely aged in some way, but also frozen in youth, in the moment at which he became famous – the way celebrities tend to be. 17. Fahrenheit 451 (1966) Truffaut wasn’t a natural at science-fiction – perhaps his most notable contribution to the genre was his acting cameo in Spielberg’s Close Encounters of the Third Kind. And it has to be said that this movie – though much discussed in its day, and instrumental in elevating the Bradbury novel to classic status while making the title itself part of the language – maybe hasn’t aged all that well. In a future dystopia where all reading matter is forbidden, a firefighter whose job is incinerating books falls in love with a schoolteacher who has a secret copy of the Memoirs of Saint Simon. It creaks a bit. 16. Two English Girls (1971) A period piece, starring Léaud in a non-Doinel role, it is based on a novel by Henri-Pierre Roché, who wrote Jules et Jim, another love-triangle story about the erotic poignancy of shared love. Léaud is the young French art critic Claude, fascinated by a young Englishwoman in Paris, Anne (Kika Markham), who introduces him to her sister , who instantly falls for Claude. The use of voiceover and journals gives a delicate, elegiac tone to this involved story of the human heart and its mysteries. 15. Mississippi Mermaid (1969) Another of the Truffaut movies based on an American crime novel – in this case, by Cornell Woolrich, whose short story It Had to be Murder inspired Hitchcock’s Rear Window. It was also another to get a dodgy Hollywood remake: Original Sin, from 2001, starring Antonio Banderas and Angelina Jolie. Jean-Paul Belmondo plays a wealthy tobacco farmer who advertises for a mail-order bride and is entranced by the woman he gets, played by Catherine Deneuve, even though he is convinced that this was not the person who responded to the ad. The denouement shows Truffaut’s playful, gleeful love of thriller conventions. 14. The Story of Adele H (1975) An unusual film in the Truffaut canon in that it’s a period drama with a literary flavour, and so close to the old-fashioned cinéma de papa, which Truffaut once made his name by deriding. At 20 years old, Isabelle Adjani made her breakthrough here as Adele Hugo, living in the 1860s with her celebrated father, Victor, on the island of Guernsey, where she has conceived a Hardyesque romantic obsession with a caddish British army officer played by the beautiful Bruce Robinson (later to direct Withnail and I). A desolate tale of doomed love, which Truffaut invests with mystery and tragedy. 13. The Wild Child (1970) Perhaps the closest Truffaut came to the cinema of confrontation or shock, The Wild Child was arguably a forerunner to Herzog’s The Enigma of Kaspar Hauser. Drawn from a sensational and mythologised case history from 18th-century France, it is the story of a “wolf boy” who is discovered living a feral existence in the forest. A doctor takes it upon himself to show the boy the civilising influence of education. Jean-Pierre Cargol plays Victor, the wild child, and Truffaut himself plays the doctor. The film returns Truffaut to his keynote theme: the vulnerability and intensity of childhood. 12. The Woman Next Door (1981) A steamy melodrama, almost an erotic thriller, evidently inspired by Tristan and Isolde, which appeared at the time to lack the indirectness and lightness of touch that features in the best of Truffaut. Gérard Depardieu plays a happily married provincial man who is astonished when a former lover, herself now married, moves in next door – Fanny Ardant. Their relationship had been painful and tempestuous and of course soon reignites in secret, leading to calamity and violence. 11. The Bride Wore Black (1968) Another playful pulp gem from Truffaut, again based on a Cornell Woolrich novel: a revenge thriller that is said to have paved the way for Tarantino’s Kill Bill. Truffaut created a great role for Jeanne Moreau as the woman whose husband was shot dead on their wedding day – and who sets out to get payback by murdering the original killer and his four associates, including Michel Bouquet and Michael Lonsdale. Was the original crime deliberate, or an accident? No matter. The fascination is in her serial-killer’s procedural, working her way through the list of the guilty and getting satisfaction even after being caught and sent to jail. 10. Bed and Board (1970) This is the fourth in the Doinel series, and perhaps the strangest or the saddest. Antoine and his wife, Christine, are living together as man and wife: the domicile conjugal of the French title, which is of course is not conducive to an enticing movie. Naturally, Antoine is to stray, after they have a child together, forming an attachment to a Japanese woman, Kyoko (played by the Japanese model Hiroko Berghauer, wearing dresses created by her husband’s design firm). Antoine’s job at this stage is dyeing carnations for flower shops – and could there be a more pointed symbol of the shallow futility of art? 9. The Last Metro (1980) One of Truffaut’s biggest commercial prestige hits – a tragicomedy set in occupied Paris in 1942, where the populace would save on heating bills by crowding into theatres and cinemas before getting the last metro home. A theatre company, with Catherine Deneuve as the leading lady and Gérard Depardieu the new young star, believes that the show must go on, despite Nazi oppression – and the Jewish director is hiding out in the theatre’s cellar from where he is shaping the productions in secret. The actors are up against one of the most hateful critics in movie history – an odious antisemitic collaborationist called Daxiat, based on the real-life pro-Nazi journalist Alain Laubreaux. The idea of the director hiding in the cellar, an artist working in secret, suppressed by fate, is not so far from Charles Aznavour’s piano player in Shoot the Pianist. 8. Stolen Kisses (1968) Stolen Kisses is a late-breaking new wave gem, free-wheeling, improvisatory in feel; witty, flighty, dapper film-making that is self-aware in the most lighthearted way, but sometimes rather melancholy and wan. With its references to les évènements and the Henri Langlois row, it could be Truffaut’s most Godardian film. Antoine Doinel has left the army under a cloud, and is now a brooding misfit who in short order is hired and fired from a bizarre range of jobs such as private detective and TV repairman. He begins to fall in love with Christine, a young woman played by Claude Jade, but also has a farcical sexual experience with his employer’s wife, vampishly played by Delphine Seyrig. Doinel’s life is now at the romantic comedy stage. 7. The Green Room (1978) Surely one of Truffaut’s strangest and most distinctive films, atypical but also intensely personal and heartfelt – based on some short stories by Henry James. Truffaut himself plays Julien, a veteran of the first world war, who works at a newspaper writing obituaries and is obsessed with death – the death in action of his wartime comrades, whose fate he didn’t deserve to avoid, the death of more and more of his contemporaries, and, chiefly, the death of his wife, to whom he keeps a shrine in his house. A disastrous fire leads Julien to a certain young woman, Cécilia, played by Nathalie Baye, with whom love and death fuse in a kind of occult redemption. 6. Small Change (1976) Truffaut returns with heartfelt passion to the theme of childhood, but here it is not seen through the lens of the past: these children’s lives are happening in the present day. There is an ensemble of children and young teens here, suffering abuse, loneliness and shame, but also experiencing rebellious fun and first love. It is an episodic movie giving us little glimpses of lives, sometimes cheekily melodramatic or sentimental, sometimes wildly implausible, but these comic elements offset the brutally real pain that mottles the movie like marble. 5. The Soft Skin (1964) Truffaut’s drama of amour fou is probably his most grownup depiction of love and sex: a movie conducted with suavity, subtlety and depth – despite the faintly preposterous or melodramatic nature of the story. Jean Desailly plays a literary celebrity called Pierre Lachenay who comes to Lisbon to lecture on Balzac and has a passionate fling with Nicole, an air-hostess (as flight attendants were quaintly known in those days) on his plane, who is staying at the same hotel – played by Françoise Dorléac. As their obsessive affair continues, sensuality turns into comedy and farce. At first brittle and elegant, the affair becomes compellingly tender as both reveal their vulnerability. 4. Shoot the Pianist (1960) Truffaut’s follow-up to The 400 Blows is based on the novel Down There, by Philadelphia crime author David Goodis, and shows his extravagant love of American pulp and American noir – a key article of faith for the French new wave. Charles Aznavour plays Charlie, the piano-player in a sleazy dive. His name is actually Edouard Saroyan, an internationally known classical concert pianist who abandoned his glittering career because of a terrible secret, and now he gets muddled up with lowlife and crime, due to the nefarious activities of his brother, with the Marxian name of Chico, played by Truffaut stalwart Albert Rémy. The scene where two mobsters abduct Charlie and his girlfriend Léna (Marie Dubois) and start gossiping among themselves is hilarious – especially when one confesses he used to wear his little sister’s silk knickers as a boy. And the weird Truffaut-esque keynote of unexpected innocence is established when a total stranger tells Chico: “There are more virgins here than in any other city.” 3. Day for Night (1973) Plenty of movies are said to be love letters to cinema, but pre-eminent has to be this raffish comedy, in French titled La Nuit Americaine, the resonant term for the lens filter used to make a daytime shot look like night. This is the farcical, even screwball story of a film being made. Truffaut plays the director, who has hired a highly strung Hollywood star called Julie Baker, played by Jacqueline Bisset. His leading male, played inevitably by Jean-Pierre Léaud, has got his fiancee hired on the crew, but she is about to run off with a British stuntman. Like Fellini, Truffaut loves the rootless intensity of the loves and friendships on a film set, in comparison with which the claims of families and spouses at home are very dull. Even the longueurs and frustrations of filming have a dramatic shape and purpose lacking in the drab and messy wasteland outside the studio. Cinema is like real life, only better. 2. The 400 Blows (1959) Truffaut’s marvellous autobiographical debut had a sublime freshness and candour – and with it he began his lifelong collaboration with Jean-Pierre Léaud, the child actor whom he recast as a version of himself, forever merging his own persona with Léaud in the public’s mind and also perhaps in Léaud’s mind. He was the 12-year-old Antoine Doinel, who, like Truffaut, is a delinquent, an unhappy kid from a troubled home. He steals things and bunks off, roaming around Paris with his mate, and, to explain his truancy, tells his teacher that his mother is dead. This lie is exploded when his mother and stepfather show up at the school and slap Antoine in front of the entire class. Finally, Antoine is sent to reform school from which he is to escape. Truffaut gives us the immortal sequence in which Antoine runs to the beach, having never before seen the sea, the final freeze frame showing the childlike face at the point of becoming a man. 1. Jules et Jim (1962) It is the eternal love triangle that feels as if it is happening right in the swinging-60s present moment (like Godard’s triple-header Bande à Part), but in fact is set before and after the first world war. Oskar Werner is Jules, a diffident young Austrian living in 1912 Paris. He befriends the more worldly Frenchman Jim, played by Henri Serre. Both men fall for the same bohemian, beautiful force of nature: Catherine, played by Jeanne Moreau, having persuaded themselves that she resembles a beautiful Greek sculpture that they have seen. When war breaks out, Jules and Jim must fight on opposite sides. Is Jules et Jim a secret queer love story? Or is their friendship an anti-war fable, Catherine symbolising what they have in common? Catherine is possibly a fatuous male creation, the original manic pixie dream girl, whose function is to showcase the men’s more substantial nobility. Yet perhaps her passion and restless unhappiness point up the essential flimsiness and mediocrity of these men. Moreau’s most remarkable scene comes when she insouciantly sings in front of Jules and Jim a song of her own composition, Le Tourbillon de la Vie, or The Whirl of Life, accompanied on the guitar by another of her lovers. She sings with a delicate, birdlike, non-fatale chirrup. And perhaps the film’s meaning resides in that idea of a fatal whirlwind. Catherine asks Jim to meet her in a cafe, and doesn’t show up. Later, she explains something about a hairdresser, and reveals she is marrying Jules. If she had made it to their date, and Jim had had the courage to get his proposal in first, would things have been different? Happier? Or even more unhappy? Do love and destiny hinge on something as random as a missed date? Catherine is missing from the title but she dominates the movie. • This article was amended on 4 February 2022. The role of Victor in The Wild Child is played by Jean-Pierre Cargol, not Jean-Pierre Léaud.Many of the Indian releases that pivoted to streaming over the past 18 months have deserved burial-by-algorithm, if I’m being honest. One that doesn’t is the Tamil melodrama Karnan, an exceptionally vivid spot of latter-day myth-making. You wonder whether writer-director Mari Selvaraj pitched it as “what if Baahubali” – the two-part SS Rajamouli epic that redrew the horizons of Indian commercial cinema back in 2015 – “but in the here-and-now?”. Enter our eponymous young hero (local megastar Dhanush), introduced completing a ritual that involves leaping off a rock overhanging a pool and, while still in mid-air, bisecting vermillion-daubed fish with a flashing blade. Lakes, swords: British viewers may be reminded of Camelot. Here’s another knight in search of a worthy cause. Yet the surprise Selvaraj has for us – one of the biggest curveballs in any movie released this past year – is that this cause should be a fully integrated public transit system. This is a tale of two villages, one of which (Karnan’s native Podiyankulam) is dirt-poor, the other (neighbouring Melur) rich enough to afford its own bus stop. When the residents of Podiyankulam hike to Melur to catch the bus, they’re regarded with suspicion and sometimes outright contempt as outsiders taking up valuable space – a source of ongoing tension between the two communities. Selvaraj has taken us somewhere very specific to tell a story that is broadly universal: a story about tribalism, and how it’s now often tied up with issues of free movement. The film’s first half, however, serves chiefly to define its warrior-in-chief – and thus to demonstrate that appearances can prove deceptive. Karnan initially presents as a nice lad with sensible hair, ticking the first box of Indian movie heroism by being good to his put-upon mother (Janaki). Yet the characterisation is soon complicated. A drinker and a gambler, Karnan is less your typical masala maverick than a punk-in-waiting. He’s a hothead who spends this first hour getting into scraps, pushing away the one gal who’s crazy about him, and – in a pre-intermission sequence that must have been tremendous fun to shoot – single-handedly trashing one of those rackety old buses pootling between backwaters. (He does much the same to a police station just after the break.) This is a kid with fire in his belly – that’s what makes him such a hothead – yet while Selvaraj grasps these flames can be destructive, he also knows that in certain cases they’re exactly what’s required to effectuate real and lasting change. Sometimes, the movie posits, you have to burn down the whole rotten system and start again from scratch. The blazingly unpredictable hero is one reason Karnan emerges as such an unpredictable watch – it’s a morality play hitched to a genuine loose cannon. In the course of the film, Karnan will alienate family members and the wider village; at points, all we can cling to is the knowledge our boy seems unlikely ever to take the shit the penniless farmers around him have been forced to swallow for generations. Somewhere in the mix, there’s a standard-issue crowdpleaser: you glimpse it whenever Dhanush raises himself up to his full 5ft 5in (5ft 4½in, when wet) and sets about righting this world’s wrongs – wealth inequality, police brutality – to what you suspect would have been huge cheers from the cheap seats had the film’s theatrical run not been curtailed by Covid. But it’s been overlaid by an artistry and delicacy rarely observed in films of this scale: if not the full Rajamouli, then not a hundred miles away. Cinematographer Theni Eswar provides lustrous cutaways to the region’s flora and fauna. And his overhead shots are positively sculptural: men gathering in a field mowed to resemble a bull, lovers trysting by a heart-shaped pond. The world-building is elevated to the point where it begins to resemble cosmology, yet as we look upon this busy, tempestuous, hotly contested few acres of land, we realise it’s not so far removed from our own backyards. It could do with more lady in its lake, true: where the Baahubalis offered equal-opportunity mythos, the women here fall between spectators and damsels-in-distress. (It’s a Dhanush film, and some hierarchies may be harder to topple than others.) Yet Selvaraj makes enough genuinely bold, even radical choices elsewhere, not least amid the tense siege finale, to make one regret that Karnan got shuttled off to streaming mid-pandemic. This is a film that takes up a small, everyday struggle, then rides hell-for-leather to fill the screen entire with it. Karnan is available on Amazon Prime in the US and UKThe government has been accused of “trashing” local democracy after overruling a council decision and approving the expansion of Bristol airport. An application by the airport to expand its capacity from 10 million to 12 million passengers a year was refused by North Somerset council at the beginning of 2021, but after the airport appealed, central government planners overturned the decision. Three inspectors from the Planning Inspectorate conceded there remained “a significant level of opposition” to the plan and that their ruling would be “a major disappointment” to some. “In coming to our decision, the protests of individuals, communities, members of parliament, action groups, technical experts and others were fully heard and carefully considered by the panel,” the inspectors said. But they dismissed environmental effects, including on the climate, air quality, biodiversity and the character of the surrounding Mendip Hills, recognised as an area of outstanding natural beauty, as “neutral in the balance” of their decision-making. Campaigners have waged a three-year battle to try to block the airport expansion and had won the support of all local authorities in the area as well as most local MPs. Steve Clarke, of the Bristol Airport Action Network, said the inspectors’ report was “completely trashing any idea of local democracy being important in this instance”. He said: “This has completely ignored local decision-making … It completely ignores any impact it’s going to have on the climate.” Activists have calculated that the expansion would lead to an extra 1m tons of carbon emissions every year. The leader of North Somerset council, Don Davies, was quoted by Bristol 24/7 as saying: “This simply flies in the face of local democracy and disregards the views of the local communities who fought equally hard to resist the expansion.” The Avon and Bristol branch of CPRE, the Countryside Charity, said it was “devastated” by the decision. “The decision tramples on local democracy, makes a mockery of the UK’s Cop26 commitments and sets a precedent for other airport expansion plans,” it tweeted. Bristol airport is owned by the Ontario Teachers’ Pension Plan. As well as an increase in flight quotas, the planning permission allows the airport to expand roads leading to the site, extend terminal buildings and build a new car park on land designated as green belt. On Thursday the airport published statements from local business groups backing the expansion. John Mayer, the local lead for the Federation of Small Businesses, said it would send a “strong signal that our region will continue to welcome trade, tourism, and investment from overseas”. Dave Lees, the chief executive of Bristol airport, said: “The decision is excellent news for our region’s economy, allowing us to create thousands of new jobs in the years ahead and provide more choice for our customers.”Some lockdown art is inspiring. Mike Nelson’s The Book of Spells, (A Speculative Fiction) is not. Only one person at a time can experience this tiny installation. As the gallerist shuts the door from the outside – was that a key turning? – you are left all alone in a monument to loneliness. The protagonist of this fabulist installation lives in a single room with barely enough space for the iron bed frame on which they apparently spent month after month. A window opens on to a sealed space full of rubble. A child’s forgotten ball sums up the apocalyptic wasteland out there. And in here, the only signs of physical sustenance are a dried squash, an animal bone and a jar of matter that might be seeds or poison. Otherwise the small cupboard is bare. What has the occupant of the room been living on? Dreams of travel. The prison-like bed is surrounded by roughly knocked together wooden bookcases loaded with copies of Rough Guides and Lonely Planets – hundreds of them – plus maps and the occasional Dorling Kindersley volume, the ones that have nice colour pictures of beaches, artworks and local dishes. These are all practical guidebooks, the kind that so many of us stuffed in our hand luggage on the budget flights that made globetrotting so popular up to early 2020. Nelson’s poor, locked-down wretch can’t let go of those days. So obsessed with weekend breaks in European cities is this person, that he or she whiles away the confined days and nights reading about good cheap hotels in Paris and the best pizzas in Budapest. There are, I counted, 22 guides on Prague alone. Portugal is shelved next to Africa, and there’s a bookcase just for Indonesia and Australasia. Israel gets two volumes and there are plenty on Turkey and Istanbul, whose imaginary subterranean souks Nelson fabricated in a delirious installation at the Venice Biennale in 2011. For this world in a bottle is also a microcosm of Nelson’s ambitious early works. It takes him back to Matt’s Gallery in London, where he first staged his sprawling labyrinth The Coral Reef back at the start of the millennium. That installation led you through room after room of a sinister urban underworld that seemed on the eve of some kind of catastrophe. Maybe in returning to Matt’s to construct a similarly doom-laden inscape he feels vindicated. After all, the 21st century has turned out to be even worse than The Coral Reef made it look. Nelson may once have seemed to be overdoing his heavy metal prophecies. Now he’s just telling it like it is. Who would have thought we would live in a time when travel guides, instead of acting as cheery holiday accessories, would summon stress and dread? The books arrayed here don’t open up possibilities but remind us of experiences closed off by lockdown: the flights not taken. Yet as you stare at the four walls that surround you, the satire metamorphoses into a story of paralysis and delusion. Nelson’s ideal city appears to be Prague. Maybe those 22 books about it are a clue to what he’s doing here. In the great Prague author Franz Kafka’s story The Burrow, a mole delights in its cosy little subterranean home but then hears something trying to get in. The inhabitant of Nelson’s room would apparently love to get out – or would he/she? There’s a door, after all. There could be experiences available beyond it, even if they are local. Instead, this obsessive reader of travel books stays in a mouldering coffin, studying the same places, making the same plans. Perhaps they never did go anywhere, even before the pandemic – maybe this is the room of someone always consumed by fantasies of the trips that never were. So The Book of Spells could be a self-critique of Nelson’s own art, a rejection of his magic realism. Art too is like a travel book, offering us escape from the physical facts of reality. We go to the theatre, read a novel, see a film. Perhaps these are all just evasions, a few hours of holiday. In this closed room the holiday is getting threadbare. Classify those guidebooks as much as you like, you ain’t going nowhere. And when it’s all over, when we’re on the plane again increasing our carbon footprint, will it just be another evasion? If Nelson’s theatrical art used to be epic and entertaining, this is a Samuel Beckett one-acter, a grumpy howl from the heart of the pandemic. Perhaps it won’t be easy to understand in future, when it doesn’t hurt your head to look at guidebooks. But right now it slams the way we’ve been living in your face. • Mike Nelson: The Book of Spells, (A Speculative Fiction) is at Matt’s Gallery, London, until 5 March.The UN special envoy to Myanmar has been widely rebuked for suggesting that pro-democracy activists should negotiate a power-sharing agreement with the country’s military, which is accused of atrocities including genocide. Almost 250 civil society organisations published a statement condemning the comments, warning they risked emboldening the military to commit “grave crimes with total impunity”. “These statements could set a dangerous precedent, that those who take control through brutal means – massacring, killing, raping, arresting, torturing, burning villages and people, targeting civilians using airstrikes and shelling – be welcomed to share power,” it said. The statement was signed by 247 local and national civil society groups including Progressive Voice, Women’s League of Burma and Union of Karenni State Youth. Noeleen Heyzer, the UN’s special envoy for Myanmar, provoked controversy during an interview with Channel News Asia when discussing ways to address the country’s crisis. Asked about the possibility of a power-sharing arrangement – an idea firmly opposed by the Myanmar people – Heyzer responded: “The point is, we have to start a process. And you can’t immediately come in with the ultimate solution of what you want. The military is in control at this particular time and something has got to be worked out. It could be a process,” she said. Heyzer added: “I know that many people, especially the young, are willing to die fighting for a total political transformation. Any political transformation requires a process and it is not going to happen overnight. And therefore I want them to have something to live for, not to die for. They need to negotiate what this power sharing could look like over a long term. And they have to be at the table.” The comments prompted a furious response from activists, who have been subjected to relentless violence by the military, which seized power from the democratically elected government of Aung San Suu Kyi a year ago. Many young people have taken up arms and joined local defence forces to fight for democracy. The office of the special envoy of the secretary general on Myanmar has since issued a statement to local media, claiming that Heyzer’s comments were misinterpreted. The special envoy had “never proposed power sharing as an option”, it said. The statement added: “The special envoy has emphasised in no uncertain terms that any peace process has to be led by the people of Myanmar.” Naw Hser Hser, of the Women’s League of Burma, a signatory of the joint statement, said the UN was growing distant from the calls of the people of Myanmar. “Ultimately, the people of Myanmar are realising that it is they themselves that will be the ones to succeed in this revolution,” she said. “Despite vehement calls from the people of Myanmar, the UN has yet to take action to stop the terrorist military’s grave crimes. One year has passed [since the coup] and the UN security council has issued only statements and even failed to hold an open meeting or issue a concrete resolution,” Naw Hser Hser added. The extreme violence used by the military to try to suppress opposition was a sign of its lack of control, she said. “In rural areas, they are losing ground, as local people’s defence forces and ethnic organisations control swathes of territory. New administrative structures, comprising the people, are being established at local levels, governing where the military cannot. They are far from being in control,” said Naw Hser Hser. Even before the coup, the military was guaranteed huge powers under the 2008 constitution, which granted it a quarter of all seats in parliament and control of key ministries, including home affairs and defence. Nonetheless, the military seized power on 1 February 2021, accusing Aung San Suu Kyi’s National League for Democracy (NLD) of voter fraud – an allegation that has been dismissed by observers. Zoya Phan, coordinator of the European Karen Network, said Heyzer’s comments had been made on the same day the military launched more airstrikes against civilians in south-eastern Karen state, also known as Kayin state. “The Burmese military was in a power sharing with the NLD-led government before the coup. However, the attacks against ethnic people didn’t stop,” said Zoya Phan, who is also campaigns manager for Burma Campaign UK. “With the Burmese military, our country will have no positive future,” she added. Vaphual is writing under a pseudonym for security reasonsThe government’s cap on energy prices, which sets the maximum amount that energy suppliers can charge customers on a default tariff, will raise energy bills for about 22m homes to almost £2,000 a year from April. It was first introduced by the industry regulator, Ofgem, in early 2019 after the government called for a tool that could put an end to rip-off energy tariffs, and is calculated every six months to reflect the fair costs of supplying gas and electricity. The catch? The energy price cap doesn’t always make energy prices affordable. Suppliers’ costs are soaring, which means Ofgem’s energy price cap has reached record levels, too. Here’s how the average dual-fuel energy bill breaks down under the price cap. Energy market prices The wholesale market price of gas and electricity plays the biggest role in determining the average energy bill. For the winter energy price cap, effective last October, market costs made up more than 40% of the total cap, or £528 of the average £1,277 dual-fuel energy bill. But in the new price cap from April, the market cost is more than twice as high at £1,077. Energy suppliers typically buy their gas and electricity from the market in advance, so Ofgem determines the cost of buying energy from the market by tracking wholesale prices over a period of six months ahead of the next price cap period. For example, the price cap in place over the winter months was based on the rising market prices recorded between February and July. However, the new price cap poised to drive bills higher from April was based on surging market prices between August and January, when market prices reached record highs. Experts have warned that market prices today could lead to even higher energy bills, of about £2,300 a year, by next winter. Network costs and bust suppliers The cost of maintaining the electricity wires and gas pipes that carry energy to homes, offices and factory sites is paid to regional energy network companies through a levy on energy bills, which typically makes up about 20% of the average energy price cap. Ofgem is tasked with determining how much network companies are allowed to spend over set periods, and how much can be taken from energy bills. But in the latest energy price cap, customers will pay a higher rate for network costs to cover the cost of energy suppliers that have gone bust. Energy companies that take on customers after the collapse of a supplier can claim “any reasonable additional, otherwise unrecoverable, costs” of taking on the customers, according to Ofgem. These claims, paid to energy companies by the distribution network companies, are recovered from consumers via their charges. Over winter, network costs were £268 but in the latest energy price cap network costs have climbed to £371, including a £68 levy to cover the cost of collapsed suppliers, or 19% of the new cap. Policy costs These costs relate to government social and environmental schemes to save energy, reduce emissions and encourage take-up of renewable energy. In recent months Conservative backbenchers have called on the government to drop some of these schemes to help relieve the pressure of rising energy bills on households, including the ECO scheme, which aims to upgrade home insulation for struggling households. The proposals have been widely criticised by consumer groups and climate campaigners for doing more harm than good. Ofgem’s figures show that policy costs make up less than 8% of the new energy price cap at £153, down from £159 or 12% in the previous price cap. Operating costs and supplier profits The energy price cap allows for the costs incurred by suppliers to deliver billing and metering services to their customers, including the installation of smart meters, while making a reasonable profit. Energy companies were allowed to claim operating costs of £204 from the average annual energy bill under the winter price cap, but under the new price the cost allowance has grown by almost 10%, to £220. The increase is in part because Ofgem’s allowance for supplier profits, which is set at 1.9%, is now included within operating costs rather than shown as a seperate allowance. The winter price cap allowed energy suppliers to claim £23 from each default energy tariff as profit. Under the new cap they will make over £37. VAT and other costs VAT is set at 5% for energy bills, which for the winter price cap meant £61 for the Treasury from the average household. Under the new energy price cap the amount for each household is expected to climb to about £98, or more than £2.1bn in total. The Treasury windfall led to calls ahead of the price cap announcement for the government to offer extra help to hard-pressed families by temporarily cutting VAT. The price cap also allows for smaller costs including a slim margin for energy company profits.MPs have forced the publication of a government-commissioned research report that found low-income people reliant on disability benefits are struggling to meet essential living costs such as food, rent and energy bills. The report has been kept under wraps for over a year, with the work and pensions secretary, Theresa Coffey, repeatedly refusing to release it on the grounds it was necessary to “protect the private space” in which ministers develop policy. The report was finally published on Thursday morning after the cross-party work and pensions select committee invoked rarely-used parliamentary powers to force its release, and accused ministers of “trying to bury uncomfortable truths”. Stephen Timms, the chair of the work and pensions committee, said the report gave “valuable insights” into the experiences of people on disability benefits: “While the system is working for some, we now know that others reported that they are still unable to meet essential living costs such as food and utility bills.” He added: “By persisting in its decision to hide away evidence of the struggles people are facing, the DWP will only have further harmed its reputation with disabled people at a time when – as its own officials have acknowledged – lack of trust is a major issue. In order to rebuild its relationship with disabled people, the DWP must stop trying to bury uncomfortable truths.” Anastasia Berry of the MS Society charity said the report highlighted the inadequacy of benefits for many disabled people: “Despite the DWP’s relentless attempts to bury this research, we can finally see what they’ve been so desperate to hide … It shows some are struggling to pay for essential day-to-day expenses, such as food, heating and medications, let alone these extra costs.” The Department for Work and Pensions (DWP) has already faced allegations from a whistleblower close to the research team that it intervened to reduce the number of references to unmet needs and the adequacy of benefits in the report. Separately, last week it emerged that Coffey had blocked the publication of an internal DWP research report into the effectiveness of benefit sanctions, arguing its release was not in the public interest. This is despite promises made to MPs three years ago that it would publish its findings. Under government social research protocols, the completed disability benefits report should have been released no later than 12 weeks after it was handed to the DWP in September 2020. Participants in the research – 120 people with a health condition or disability were interviewed in depth – were reportedly promised the report would be published, according to the Disability News Service. At the time, the adequacy of benefit levels was a major political issue amid a fiery debate over whether ministers should scrap or maintain the £20 universal credit Covid top-up, or extend the top-up to people on “legacy” disability benefits who were not in receipt of universal credit. The government announced last June that it would withdraw the £20 top-up in October, brushing off criticism that this would put the living standards of low-income households at risk. This amounted to the biggest overnight cut to the basic rate of social security since the second world war, according to the Joseph Rowntree Foundation. The disability benefits research, carried out by the National Centre for Social Research, found that for claimants with “restricted financial circumstances”, benefits offered the prospect of a regular income vital to enable them to meet basic day-to-day living costs. Despite this, some of the cohort of disabled claimants interviewed by researchers reported that the low value of benefits meant they “were still unable to meet essential living costs such as food and utility bills”. The DWP said: “We’re providing extensive support to millions of disabled people and those with a health condition to help them live independent lives. As the research shows, health and disability benefits, alongside other income streams, helped to meet almost all identified areas of additional need. “We are currently considering a range of policy options, drawing on wide evidence, research and analysis as part of the upcoming health and disability white paper. “Protecting a private space for policy development is important and we had committed to publish this report as soon as this policy work concluded.”Boris Johnson has bowed to pressure and rowed back on a controversial comment about Keir Starmer and Jimmy Savile, after three days of pressure from Tory MPs for him to withdraw the “smear”. The prime minister said he wanted to “clarify” his comments and admitted “a lot of people have got very hot under the collar”, hours after Jacob Rees-Mogg said it was “perfectly fair and reasonable”. The controversy began on Monday, when Johnson launched an attack on Starmer during a testy Commons exchange about a damning document on alleged Covid rule-busting parties in No 10 and across Whitehall. In response to the Sue Gray inquriy, which identified serious failures of leadership at the top of government but was heavily pared back given an ongoing Scotland Yard investigation, Starmer called on Tory backbenchers to “end this farce” and oust Johnson. The prime minister retorted by accusing Starmer of trying to “prejudge a police inquiry”, adding that as director of public prosecutions from 2008tp 2013, Starmer had “spent most of his time prosecuting journalists and failing to prosecute Jimmy Savile”. Starmer later accused Johnson of “parroting the conspiracy theories of violent fascists” for political gain. A Tory MP and former chief whip, Julian Smith, also said the “smear” was “wrong and cannot be defended”. On Thursday, during a visit to Blackpool, Johnson was challenged to withdraw the remark. He said: “I want to be very clear about this because a lot of people have got very hot under the collar, and I understand why. “Let’s be absolutely clear, I’m talking not about the leader of the opposition’s personal record when he was director of public prosecutions and I totally understand that he had nothing to do personally with those decisions. “I was making a point about his responsibility for the organisation as a whole. I really do want to clarify that because it is important.” Three cabinet ministers have defended Johnson’s decision to use the false claim in the Commons. One, the justice secretary, Dominic Raab, admitted he could not substantiate it. The latest to defend the comment was Rees-Mogg, who said such remarks were “perfectly fair and reasonable points of political debate”. During business questions in parliament on Thursday, he said Starmer’s apology, made on behalf of the Crown Prosecution Service (CPS) in 2013, was “following the principle of taking responsibility for what went on in his organisation and then apologised for the fallings”. Rees-Mogg said Johnson had “apologised similarly for mistakes that have been made in Downing Street” and added: “I think that what is sauce for the goose is sauce for the gander, and the geese and the gander should not complain one for the other. They are perfectly fair and reasonable points of political debate.” Pete Wishart, the SNP’s shadow Commons leader, challenged Rees-Mogg to allow an urgent debate about parliamentary discourse and “how we hold members accountable for the veracity and truthfulness of things that are said in this house” given the fury about Johnson’s comment about the Starmer. Rees-Mogg said it was natural for MPs to dispute claims. He said: “That is why we have the forms of debate that we have. Because when people hold views strongly, and somebody else stands up and thinks the other thing, they say: ‘That’s not true’. “But it’s not a matter of truth, it’s a matter of opinion, which is what we discuss in this house. It’s not a matter of fact-checking.” While Starmer was head of the CPS, he commissioned a report in 2012 into why Savile had not been prosecuted when allegations of sexual assault were made to Surrey and Sussex police in 2007 and 2008. The report, completed by Alison Levitt QC, suggested that if some of the victims had known there were others making similar complaints against Savile, they might have been more prepared to give evidence in court. It also said there was no evidence found to suggest the decisions not to prosecute “were consciously influenced by any improper motive on the part of either police or prosecutors”. After the report’s publication, Starmer said: “I would like to take the opportunity to apologise for the shortcomings in the part played by the CPS in these cases. If this report and my apology are to serve their full purpose, then this must be seen as a watershed moment.”Bafta must hope that its nominations mark a fresh start after a year of pure mortification for that body caused by the Noel Clarke debacle: screenwriter-actor-director Clarke was presented in 2021 with the outstanding contribution to cinema award, despite accusations against him of bullying and abuse. Clarke denied accusations of sexual misconduct and the award finally had to be suspended. But this year’s list is very lively: the best director section is not lacking in inclusivity and good taste: Aleem Khan, Ryûsuke Hamaguchi, Audrey Diwan, Paul Thomas Anderson, Jane Campion and Julia Ducournau. (All fascinating choices – though I personally am a Titane refusenik, finding that film inferior to Ducournau’s debut, Raw.) Leading the nominations tally is Denis Villeneuve’s gigantic sci-fi adaptation Dune with 11 (though no director nod), then it’s Jane Campion’s enthralling The Power of the Dog with eight, and below that is Kenneth Branagh’s wonderfully heartfelt and sympathetic personal movie Belfast with six, based on his own early memories of a boyhood in Northern Ireland at the beginning of the Troubles. I was surprised actually not to see Belfast going higher than this and not actually leading the field, as it seems tailor-made to appeal to Bafta voters. As far as snubs go, and whatever my reservations about the film, I am staggered to see nothing in the best actress category for Kristen Stewart’s enjoyable portrayal of Diana, Princess of Wales in Pablo Larraín’s satirical fantasy Spencer. Maybe native-Brit Bafta voters are slightly more sceptical about Stewart’s reading of Diana than was generally assumed. But what is more worrying is the omission of Olivia Colman - who gave a wonderful performance, perhaps the best of her career so far, in The Lost Daughter. What happened? Did Bafta voters not see the film in time? There is also the glaring failure to nominate Joanna Hogg’s The Souvenir Part II: it’s very odd not to see it in the best British film category, although we were prepared for this by its non-appearance in the long list. Again - were voters simply overwhelmed by more effective campaigns elsewhere? It is a reminder that the Baftas are a democratic vote, not a jury decision, and the arbiters of taste can be rebuffed. I am also sorry to see that David Lowery’s superb The Green Knight, with Dev Patel as the troubled Arthurian hero – one of the very best films of the year – seems to have been so widely forgotten. It could also be said that Guillermo del Toro’s savage noir Nightmare Alley deserved more than three nominations. Those who groan at the disparity of awards prestige and actual commercial success will note the complete absence of Spider-Man: No Way Home, which has ruled the global box office and got people back into the cinemas, even more so than James Bond in No Time to Die, which has picked up five nominations. Mamoru Hosoda’s dreamy Japanese anime Belle should really have got into the animations list. But Dune is a thrillingly cinematic spectacle, a futurist colonial tale in the Lawrentian desert, and if it turns out to dominate this year’s Baftas, this will be no disgrace: it is an awe-inspiring epic, a big-screen spectacle that is eerie and exotic, and actually an improvement on the previous adaptation directed by David Lynch. The Power of the Dog is an utterly gripping and operatic drama in the American west, a frontier of emotional and sexual dysfunction, with wonderful performances from Benedict Cumberbatch, Kirsten Dunst and Kodi Smit-McPhee. And then there is Branagh’s utterly seductive Belfast, which refuses the traditional dramatic language of anger, cynicism and despair. I admit I’m a bit dismayed to see the prominence of Adam McKay’s impeccably intentioned all-star climate change satire Don’t Look Up, which worryingly gets a best film nod, as well as best actor for Leonardo DiCaprio. Don’t Look Up is the celeb comedy equivalent of Gal Gadot’s Imagine video. As far as the best actor nods go elsewhere, Mahershala Ali is a great pick for his excellent performance in the sci-fi drama Swan Song, and no one could begrudge the nomination for Will Smith for his crowd-pleasing turn in King Richard. On the best actress list, I’m rooting for Joanna Scanlan whose superb performance in After Love, playing the widow who realises her late husband was leading a double life, confirms her reputation as one of the most distinctive and valuable talents in British cinema. But the prize could well go to Alana Haim, for her remarkable acting debut in the glorious Licorice Pizza or to Lady Gaga for her outrageous and entertaining turn as the scorned woman in House of Gucci. The outstanding debut award is arguably the beating heart of the entire Bafta ceremony, and the prize which can make such a difference to careers, so it is great that Philip Barantini’s one-take restaurant drama Boiling Point in there, and also Rebecca Hall’s excellent movie Passing. So a very plausible range of achievement here, and my guess is that it’s Branagh’s Belfast that will convert most of these nominations.South Park subsists on controversy and conflict the same way you and I subsist on carbon-based food matter. In this respect, the show could go on forever; the world sure isn’t getting less hysterical and contentious with time, providing Trey Parker and Matt Stone with an infinite supply of grist for their mill of proudly dim-witted parody. (Or at least, enough to fulfill their contract with Comedy Central for another five seasons and 12 hour-long TV movies to run on the Paramount Plus platform.) Limited more by the practicalities of maintaining a famously rigorous production schedule under the added strain of a pandemic than by creative stagnation, the show now returns to a regular season order following a quasi-hiatus that saw 2020 and 2021 pass with a pair of specials apiece. And because America continues to grow more fractious and paranoid, a pop-culture institution entering its 25th season still has plenty to work with – yet little to say. The recent tragedy of parents and children everywhere comes to South Park as a lucky break, the setting at an elementary school placing the foul-mouthed tots right in the zeitgeist’s crosshairs. As the most inflammatory subject of public discourse, masking naturally claims the focus of last night’s premiere episode Pajama Day. The students in Mr Garrison’s classroom are abuzz about the chance to model their comfiest clothing for friends during the schoolwide holiday Mr Mackey calls “the Met Gala for children”. But when the youngsters show insufficient enthusiasm for Mr Garrison’s news that he’s found a boyfriend, he freaks out and bans them all from taking part in Pajama Day, an injustice that the town’s grownups protest by wearing their own PJs to work, the store and every other enclosed space. Of course riots break out, and at every step of this convoluted societal breakdown, whoever feels slighted by the turns of fortune busts out a comparison to Germany under Nazi rule. Though it feels like we’re in a flashpoint moment as a nation and perhaps even species, this is basically business as usual for South Park. Parker and Stone continue to thrive on the non-commentary that their strategy of partial metaphor affords them, hiding behind the joke once it comes time to make a statement beyond the broadly agreeable. The divisiveness of pajama-wearing allows them to get a few good blows in, as in the scene that sees an anti-pajama-er declaring that he’ll never be cozy again, a succinct summation of the self-defeating “own the libs” philosophy currently dominating conservative thought. Earlier, rage faucet Cartman sputters a probable approximation of what many grade-schoolers have thought over the past couple of years: “We keep not doing anything wrong, and we keep getting fucked!” But the pressing question of pajamas turns into an easy out when the episode might strive to do more than articulate our pent-up frustration. Of course no one expects pearls of sagacity from the show with the talking poop and the weed-smoking towel, but the tidy resolution tying things up still comes as a cop-out. After a faux-stirring monologue about doing the right thing and how “saying you were wrong is sometimes the strongest thing you can do” (a line delivered with surprising, awkward sincerity from a cornerstone of nose-thumbing irony), PC Principal uses Opposite Day to defuse the tensions. The show invites and refuses real-world analogs at its own convenience, ultimately offering a shrug of the shoulders. That’s a slanted way of saying that in its third decade of existence, this show has maintained a freakish level of consistency, still getting its customary half-dozen-or-so laughs. There’s a well-deployed running joke about Matt Damon’s goofy commercials for Bitcoin bankrupting families by encouraging them to take risks in personal finance, and an amusing montage of mayhem set to the baby-friendly strains of the Laurie Berkner Band’s Pajama Time. It’s all easy enough to watch, especially for the hordes of longtime viewers for whom tuning in has become an annual ritual as reliable as the beginning of a new year. But familiarity and expectedness have never been aspirational qualities for South Park. You can’t spend 25 years making a TV show without developing some habits and routines, and it could be argued that that’s a necessity in the labor-intensive process of generating a complete work of original animation on a weekly basis. Even so, the danger of Stone and Parker’s subversive streak is the soul of the show. Without that, the buttons being pushed don’t feel so hot, a given topic’s equivalent of whinging about those clowns in Congress. Looking at the history of the small screen, an unending broadcast run and the guarantee of an easily satisfied audience have led to only one thing: complacency. With Parker and Stone now entering their 50s, the greatest challenge facing them is their own success.In the end, after I had climbed out on to the narrow window ledge yet again, my mum tied the bedroom windows shut with shoelaces, knotted over and over and tugged tight. Even at that young age – just six or seven – I knew, standing in the window, that if I stepped a foot off, I wouldn’t fly. I would fall. And if that meant dying, there on the grass below, that was OK. Other times it wasn’t quite so passive; I actively craved it. I know. It’s uncomfortable to talk about, write about, read about suicidal ideation in a child. Did I fully understand what dying would mean? Probably not. Could I have truly had intent? Who can say for sure. But still, it remains devastating to me, 35 years later, to acknowledge those thoughts I had. When most kids were thinking about whether they’d be allowed out on their BMX or what they were having for tea or if they’d see their pal at school tomorrow. And it wasn’t just the shadow of suicide: I scratched up my arms; twisted, pinched and punched my skin. I became obsessed with, and catastrophised about Aids, UFOs and nuclear war. I had recurring nightmares where the walls swelled and loomed and closed in on me until I was trapped and dying and dead. I suffered with what I now know were panic attacks. I stuttered and stammered. I wet my pants in the daytime and my bed at night, the alarm on the special blanket meant to deter me ringing out loud, wrenching me from sleep. There was no mystery for me then about what I was escaping on that ledge. After experiencing both sexual and physical violence in the very place I should have felt safest, at home, I felt nothing but fear, constantly. A brutal, ice-cold terror that back then could cause me to vomit and even now spins my stomach in a second. And sadly, there wasn’t just one man, one pair of fists that cracked open our house and the family trying to shelter within it. At the time, the only thing that truly mattered was survival. Getting through it, getting out of it, in one piece. But now, decades on, it’s clear to me that I needed professional help and support – counselling and therapy. The chance to start working through what had happened to my body and my mind. But apart from one single family therapy session after I broke down at school, that support wasn’t offered. Instead, I buried my memories, my hurt. Whenever it tried to surface, I’d dig the hole deeper. And as I became an adult, I realised I needed more help keeping it below ground, seeking assistance from booze, pills, bad relationships and self-harming. By the time I overdosed in New York, where I was living and working, eight years ago, it was clear that my almost three-decade strategy wasn’t working. And that surviving by my fingertips wasn’t enough. I engaged for the first time – properly – with professional services and started work that I continue with today. That was the 1980s. You might say of my childhood, things will have changed now for kids, surely. But that’s not necessarily true. It was only last week that children were finally officially recognised as victims of domestic abuse in their own right (as part of the Domestic Abuse Act). Specialist support services for them are inconsistent and in many senses a lottery. Of 30 local authorities surveyed by Action for Children in 2019, kids faced barriers accessing support in at least two-thirds of them. In over 10%, there were no support services available at all. Domestic abuse involving children has only worsened in recent years and especially since the pandemic – government data shows that last year, police made on average 669 child protection referrals a day for domestic abuse to social services across England and Wales. The NSPCC reported a massive leap of 35% in calls to its helpline about children living in violent homes. Yet this is still probably just the tip of the iceberg, with untold numbers of kids suffering behind locked doors, under the radar of any interventions. In my case, a handful of violent incidents in our house were reported. I remember personally calling the police and then listening as they lectured my mum on not “winding up” her partner before leaving us to it. These statistics and stories make for grim reading. But the NSPCC is now trying to ensure that kids like me are helped. It is calling for Dominic Raab to use the victims’ bill – which is in consultation this week – to ensure easy, guaranteed access to professional services for kids who’ve been victims of domestic violence. And specifically for local authorities to have a statutory duty to provide specialist, therapeutic services in the community. Isn’t it the least we owe our kids? If we couldn’t protect them while they suffered unspeakable, unthinkable things, we at least need to give them the chance of healthy, happy lives in the aftermath. It’s unacceptable for the matter of a child receiving the help they need to be a matter of luck and location. They don’t deserve to have their lives left in ruins before they’ve even truly begun. If I’d been offered immediate support as a child, I don’t believe that my memories and experiences would have been scrubbed from me. But would I have ended up in a locked psychiatric ward at 33, sinking into the soil under which my secrets and trauma lay? There’s every chance that no, I wouldn’t. It’s too late to reach back through time and pull that girl off the window ledge and into safe arms; but it’s not too late for the children of today and of tomorrow. Terri White is a journalist and the author of Coming Undone: A Memoir In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is at 800-273-8255 or chat for support. You can also text HOME to 741741 to connect with a crisis text line counselor. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org In the UK, the NSPCC offers support to children on 0800 1111, and adults concerned about a child on 0808 800 5000. The National Association for People Abused in Childhood (Napac) offers support for adult survivors on 0808 801 0331. In the US, call or text the Childhelp abuse hotline on 800-422-4453. In Australia, children, young adults, parents and teachers can contact the Kids Helpline on 1800 55 1800; adult survivors can seek help at Blue Knot Foundation on 1300 657 380. Other sources of help can be found at Child Helplines InternationalAt 11am the regulator Ofgem put up the cost of the average energy bill by £700 a year. At noon the Bank of England raised interest rates for the second time running and warned of rapidly rising inflation. Sandwiched in between these two cost of living bombshells, Rishi Sunak popped up in the Commons with the government’s attempt at damage limitation. The chancellor said his £9bn package would take the sting out a rise in energy bills made inevitable by the rising global price of gas. Even so, the Treasury measures will cover only half the expected increases looming in April. All households will be worse off, with charities warning more children in Britain’s poorer households will go hungry as a result. Sunak announced that every household in England, Scotland and Wales would receive a £200 discount off their bills in October. This, though, is intended to be a temporary respite because the money will be clawed back at the rate of £40 a year from 2023 onwards. That assumes wholesale energy prices come down in the intervening period, which – as Sunak acknowledges – is by no means guaranteed. As things stand, the price cap is on course to rise by a further £200-£300 in October. The other main measure was the £150 rebate from council tax bills in homes in bands A to D in England, with the Treasury making money available for the devolved administrations to cut bills by similar amounts. Sunak says 80% of households in England will benefit, although because council tax bands have remained unchanged for more than 30 years, plenty of relatively well-off people will benefit. The Institute for Fiscal Studies estimates only 56% of those living in band A to D properties are in the bottom half of the income distribution, defined as disposable income after housing costs of less than £24,800 for a childless couple. Some will be in the highest income group. There were alternatives. The government could have raised universal credit or increased the generosity of the warm homes discount but chose not to do so. Given its current political problems the government was keen to offer support to more than the neediest households but, as a result, the package attracted criticism for not being generous enough and for not targeting enough support at those who will need it most in what will be a dire year for living standards. The fear that the spring of 2022 will represent a “perfect storm” for the cost of living was sharpened by the latest upward move in interest rates from the Bank of England. It wasn’t simply that Threadneedle Street’s monetary policy committee voted to raise borrowing costs, it was that four of the nine members considered a quarter-point rise to 0.5% insufficient to head off inflationary pressures and wanted a half-point increase instead. Sunak began his statement to MPs by boasting about how well the economy was doing, citing falling unemployment and the reduction in government borrowing. An altogether gloomier picture was painted by the Bank, which expects the annual inflation rate to peak at more than 7% in April, and for the bounce-back from the plan B Covid restrictions to be followed by a marked slowdown in the economy. The UK faces a triplewhammy over the coming months: businesses and mortgage payers paying higher interest rates; prices rising faster than wages; and more expensive energy costs. Sunak’s package will ease the squeeze – but not by much.A key figure in the corruption trial of Israel’s former prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu may have been illegally bugged by police, according to reports, amid global controversy about Israeli-made spyware and how it has been used. In a recording broadcast by Channel 12 news, police are heard allegedly discussing tapping a phone belonging to Shlomo Filber, a former Netanyahu ally turned state witness. “It’s as if it’s illegal … to install the application,” a police officer says. The claim emerged days after Israeli officials admitted that – contrary to earlier denials – they may have found evidence pointing to improper use of spyware by its own investigators. It is not known what spyware was allegedly used in the Netanyahu case. Netanyahu – who lost power in June after 12 consecutive years as prime minister – has pleaded not guilty to charges of bribery, breach of trust and fraud in three cases for which he was indicted in 2019. A former head of the communications ministry, Filber is accused of mediating between Netanyahu and the controlling shareholder of Bezeq, a telecoms group, in an alleged plot to exchange regulatory favours for positive coverage of Netanyahu on a news site owned by the firm. According to Channel 13, data was extracted from a phone without a court order and included photos, phone numbers, correspondence history and various applications. A statement issued on the former prime minister’s behalf called the claims “Israel’s Watergate”. Netanyahu tweeted: “Earthquake. It was revealed tonight that police illegally hacked phones in order to bring down a strong rightwing prime minister.” Israelis have long believed themselves immune to state surveillance, and allegations that they have been targeted have sent shockwaves through the country.On Tuesday, Israel’s attorney general, Avichai Mendelblit, announced the appointment of an inquiry team to look into potential police misuse of spyware. Police declined to comment on the recording that emerged late on Wednesday, but a spokesperson told Agence France-Presse that the Israeli police would “cooperate fully and transparently” with the investigation team appointed by the attorney general. Last month, NSO Group – which makes a controversial surveillance software that can switch on a phone’s camera or microphone and harvest its data – would neither confirm nor deny it sold technologies to the Israeli police, stressing it does “not operate the system once sold to its governmental customers and it is not involved in any way in the system’s operation”. Filber tweeted in jest on Wednesday: “My wife responds: ‘Finally someone is listening to your prattling.’” Israeli media reported last month that Netanyahu was negotiating a plea deal with the attorney general that would include admission of “moral turpitude”, an offence that carries a seven-year ban from politics. Netanyahu has denied this. Agence France-Presse contributed to this reportWhy did the chicken cross the road? To break into the Pentagon, apparently. Or is it now the Hentagon – and is America about to have a new peck-retary of defense? A wandering chicken was caught sneaking around a security area at the Pentagon this week, a local animal welfare organization said. The hen was found running loose early Monday morning near the US Department of Defense headquarters on the outskirts of Washington DC, the Animal Welfare League of Arlington, Virginia wrote on social media. “Apparently, the answer to ‘why did the chicken cross the road’ is to get to the Pentagon,” the group posted. The chicken was taken into custody by one of the league’s employees. Chelsea Jones, a spokesperson for the organization, said in an email that she couldn’t reveal the precise location where the bird was spotted. “We are not allowed to disclose exactly where she was found,” Jones said. “We can only say it was at a security checkpoint.” It’s also unclear where the chicken came from or how she got to the Pentagon. The hen – which has brown feathers and a red comb and wattles – is a Rhode Island red. Jones described the bird as “sweet” and “nervous” but said the animal has permitted some people to pet her. The Animal Welfare League asked people online for name suggestions, prompting various creative responses. “I mean, chicken found on the military installation … I suggest Colonel Sanderson,” one user wrote. Another said, “Chick Cheney, after the former Defense Secretary and VP.” “Hentagon!” someone else wrote. Similarly, another user said, “Henrietta Kissinger?” in reference to Henry Kissinger, a former secretary of state. “It’s probably not a joke that this chicken will prompt Congress to increase Department of Defense spending by $12 billion,” tweeted Martin Austermuhle, a web and radio producer for WAMU 88.5. The Animal Welfare League eventually chose Henny Penny for the chicken, one of the names given to the chicken that thinks “the sky is falling” in the folktale. This one has gained notoriety of her own: Jimmy Fallon performed a song about her on The Tonight Show. “Are you a normal clucker or an undercover spy,” Fallon sang on his Tuesday episode. Jones said Henny Penny is being adopted by a staff member who has a small farm in western Virginia.For Hurricane Katrina survivors in the Lower Ninth Ward, it had seemed like a prayer answered: in 2006, Brad Pitt announced an initiative to rebuild New Orleans’ storm-ravaged Lower Ninth Ward with sustainable, flood-proof, affordable homes, designed by a list of A-list architects. The 109 homes on offer would give many survivors a chance to become first-time homeowners, and bring back a community devastated by the hurricane. But not even a decade after the homes were completed to great fanfare – including a star-studded gala hosted by Ellen DeGeneres – that dream has become a curse, as many of the residents’ homes have decayed to unlivable conditions. The houses now list a frightening array of defects: water intrusion, black mold, porches rotted through, stair rails collapsing, fires caused by electrical problems, plumbing problems and poor ventilation, according to a class-action lawsuit filed against Pitt and his charity by some of the remaining residents. Other residents have reported termite infestations, and multiple residents have fallen sick. Judith Keller, an urban studies academic who stayed in one of Pitt’s houses as part of her research on the failed development in 2018, returned recently to find things had gotten far worse: “Although some of these structures are not yet a decade old, my data shows only six remain in reasonably good shape,” she wrote in her research report. After one house was demolished in 2018 for severe mold problems, another was torn down last year for the same reason. Of the remaining homes, six have been boarded up and abandoned since the first residents moved in. “I was just shocked at how that project had deteriorated over the past three years,” Keller told the Guardian. “The problems that existed in 2018 are all getting worse because there’s no one there to fix stuff.” And many of the homeowners don’t have the resources to make the necessary repairs on their own. It was supposed to turn out differently. The non-profit project, called Make It Right, was launched by Brad Pitt in the wake of Hurricane Katrina’s devastation, to ample hype. Lavish fundraisers drew the support of luminaries from Snoop Dogg to Bill Clinton, raising millions of dollars – including a claimed $5m from Pitt himself, who lived part-time in New Orleans with his then wife, Angelina Jolie. The project seemed cutting-edge, if not utopian. Architects like Frank Gehry, David Adjaye and Shigeru Ban helped design the houses, which incorporated next-gen features like solar panel roofs, energy-efficient heating and cooling, and sustainable materials. And each house would be sold well below cost: $150,000. As Pitt boasted in 2010: “We’re cracking the code on affordable green homes.” He called the rebuilt Lower Ninth “a ‘proof-of-concept’ for low-income green building nationally, maybe even worldwide”. Keller said residents were initially “starstruck” by Pitt, and excited to become homeowners. And at first, everything seemed fine. But almost as soon as the camera crews left and they began settling in, the issues became apparent. Some houses had flat roofs and lacked basic features like rain gutters, overhangs, covered beams, or waterproof paint to weather New Orleans’ torrential downpours. Within weeks, houses began to develop mold, leaks and rot. Pitt’s non-profit initially made some minor repairs, but then began pushing residents to sign non-disclosure agreements before it would tell them what was wrong with their homes. “That’s when a lot of residents started to notice that things were very fishy.” By 2014, it became clear that the buildings were actively falling apart, with reports that the glass-infused wood was “rotting from the inside out”. But without correcting the issue, Pitt continued to call the project a success – telling local media in August 2016: “I’ll tell you, every time I drive over the Claiborne bridge, no matter what frustration I might be dealing with at the moment, I get this well of pride when I see this little oasis of color and the solar panels.” That was the last time he would publicly mention Make It Right. The next month, he and Angelina Jolie divorced, and soon the pair had sold their New Orleans mansion. Then Make It Right vanished. Its website stopped updating – and later was replaced by a blank page. The office stopped picking up the phone. “Everyone from Make It Right has more or less disappeared,” said Keller, who said she had tried every method to contact the organization, with no luck since she began her research. With no one to turn to, the residents have been stuck. In 2018, as their houses continued to crumble, some residents filed a class-action lawsuit against Pitt and Make It Right, citing “significant mental distress” and “financial loss”, and noting in their petition that “despite months and/or years of multiple requests, the defendants have failed to ‘make it right’”. “This was, in most cases, a one-shot deal at home ownership for these people,” said Ron Austin, an attorney representing the residents. He told the Guardian some residents had spent their life savings on their Make It Right home. “Without some financial relief, these people will literally be left holding nothing.” The lawyer added that many of the residents are still fans of Brad Pitt. “It’s unbelievable. To this day, their homes are falling down around them, and they love the man. But they just can’t believe the betrayal.” Pitt has denied responsibility. A source close to Pitt told the Guardian, “Brad got involved at the beginning to help the people of the Lower Ninth Ward, and obviously it was upsetting to see what had happened once he had stepped back from the project and others took over,” the source said. Although a judge refused a petition from Brad Pitt to remove himself from the lawsuit in 2019, the source also denied Pitt’s legal culpability for the houses. “His attorneys have made it clear that he has no legal liability for the decisions made by others. He remains personally committed to doing whatever he can to helping resolve the ongoing litigation. It was always something that was important to him from the beginning and he very much wants to help facilitate this getting to a much more positive end,” the source said. Make It Right has filed cross-claims of its own, suing its lumber supplier, head architect and executive director – blaming them for the project’s failure, and estimating that the flawed constructions would cost $20m to repair. Last year, Make It Right was hit by more lawsuits: from a local bank, and even a lawnmower who said he was owed thousands of dollars in unpaid wages. Keller believes Brad Pitt had good intentions. But she said the debacle had shown how celebrities like him can evade accountability, and what can go wrong when a state entrusts private individuals, or non-profit groups, to solve its housing problems. “Usually [nonprofits] step in to help in case of an emergency. But now their own project is the emergency,” she said. “And the city doesn’t really take any responsibility, either.” She thinks the Hollywood star needs to own up to his mistakes, and fix them. “That’s all I think the residents want. They don’t need a fake reconciliation, they don’t have to be best friends with Brad Pitt. They just want the problems in their homes taken care of.”Just a few minutes into Channel 4’s new comedy drama The Curse, the narrator informs us that a chain of events has been set in motion and every character but her will die. You don’t exactly have to be a comedy expert to know that stark reminders of humankind’s futile impermanence don’t traditionally get bums on seats, but that’s the kind of show The Curse is. Set in London’s East End in the 1980s, the series follows a clutch of hapless would-be gangsters who find themselves dropped into a world of trouble when a small-time robbery ends with an accidental haul of gold bullion. It’s narratively tight and extremely gripping, but also finds plenty of pockets of loose, knockabout comedy. As with Only Murders in the Building before it, it’s a balancing act that seems unlikely to work, yet manages to hit the sweet spot over and over again. The Curse was created in part by Steve Stamp, Allan Mustafa and Hugo Chegwin, who were three-quarters of the brain trust behind the BBC Three breakout People Just Do Nothing. That show was a funny, silly, wonderfully observed sitcom that, by design, didn’t really go anywhere. But this? This claps along like an airport paperback. “It just feels like we were all at that point in our careers where we wanted to make something that felt like a level up, something different and unexpected,” says Stamp, speaking over Zoom from his kitchen, a long row of trainers neatly leading out to his front door. Mustafa, joining in on the chat from his own kitchen, where an unopened subscription box of smoothies is balanced on the worktop behind him, can’t hide his excitement about how different it is to his last show. “This is the first time we’ve done something that looks more stylised, like a film,” he says. “The kid in me keeps going: ‘Shit! It actually looks like a proper thing!’” Meanwhile, Chegwin – calling in separately during a break from filming – has a simpler reason to appreciate The Curse. “My dad loves it, so that’s the main thing,” he explains. “He doesn’t really show emotions, and he did to this.” Which brings us to the rest of the creative team: Tom Davis and James De Frond, the pair behind Murder in Successville and King Gary. Figuring out how this comedy supergroup came to be took some heavy interrogation – there is lots of hazy talk from all involved about meeting at a nebulous industry awards show – but the genesis of The Curse seems to be a pitch that Chegwin had about an aspiring screenwriter hiding in the witness protection scheme. “It was crap,” he repeatedly assures me. But Mustafa urged him to take the idea to Davis and De Frond. “And then they were like, ‘Actually, we’ve got this idea,’ which is effectively The Curse, and said, ‘We’d like to try to develop it collectively.’” The charming thing about this collaboration is that both ends seem to think they’ve got the better deal. The People Just Do Nothing contingent are all clearly beside themselves that a heavyweight like Davis would pick them to work with, while Davis can’t believe his luck that they actually agreed. “They’re a phenomenal bunch of boys,” says Davis, smiling, in what is either a large spare room or a small warehouse. “I was dying to work with them from the moment I saw People Just Do Nothing. And I think that it’s quite underestimated how much of an influence they’ve had on the world of comedy. That show, I think, speaks out to a generation.” The key bonding element, Davis believes, is that they have all made it up the ladder without the traditional privileges. “[We] have very similar backgrounds to each other, but didn’t come through the normal sort of Oxbridge world,” he explains. “I think, weirdly, you can see it in the show and in the writing – it’s that underdog spirit.” I admit to them all that I’m fascinated by such a sprawling collaboration. To me, it seems like it has the potential to be a minefield of ego and compromise. As they explain it, it seems as though the success of The Curse is down to its unhurried development – Davis estimates that it took four years to get it to our screens – and also the ease with which everyone found their roles in the collective. “James [De Frond] and Steve [Stamp] are kind of like the puzzle masters,” says Chegwin. “They look at it from a real deep way. Like, they’re super-funny and super-creative and imaginative, but they put the puzzle together really well in terms of structure and things.” “Having the director as a writer is amazing,” says Stamp of De Frond. “James led most of the writing. He also kept all of the notes of the scripts as we were going through them, which was nice for me because I’ve never had that before, really.” “He’s the dad,” Mustafa adds. “And Tom [Davis], he comes out with the maddest stuff,” says Stamp. “He’ll just throw in a whole new backstory for his character, where he’s dating a 7ft woman or whatever. And it’s like: ‘Where has this come from?’” “We all have the same end goal, which is to make it as good and as funny as it can possibly be,” continues Chegwin. “And if it doesn’t make sense or it doesn’t work, there’s no ego in the room; there’s no like, ‘Oh no, my idea must be in there,’ or anything like that. It’s all love.” On top of everything else, The Curse feels like an authentic period piece, set in the 1980s but – as with real life – the characters’ clothes and music tastes lagging a few years behind. I ask Mustafa if it was hard finding pockets of the old tumbledown East End, given London’s identikit gentrification. “We actually filmed it in Liverpool,” he tells me. “There’s just so many amazing locations there. You’ve got the docks, you’ve got the arches. Even just the fact that they’ve got so many old, derelict buildings. Our cafe set wasn’t a studio; it was just a real old cafe that we recreated as an even older cafe.” The choice of era, the creators explain, was partly down to necessity. In an age where Line of Duty has taught everyone that CCTV, trace DNA and mobile data mean that nobody can ever get away with anything, small-time crooks like these would be banged up in an instant. But 40 years ago that simply wasn’t the case. “When police were going off just chatting to the locals, you could get away with more crime,” explains Mustafa with a grin. “Also, Tom and James are really old and they were about in the 80s. Put that in there.” The key to getting The Curse right, Davis explains, was to make the characters peripheral to the gangland crime of the time. “Everyone, in that time and in that world, was probably always just rubbing up against guys that you might have gone to school with, who are embedded into that criminal world,” he says. “But you have to then make them lovable and you have to make the odds against them.” Like all good gangster stories, The Curse doesn’t really get going until after the robbery itself, when everyone is left to figure out the consequences of their actions. “You’ve got all this fucking gold; what are you going to do with it?” Davis says. “And also, how are you going to handle that? How’s it going to change you? From episode three, they’re hanging on to their sensibilities and the friendship, but the rope is starting to fray. And, I think for four, five, six, it’s a case of ‘be careful what you wish for’, because everybody will come and bite you in the arse.” Given its filmic nature, and its doomy opening prophecy, I had assumed that The Curse was designed as a one-season wonder: a confidently told story with everything aimed at a finish line. Apparently, though, this isn’t the case. “There is a finish line in the sense that some of the characters are going to die,” says Stamp. “But you don’t know how long that timescale is, basically. In an ideal world, we want to take it to the next decade, so it’ll be the 90s. There’s a lot of stuff around where that gold ended up, and what it helped to create. The drug scene in the 90s was very tied up in that gold’s journey.” “There’s a long way to go in the gold’s journey,” says Mustafa, “but I guess let’s see.” Hugo Chegwin, on the other hand, seems less bothered about the future. The Curse is already a victory for him. “I think my dad loves me now,” he gasps over the phone. “Just took him 36 years, but that’s cool.” The Curse starts airing weekly on Channel 4 from Sunday 6 February at 10pm.It is now more than 50 years since I first wrestled with the restructuring of local government. After the Conservatives won the 1970 general election, I was sidekick to Peter Walker, secretary of state for the newly created Department of the Environment, and our attempts to change things faced entrenched resistance. It would be understandable, therefore, if I were to say that I know where the bodies are buried. Michael Gove’s new white paper on “levelling up” makes it clear that, far from being buried, the bodies are alive and very much kicking. In the white paper, Gove has proposed cautious, evolutionary moves towards greater devolution, achieved by agreement. I cannot criticise him for this. Time and again I faced the same pressures, and was able to persuade colleagues to accept only partial and gradual shifts in the status quo. The objections came from all directions. The Treasury wants to maintain its tenacious grip on expenditure. The Whitehall barons fight to preserve their functional powers. Local councillors resist the abolition of their jobs, and members of parliament are deeply suspicious of change that creates local figures more powerful than them and deprives them of the foot soldiers they need to hold their seats. In the 1970s, we tried and failed to bring in a proposal commissioned by Labour from John Redcliffe-Maud. He suggested replacing the existing 1,300 authorities, many of which reflected an England where the only means of transport were by foot, cart or horse, with 60 unitary authorities and metropolitan authorities covering the larger conurbations. Peter Walker found a compromise that reduced the number of authorities to just over 300 by introducing a two-tier structure based on counties and districts, while accepting Maud’s proposal for metro councils in the metropolitan areas. The metro councils were deeply controversial because the prosperous Tory fringes feared the Labour heartlands, and to my discredit I abolished rather than reformed them as environment minister in the 1980s. In mitigation, I helped George Osborne and Greg Clark when they pioneered the recreation of metro authorities with elected mayors in several of our major cities. (London had already achieved this under Tony Blair, whose government had used legislation I enacted to enable a small number of county councils to opt for unitary status.) It is a major failure of public policy that well over half a century after Maud we are still left with an expensive, multitiered local administrative machine. It is against this backdrop that Gove inherited responsibility for the devolution agenda and the drive to level up the less prosperous parts of the country. Gove cannot be held responsible for the delay, and he is right to make clear that there are no short-term fixes. Regeneration is a long-term process, and he is right to recognise the role of central government in bringing it about. He is also right to chair a committee of the relevant ministers to drive the agenda. I walked the streets of Liverpool for three weeks after the 1981 riots. It changed my understanding of public administration beyond recognition. He should hypothecate a minister to each conurbation authority and insist they have regular dialogue with the mayor and other influential local people in both public and private sectors. Another wise move is the recreation of the old government offices in each region to coordinate central government’s interactions with the mayoral authorities. These will be chaired by levelling-up directors who will replace the old regional directors that disappeared under the coalition government. I hope that Gove will take a personal interest in these appointments. They are a critical building block in any devolution plan, as a partnership of trust is a must. He may wish to seek some appointments from outside the public sector to bring entrepreneurial experience to the task. Considering the constraints at play, there is much to welcome in the white paper. Three mayoral authorities, West Midlands, Manchester and Glasgow, have been invited to negotiate more comprehensive deals. There is a clear indication that this is a path others will be able to follow. The paper also sets out a range of incentives to encourage a list of authorities to negotiate new mayoral deals. I hope they will – though the risk is that local pressures will drive councillors to opt for one of the lesser options tabulated in the document. An observer could very well ask what the point of all this is. The answer is set out in the white paper’s 12 mission statements that cover virtually every aspect of modern life. Machinery is to be put in place to monitor progress against targets set for each of these criteria. A quango is to be set up to report on the facts. Joint select committees of both houses of parliament should keep close to this process. I tried something similar in the 1990s with my white paper on competitiveness. It provided an invaluable source of criticism for the opposition. Annual comparative statistics tend not to survive long in the heat of party politics. It is inevitable that the first question many will pose in response to the white paper is how much more money is promised. But it is the wrong question. Huge capital programmes flow into every part of our country every year. The right question is how relevant are these sums to the needs and priorities of local opportunities. The white paper reveals the problem by endless reference to existing budgets. These are all programmes designed in Whitehall to fit the functional judgments of individual spending departments – they are not designed to reflect Birmingham, Manchester, Newcastle or anywhere else. Devolution is about replacing the myriad different funds with a single fund to finance strategies devised and led by local mayors that best reflect the circumstances of each local economy and attract the largest additional expenditure. The next great task for Gove is to add a sense of urgency to the good intentions outlined in the white paper. Why not invite each of the metro mayors to separate meetings with Gove’s committee to outline individual programmes for each area? The public is more than capable of judging who simply uses the occasion to play party politics. The outstanding quality of Andy Street in the West Midlands and Ben Houchen on Teesside ensures the government has everything to gain. Lord Heseltine is a former Conservative deputy prime minister and environment secretaryHello Fight to Vote readers, For the last few months, I’ve been following the case of Pamela Moses, a 44-year-old activist in Memphis who was convicted in November for trying to register to vote while she was ineligible. On Monday, Moses, who is Black, was sentenced to six years and one day in prison. To my eye, the case is far more complex than it seems. Amy Weirich, the local prosecutor, has trumpeted both the conviction and the sentence in press releases. She has highlighted that Moses has an extensive criminal record, and she told a straightforward story about Moses’ voting crime. In 2015, Moses pleaded guilty to perjury and tampering with evidence in connection to allegations that she stalked and harassed a local judge. Tampering with evidence is one of a handful of felonies that causes someone to permanently lose their voting rights in Tennessee. Nonetheless, Moses, still on probation, knowingly tried to register to vote in 2019. The case caught my attention for a few reasons. First, it is rare to see a prosecutor bring criminal charges against someone for election crimes, and I was curious whether this was a bona fide case of fraud or of someone who had made a mistake. Second, there has been growing awareness of racial disparities in punishments for election-related crimes. Black people such as Crystal Mason and Hervis Rogers have faced years in prison for making mistakes about their voting eligibility. White voters have received much lighter sentences for election-related crimes. Weirich’s office did not respond to interview requests, but the more I looked into Moses’ case, the more I realized the case wasn’t straightforward at all. Behind the scenes, Tennessee officials conceded that they had made a series of mistakes concerning Moses’ voting eligibility. In 2015, when Moses pleaded guilty to her felony, she says no one told her she couldn’t vote. “They never mentioned anything about voting. They never mentioned anything about not voting, being able to vote … none of that,” Moses told me last year. (She added she hadn’t discussed the case with her two sons, 24 and 13, but described it as “traumatic”.) At the time, election officials should have removed her from the rolls, but the court never sent election officials in Memphis the documents they needed to do so, according to a letter from an election official I obtained. Moses didn’t know anything was amiss until 2019, when she launched a long-shot mayoral campaign. Election officials said she couldn’t appear on the ballot because of her felony. When they began to look into her eligibility, they also realized she had never been taken off the voter rolls. Moses went to court and asked a judge to clarify whether she was still on probation, and the court confirmed that she was. What happened next is at the crux of the case against her. Moses did not believe the judge had correctly calculated her sentence. So she went to the local probation office and asked an officer to figure it out. An officer filled out and signed a certificate confirming her probation had ended. In Tennessee, people with felony convictions who want to vote need that document from a correction official. Moses submitted it to local election officials along with a voter registration form. But the day afterwards, an official at the corrections department wrote an email to election officials saying a probation officer had made an “error” on Moses’ certificate. Moses was still serving an active felony sentence, they wrote, and was not eligible to vote. The department offered no explanation for the mistake. Such errors are actually fairly common in Tennessee, where the voting rules are extremely confusing for people with felonies, Blair Bowie, an attorney at the Campaign Legal Center, told me. A 2017 study found that about 8% of the certificates submitted were rejected because the voters remained ineligible. Bowie said she was unaware of any voter in the state ever facing criminal charges for submitting a certificate but later turning out to be ineligible to vote. During Moses’ trial, prosecutors argued that she knew she was ineligible to vote when she submitted the certificate. They pointed to the fact that she submitted it even though a judge had recently told her she was ineligible. “Even knowing that order denied her expiration of sentence, Pamela Moses submitted that form with her application for voter registration and signed an oath as to the accuracy of the information submitted,” prosecutors wrote in their request for an indictment. “Pamela Moses knowingly made or consented to a false entry on her permanent registration.” “You tricked the probation department into giving you documents saying you were off probation,” the judge sentencing her said last week. “That seems absurd to me on its face,” said Bowie, who is involved in a challenge to Tennessee’s process for restoring voting rights. “The instructions on the certificate of restoration form are very clear to the probation officer or the clerk. They say you will check these records and you will sign off on this based on what the records say. “They’re saying that she tricked the probation officer into filling out this form for her. That creates a really scary prospect for people who think they’re being wrongly told they’re not eligible.” Moses is currently in custody and an appeal is expected. But the case highlights the byzantine maze that people with felony convictions have to go through to figure out if they can vote. And it shows the harsh consequences prosecutors can bring if people with felony convictions make a mistake. Also worth watching … New York Democrats are pushing ahead with new congressional maps that would tilt future elections in their favor. Texas faces a “clusterfuck” as it tries to implement a sweeping new voting law ahead of its 1 March midterm elections. A bipartisan group of senators is making progress in a proposal to reform the Electoral Count Act, a confusing 19th-century law that governs how votes from the electoral college are counted. Trump planned to rely on ambiguities in the law as part of his efforts to overturn the election.What does ‘indivisible security’ mean and where did it originate? At its most crude, it means security should be seen as a collective concept so if the actions of one state threaten the security of another, the principle of indivisible security is breached. Therefore no state should strengthen its security at the expense of another. The principle was first set out in the 1975 Helsinki Act, but also appears in the 1990 Charter for a New Europe and in the 1997 Founding Act on Mutual Relations, Cooperation and Security – all treaties signed by the west and Russia. What has it got to do with the Ukraine standoff? In Russia’s eyes, indivisible security lies at the heart of the Ukraine crisis because it thinks Nato’s expansion threatens its own security. The term provides the strategic underpinning for the Russian demand that Nato withdraw from central and eastern Europe. It has featured in all major Russian strategic documents since 1990. The subject was brought up by Vladimir Putin in his phone call with Boris Johnson on Wednesday, and appears in the two drafttreaty documents published by Russia in mid-December. It was also the focus of a written message sent by the Russian foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, on 28 January to Nato. What is the practical application in Russia’s eyes? Russia argues that Nato runs an open-door policy on expansion because only it and applicant states decide if applications should be accepted. The views of the states remaining outside the bloc are legitimate, says Russia, and need to be taken into account. Has the west bought into this concept? Russia says yes. It relies mostly on two Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) documents to promote its version of indivisible security: the European Security Charter, signed in Istanbul in November 1999, and the Astana Declaration of December 2010. The US is a signatory to both documents. The Istanbul charter says countries should be free to choose their own security arrangements and alliances, but adds the rider that they “will not strengthen their security at the expense of the security of other states”. The Russian government has accused the US state department of selectively picking out from a “package of interconnected commitments” only those elements that serve its purpose. The underlying principle, according to Russia, is that if some countries coexist in a particular region, they are supposed to have common security interests. Consequently, they need inclusive international platforms to communicate. What does the west say by reply? It says the Istanbul document explicitly affirmed the inherent right of nation states to choose their security alliances. It did not provide a right of veto to Russia. It points out that the OSCE documents to which Russia signed, including the 1990 Paris Charter, also presumed an adherence to human rights and democracy. The west says it is an abuse of the indivisible security concept, and a violation of the spirit of the Helsinki Final Act if Russia insists on decoupling security issues from human rights. Does this matter? Yes, and no. In wars, casus belli matter as much as tank formations. They can in theory also matter in international law. If the two sides could come to a collective understanding of its practical application, it might help. On the other hand, this is only the language through which a dispute about power and values is conducted. Moreover, perceptions of security and threat are highly subjective, with one person’s security being another’s insecurity.Record numbers of patients had to wait in the back of an ambulance outside A&amp;E units in England this winter when hospitals came under pressure during the Omicron surge, NHS figures show. A total of 151,798 patients were delayed for at least half an hour with ambulance crews because emergency departments were too busy to admit them, according to NHS England data. That was 14% more than the previous highest total for the number of patients forced to wait during the first nine weeks of the winter, which was 133,000 in that position at that stage in 2019-20. NHS England figures published on Thursday show that one in five patients have waited 30 minutes or more in ambulances before being admitted since the start of December. The absolute figure – 151,798 – exceeds the previous highest level in recent years – 133,000 at the same stage of winter 2019-20 – by 14%. The number of ambulances that have had to wait 60 minutes so far this winter before offloading patients has also hit a record high – 60,687, up 82% compared with the past two winters. “Going to A&amp;E can be frightening. To then be stuck in an ambulance unable to get immediate medical help once you get there must add to the trauma of an emergency visit,” said Rachel Power, the chief executive of the Patients Association. “These terrible figures show how the pressures on the NHS affect the care and treatment of individual patients.” Ministers needed to put more money into social care to make it easier for hospitals to discharge patients who were medically fit to leave, and thus relieve the pressure on A&amp;Es, Power added. The proportion of people waiting is also higher than in previous winters: whereas between 3% and 4% of patients waited an hour or more in the previous four winters, that figure stands at 8% this winter to date, or one in every 12 patients. “Having to wait outside in an ambulance because A&amp;E is already dangerously overcrowded is distressing, not just for patients but also for staff, who can’t provide proper care,” said Patricia Marquis, the Royal College of Nursing’s England director. Some patients die in the back of ambulances, and others after they are admitted, directly as a result of the delay in starting treatment, the Association of Ambulance Chief Executives warned in a report in November. Saffron Cordery, of the hospitals group NHS Providers, said the high number of delayed handovers showed that “safety risk is being borne increasingly by ambulance services”. Vehicles trapped outside A&amp;E were a key reason why response times to 999 calls were so slow, even for people who were seriously unwell, she added. Separate NHS figures showed that staff absences were down slightly compared with the previous week, but remained high, with 70,000 workers off sick across England on an average day. The number of NHS staff off due to Covid reasons also dipped slightly to about 26,000, representing more than a third of total absences. NHS England’s national medical director, Prof Stephen Powis, said that despite 70,000 personnel being off sick every day last week, “hard-working staff are doing everything possible to get people home to their loved ones and out of hospital safely, as hundreds more beds were freed up each day compared to the week before, all while delivering as many routine checks and procedures as possible, including vital diagnostic checks, as staff continue to make inroads delivering treatments disrupted by Covid.”Competing mediation offers have showered down on Vladimir Putin, as his defence minister visits troops on the Ukraine border before unprecedented joint exercises with Belarus, due to start in a week’s time. The Turkish president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, on a trip to Kyiv, offered to host talks between Ukraine and Russia. The French president, Emmanuel Macron, prepared a fourth phone call in a week with Putin, and the German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, said he was planning a trip to Moscow. Russia confirmed it was possible that Scholz and Macron would travel to Moscow together, as a symbol of European unity and as joint signatories to the Minsk agreements, the stalled 2015 deal designed to bring peace and autonomy to Russian-supporting eastern Ukraine. Macron is de facto becoming the chief interlocutor for the Russian president in Europe, coordinating closely with Washington and Warsaw. The frenetic diplomatic activity on Thursday came as Russia accused the US of ratcheting up “tensions” by sending 1,000 soldiers to Romania and 2,000 to Poland to bolster Nato’s eastern flank. Moscow is refusing to pull back more than 100,000 troops from Ukraine’s borders, and said its security demands had not yet been addressed by Nato. Erdoğan’s efforts to become the lead mediator are likely to be rejected by Moscow. Putin has been angered by Ankara’s decision to sell drones to Kyiv for use in eastern Ukraine, as well by a new offer to build a Turkish drone manufacturing plant in the country. Turkey said that as a Nato member it was legitimate to provide weapons against a country that might threaten other Nato states in eastern Europe. “Military cooperation between Ankara and Kyiv is not intended to target Russia and won’t be disrupted in order to please it,” a senior Turkish presidential official said. The Kremlin urged the US to “stop escalating tensions” after the deputy foreign minister, Alexander Grushko, warned the “destructive” move would make it harder to reach a compromise between the two sides. The Russian defence minister, Sergei Shoigu, was in Belarus inspecting plans for a massive joint drill planned for between 10 and 20 February between Belarus and Russia Putin has demanded guarantees that Ukraine will never join Nato, and that offensive missiles will be removed from states close to Russian borders. The Kremlin also claimed it had China’s support in the standoff, backing that would be demonstrated when Putin met Xi Jinping in Beijing on Friday at the opening of the Olympics. Alongside the frenetic diplomacy, Ukraine’s defence minister, Oleksiy Reznikov, tried on Thursday to cool the temperature, saying that “the probability of a significant escalation as of today is considered low” as Kyiv had not seen Moscow move “strike groups” to the border. In a change of language, responding to Ukrainian concerns, the White House said on Wednesday it would no longer refer to a Russian invasion of Ukraine as “imminent”, saying the word implied Putin had already made a decision to attack. France also said its offer to send troops to Romania among wider plans to bolster Nato’s ranks on the eastern flank was designed to de-escalate the crisis rather than provoke Russia. The French foreign minister, Jean-Yves Le Drian, speaking alongside his Romanian counterpart, said: “I don’t think one can say this is a provocation, to respond to the commitments we have in the framework of Nato. The fundamental subject now is to defuse tensions as quickly as possible and to do that you dissuade and discuss.” The Romanian foreign minister, Bogdan Aurescu, said: “It must be said very clearly, if you compare the allied presence on the eastern flank to the troops Russia has massed, it is several times smaller so there is no question of an attempt to escalate tensions.” The two ministers were also meeting foreign ministers from the Baltic states and eastern Europe. Lithuania is pressing Germany as the Nato battlegroup leader to increase its troop commitments in the country. Germany currently has 550 soldiers stationed in Lithuania as part of the 1,200-strong battlegroup. There are unresolved divisions within the EU, especially between Poland and Hungary, over the nature of the sanctions that would be imposed in the event of a Russian invasion, as well as how to protect European energy needs. Le Drian, in a sign of Franco-German solidarity, is due to fly to the frontline in eastern Ukraine on Friday in the company of the German foreign minister, Annalena Baerbock.Boris Johnson has been ambushed by the Democratic Unionist party over its order to local border officials to halt all Brexit checks on food and farm products in Northern Ireland ports. The unilateral move by the Stormont agriculture minister, Edwin Poots, has set the UK on a new collision course with Brussels. Johnson’s spokesperson said ministers in Westminster had not known about the DUP’s plan, but confirmed that the checks were continuing for now. He added that the government was looking into the legalities of who might be responsible if they did stop, given the checks are a devolved competence but are mandated by an international treaty personally negotiated and signed by Johnson in January 2020. “As we speak, checks are continuing to take place at ports in Northern Ireland, as they have done before,” he said. “We are monitoring the situation closely, and keeping the legal position under review. “The operation of those checks is a matter for the Northern Ireland executive, as SPS [sanitary and phytosanitary] checks are a devolved competence. We want the executive to resolve this issue in the first instance, and we are in contact with them.” He was speaking as the Stormont executive was plunged into an existential crisis with the first minister, the DUP’s Paul Givan, resigning in protest against the Brexit checks. The order by Poots to halt all Brexit checks on food and farm products entering Northern Ireland has been described by Ireland’s European commissioner as “an absolute breach of international law”. The UK environment secretary, George Eustice, told the House of Commons that he had spoken to Poots, who told him “he had taken his own legal advice before issuing the advice to officials” but that no laws were presently being broken as the checks were continuing as before at points of entry. After a video conference call with the foreign secretary, Liz Truss, the EU’s Brexit commissioner, Maroš Šefčovič, said he understood the checks on goods were continuing. He said: “We see the recent instruction by [Poots] as being very unhelpful. It creates uncertainty and unpredictability for the people and businesses in Northern Ireland. These checks are necessary for Northern Ireland to benefit from access to the EU’s single market for goods. “According to our information, officials in Northern Ireland continue to carry out checks on goods coming to Northern Ireland. It is essential that this remains the case. The European Commission will closely monitor the developments on the ground. “The protocol, the cornerstone of the withdrawal agreement, is an international agreement. It is therefore the UK government’s responsibility to uphold its legal obligations stemming from the protocol – the only solution we have found with the UK government to protect the Good Friday (Belfast) agreement, taking into account the type of Brexit the UK government chose.” The DUP MP Sammy Wilson confirmed to BBC Good Morning Ulster that the advice was given by the former Northern Ireland attorney general John Larkin. He predicted the move would accelerate a solution after almost a year of negotiations between the UK and Brussels. “If it requires a bit of a kick for a bit of reality to come into these talks, then what has happened today is a bit of kick. This will also test whether the checks are really necessary because 95% of the goods are not going near the Irish republic.” Simon Hoare, a Conservative MP and chair of the Northern Ireland select committee, said the move had put the reputation of the UK at stake. He tweeted: “There’s no ifs and buts on this. The reputation of the UK on these matters is important. Anyone who cares about the UK should feel the same.” Poots confirmed on Thursday that checks were continuing to take place at Northern Ireland’s ports while “financial” issues were being considered. He predicted they would stop “in days”. Poots’s move comes as the DUP faces a huge battle to retain its position as the largest party in Northern Ireland with Sinn Féin’s popularity increasing and the Ulster Unionist party snapping at its heels. Poots, who was leader of the DUP last May, is also facing local turmoil. Last week he lost out in his attempt to be selected for the South Down constituency in the upcoming local election.A one-off repayable £200 discount and a rebate on council tax bills have been announced by Rishi Sunak in a £9bn package designed to “take the sting” out of a £700-a-year rise in the average household’s energy bills in April. The chancellor said 80% of households would receive £350 in support this year in response to the decision by the energy regulator Ofgem to raise its price cap to just under £2,000. In an attempt to mitigate Britain’s cost of living crisis, Sunak said: All households would receive £200 off their energy bills in October – but then pay the discount back by £40 a year over five years from 2023 Council taxpayers in England in bands A to D would receive a rebate of £150 from their bills in April, which will not have to be paid back. Local authorities would receive £150m to make discretionary payments to the neediest. The number of poorer households eligible for the warm homes discount – worth £150 from October – would be increased by a third to 3m. “Without government intervention the increase in the price cap would leave the average household having to find an extra £693. The actions I’m announcing today will provide to the vast majority of households just over half of that amount, £350,” Sunak told MPs. “In total the government is going to help around 28m households this year. Taken together this is a plan to help with the cost of living worth around £9bn.” The Treasury will make £565m available to share between the devolved administrations in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland, which they can use as they see fit to cut council tax. Northern Ireland will get an extra £150m to spend on cutting energy bills. He said the fourfold increase in the global wholesale price of gas meant the energy price cap had to rise, but added: “We can take the sting out of this significant price rise for millions of families.” The chancellor said a council tax rebate was more generous and better targeted at less well-off households than the cut in VAT on energy bills proposed by Labour. Rachel Reeves, the shadow chancellor, said under Labour’s plan there would be £400 in targeted support for the poorest homes, as well as £200 in general support for most households. The poorest families would be largely protected from the increase in bills from April. “The chancellor wants to load costs on taxpayers with a buy now, pay later scheme – while Labour will keep bills low with a windfall tax on North Sea oil and gas producers with booming profits,” Reeves said. “In the midst of a cost of living crisis, the government’s proposals will leave families in Britain paying hundreds of pounds more as a result of the breathtaking rise in energy prices. It will be of little comfort to many.” The Scottish government said the £290m it is expected to receive was too little to cope with energy poverty in Scotland. Michael Matheson, Scotland’s energy secretary, said the Treasury needed to do far more, including removing VAT from energy bills. Adam Scorer, the chief executive of National Energy Action, a fuel poverty charity, said: “We needed deep, targeted support for the most vulnerable. We have shallow, broad measures for all. That simply does not work.” The charity warned that the depth of support offered by the Treasury’s package of measures was not proportionate to the financial toll which is expected to drive the number of UK households living in fuel poverty to the highest level on record by this spring. “A household paying by prepayment [meter] will still have a £500 increase when you take into account rises from October 2021 and April 2022,” Scorer said. “We expect the government will have no choice but to return to the issue of spiralling fuel poverty and another price rise later this year.” Frances O’Grady, the general secretary of the TUC, said: “The chancellor’s announcement is hopelessly inadequate. For most families it’s just £7 a week and more than half must be paid back. It’s too little, it’s poorly targeted, and it’s stop gap measures instead of fixing the big problems.” Struggling businesses and manufacturers have been pressing Sunak for help, saying soaring costs are making their products uncompetitive. His package, however, contained no help for companies. Hannah Essex, the co-executive director of the British Chambers of Commerce, said businesses would be “dismayed at the lack of support for those firms also struggling with their energy bills. Many have already been hit by steep rises, with further significant spikes expected as existing fixed tariff contracts come to an end in the coming months.” Mike Cherry, the national chair of the Federation of Small Businesses, said: “The government is right to help households with rising costs. It should be helping the smallest firms too, which face many of the same challenges as consumers in the energy market, but without the same protections. “The household rebate should be matched by an equivalent business rates rebate, to help the smallest firms which have been weathering these price increases for months already, and which desperately need a measure of protection from the energy crisis storm.”The International Space Station (ISS) will continue its operations until 2030 before heading for a watery grave at the most remote point in the Pacific, Nasa confirmed in a new transition plan this week. More than 30 years after its 1998 launch, the ISS will be “de-orbited” in January 2031, according to the space agency’s budget estimates. Once out of orbit the space station will make a dramatic descent before splash-landing in Point Nemo, which is about 2,700km from any land and has become known as the space cemetery, a final resting place for decommissioned space stations, old satellites and other human space debris. Also known as the “Oceanic Pole of Inaccessibility” or the “South Pacific Ocean Uninhabited Area”, the region around the space cemetery is known for its utter lack of human activity. It’s “pretty much the farthest place from any human civilization you can find”, as Nasa put it. Nasa said it plans to continue future space research by buying space and time for astronaut scientists on commercial spacecraft. While celebrating the ISS’s record of scientific accomplishments, Robyn Gatens, the director of the International Space Station at Nasa headquarters, also emphasized in a statement that its current goal was to “lay the groundwork for a commercial future in low-Earth orbit”. “We look forward to sharing our lessons learned and operations experience with the private sector to help them develop safe, reliable and cost-effective destinations in space,” said Phil McAlister, the director of commercial space at Nasa headquarters, said in a statement. Nasa estimated that transitioning its space research from a dedicated space station to renting space aboard commercial space ventures would save $1.3bn in 2031 alone, and that the savings could “be applied to Nasa’s deep space exploration initiatives, allowing the agency to explore further and faster into deep space”. The ISS, about the size of an American football field, orbits the Earth about once every 90 minutes, and has been continuously occupied by astronauts since November 2000. In September, a Russian official warned that small cracks had been discovered on the space station that could worsen over time and raised concerns about ageing equipment and the risk of “irreparable failures”, BBC News reported. The space station was originally intended to operate for just 15 years, but Nasa said in a report that “there is high confidence that ISS life can be further extended through 2030”, though some analyses of its viability are still being conducted. ISS was “examining the recent technical issues aboard the Russian segment”, Nasa said in its report. Since 1971, nearly 300 different chunks of space debris, including at least five space stations, have been sunk at Point Nemo, most of them American or Russian in origin, according to a law review article about the space cemetery’s environmental impact. The space station’s end is likely to be fiery. The “downfall” of Mir, the Russian space station, happened in March 2001, when a cargo ship fired its engines to push the space station out of orbit and send it plummeting towards Earth. While solar panels and other peripheral pieces of the space station broke off during its fall, about 20 to 25 tons of remnants fell together, resulting in sonic booms, according to Nasa’s documentation. This article was amended on 3 February 2022 to correct the year in the headline from 2030 to 2031.There is a story that John Williams was working on Schindler’s List when he suggested to Steven Spielberg that he needed a better composer for his overwhelming Holocaust drama. “I know, but they’re all dead,” replied the director. The anecdote is redolent not only of Williams’s humble view of his handiwork but also speaks to the traditional gulf in perception between the populist Williams – he has the most entries of any living composer in Classic FM’s hall of fame – and the vaunted masters of classical music. Celebrating his 90th birthday on 8 February, Williams has a body of film work that encompasses blockbusters (nine Star Wars movies, four Indiana Joneses, three Harry Potters, two Jurassic Parks and the first Superman film) and serious historical fare (JFK, Schindler’s List, Saving Private Ryan, Lincoln). The stats are impressive. A 28-film, nearly 50-year collaboration with Spielberg. Fifty-two Oscar nominations – the most for a living person and second only to Walt Disney – with five wins. Four Olympic Games fanfares. One presidential inauguration (Obama). For all his accomplishments, Williams has always been undervalued by the classical establishment. But with the children weaned on Williams now old enough to be composers, musicians, critics and scholars, that is finally changing. “I was immediately smitten by the leitmotifs,” says the virtuoso violinist Anne-Sophie Mutter, about seeing Star Wars for the first time in 1978 in the Black Forest. “Looking back they still hold up; all these characters [are] elevated by his inventiveness. Usually, you would go to the cinema to see the actors. I would go to hear John Williams’s music.” “As we reach his 90th birthday, I think the people who just go: ‘Oh, they all sound the same,’ just can’t justify it any more,” says the London Symphony Orchestra’s first violinist Maxine Kwok, who was inspired to join the LSO because it was the orchestra that performed the Star Wars score. “You can play the first two bars of Superman, Indiana Jones, Harry Potter and ET and people recognise them instantly. They are all different but by the same man.” Subordinate to images, often buried under sound effects, film music is often seen as the neglected step-child of the classical world. But even among such cultural elitism, after the success of Star Wars, Williams in particular came under attack for being over-sentimental, simplistic, manipulative and a pasticheur – or worse, a plagiarist. You can easily fall down a YouTube rabbit hole watching videos comparing his music to the classical greats, be it Star Wars (Korngold, Holst, Stravinsky), Superman’s Love Theme (Strauss) or ET The Extra-Terrestrial (Howard Hanson). Film music scholar Frank Lehman says: “The examples that are often enlisted pointing to Williams’s influences are often pretty superficial, and used as a kind of gotcha.” The broadcast and film concert producer Tommy Pearson suggests Williams makes a deliberate artistic choice to lean into classical and film music idioms as a means of making the exotic, alien worlds of Star Wars feel more familiar. “One of the key elements of Williams’s skill is the absorption of his tradition,” says Pearson. “He writes with counterpoint and harmony – all those boring traditional techniques that make him a great composer. He is so much smarter than his critics. If he sounds like Strauss, it’s because he wants to sound like Strauss. It’s not by accident. The groundwork is there in his skillset.” There has always been another barrier to serious consideration. “The one thing he does so amazingly is create memorable tunes,” says Jess Gillam, who played Williams’s alto saxophone concerto Escapades at the 2017 Prom dedicated to his work. “He is a master of melody.” This supernatural sensibility for a memorable theme has seen him change a director’s mind – when Spielberg suggested the musical signature for Jaws should be a melodic counterpoint to the hulking great white shark, Williams played him that now iconic der-dum repetition – but it remains a lot of hard graft to craft something that feels as if it’s been with us for ever. “He’ll claim crafting melodies is actually the part of composition that he pours the most effort into,” says Lehman. “Sometimes it’s just a very short little motif, but to absolutely lodge them into your brain requires an incredible amount of care, revision and rewriting until you sand down the rock into a perfectly carved jewel.” The themes may be succinct, but they are not easy. “Schindler’s List is quite a simple line of music,” says Gillam, “but very demanding to execute with the emotion and the right style.” Behind the headline themes is a wealth of writing featuring daunting technical challenges for the most proficient musician. “When you record a soundtrack, you don’t see the music until the day,” says Kwok. “Hedwig’s theme from Harry Potter was so tricky. It’s full of fast notes, sweeping sounds and an incredible series of scales. I remember going to the listening booth thinking: ‘Gosh, I hope that was all right.’” Another Harry Potter passage, a ridiculously complicated flute solo from the Prisoner of Azkaban, is so demanding and virtuosic it is now a standard audition-piece for orchestras recruiting new flautists. “His use of the palette of the orchestra is a really extraordinary thing,” says Gillam. “He knows the extremities of instruments, when to push to get these colours. For me that’s when the music comes to life.” Since the 90s, Williams’s reputation has been bolstered by collaborations with superstar soloists such as the cellist Yo-Yo Ma, violinist Itzhak Perlman and more recently Mutter, who have all interpreted Williams’s work away from the movies. “I would love for us to delve deeper into the music he has written for violin, flute, cello,” says Mutter who premiered Williams’s Violin Concerto No 2. “He creates incredibly complex cadenzas for the solo violin. The whole musical structure is really on a higher level, as is everything he writes. We are not doing his genius justice by looking at one part of his oeuvre.” “His music suits being performed in a concert hall,” says Pearson. “So much film music does not. Also, he writes for a traditional orchestra, which makes it much more compact and easier to perform. He is box office – his concerts always sell out – and he is the only one.” Meanwhile, Williams’s scores for Jedi, wizards, and archaeologists have become a field of academic study. In 2018, Lehman, an associate professor of music at Tufts University in Massachusetts, created a comprehensive catalogue of Star Wars themes, detailing more than 60 leitmotifs and musical ideas from the nine-film space saga (and beyond), an act of academic erudition usually reserved for those long dead. “Every now and then someone will say: ‘This is a great analysis, but why don’t you turn to Wagner or Puccini? Why are you spending your time on this?’” says Lehman. “One answer is: “How much ink has already been spilled on Wagner and Puccini?’ Let’s concentrate on something new that has a vivid relevance to a lot of people these days.” Williams shows no signs of slowing down, and is now at work on the fifth Indiana Jones film. If the symphonic tradition he reintroduced to movies in the 70s has been ousted as the dominant mode in Hollywood film-scoring by Hans Zimmer’s synth-driven mood-pieces, his work has a deeper, longer-lasting legacy. “He has this unique ability to tap into the absolute correct emotion at the right time,” says Kwok. “It’s not dumbed-down music at all because, if it was, it would never have lasted. He has the knack of how to score music that creates a visceral reaction – without any action on screen.” “For five decades he has touched people around the world. That is spectacular,” says Mutter. “But that is him: a unique gift to the world.” The Force will be with him, and us, always. • John Williams: The Berlin Concert with the Berlin Philharmoniker is released on 4 February.For the most part, Netflix’s top 10 makes a lot of sense. The shows and films that occupy that list tend to be big and splashy and trailed to death. Don’t Look Up is a perfect case in point. Look at the orgy of attention that film was given when it came out a few weeks ago. Look at all the fawning over the stars and the director and the themes that accompanied the release. It was genuinely inescapable. Anyway, Don’t Look Up is currently the fourth most watched English language film on Netflix. The first is The Royal Treatment; a film with no big names, no urgent message and barely a publicity campaign. And yet in the last week of January, people around the world spent 26 and a half million minutes watching it. That’s two and a half times more than they spent watching Don’t Look Up. So what’s going on? Now, your first thought might be that The Royal Treatment is a brilliant film, and it has risen to the top because Netflix is a meritocracy. But if you think that, it’s a pretty good sign that you haven’t actually watched The Royal Treatment. Because, while it isn’t terrible, anyone who claims that The Royal Treatment is actively good probably needs to have their assets seized by the state. The Royal Treatment is a film about a hairdresser who falls in love with a prince. That’s it. She cuts hair, she meets a prince, they fall in love and then the film ends. It is absolutely rote in every conceivable way. I don’t want to make assumptions, but there is every chance that The Royal Treatment achieved its 26.5 million minutes because 160 million people watched the first minute of the film, figured out exactly how the rest of it would go and then turned it off. It’s the sort of film that can only exist because of Netflix’s ability to capture audience data. Somewhere deep in Netflix’s basement, an algorithm figured out that millions of people like aggressively inoffensive films about girls who fall in love with princes, and now this exists. Nobody wanted it, nobody expressed an interest in it, but the algorithm decided that there’d be an audience for it, and now here it is. It isn’t a terrible film by any means. Some of the performances are perfectly watchable. In particular Laura Marano, who plays the hairdresser, does an amazing job of dancing right at the very edge of parody, like she knows the film isn’t up to much and has decided to just have fun instead. In that regard, she reminded me of a young Fran Drescher, and I mean that entirely as a compliment. True, it isn’t perfect. Films like this require a moment of high emotion at the end of the second act, and the speed at which this is brushed over is a possible sign of lack of care. Another, more obvious, sign is the moment where a character receives a call on a landline, and then checks the caller ID by looking at the receiver as if it was a mobile phone, even though it’s just a plastic landline telephone receiver. But, hey, no film is perfect. Perhaps, then, the success of The Royal Treatment is yet more proof that critics and audiences have wildly different values, and something charming and populist can still be a mainstream success even if critical praise eludes it. But this doesn’t seem to be the case either, because barely anyone is talking about it. On Twitter the bulk of the scant chatter regarding The Royal Treatment concerns all the dodgy accents. If you search for the film on TikTok, which you would assume would be the home of this sort of discourse, you mainly get only filming updates from the cast. Yes, there is one video by a teenage girl absolutely losing her mind over a still of the lead characters kissing, but she alone can’t be responsible for all those millions of minutes, can she? Can she? So the mystery remains. The Royal Treatment – a bland little nothing that doesn’t exist for any clear purpose, and has failed to achieve any meaningful discussion anywhere – is still a wild, out of control success story. Maybe thousands of computers are all streaming the film, muted and on a loop, to get the views up. Or maybe I’m more out of touch than I thought. Who am I kidding, it’s the last one.The actor Jo Kendall, who has died aged 81, was catapulted to fame as the only woman alongside a group of six male Cambridge University students – including John Cleese, Tim Brooke-Taylor and Bill Oddie – in a revue that wowed the critics in the West End of London and transferred to Broadway in the early 1960s. A decade later, she spoke the first words in the television soap Emmerdale Farm (now titled Emmerdale), in the role of Peggy Skilbeck, Annie Sugden’s daughter. In 1963, Kendall – although not a Cambridge student – successfully auditioned to perform in the university’s Footlights Club revue A Clump of Plinths, staged first at the city’s Arts theatre, then the New Arts theatre in London, and directed by another Cambridge student, Humphrey Barclay. The Guardian described it as “full of high spirits and delightfully fresh, original and funny”, and devoid of the political satire of its famous predecessor Beyond the Fringe. David Hatch, later a BBC radio producer and executive, was also in the cast. Retitled Cambridge Circus, the show then transferred to the Lyric theatre, in the West End. By the time it reached Broadway in 1964, via a tour of New Zealand, Graham Chapman and Jonathan Lynn were among the septet. The New York Times, in a mixed review of the production at the Plymouth theatre, noted the male-female imbalance – Kendall herself always bemoaned the lack of opportunities for women – observing that she was “one lass with six young men” and the circus’s “glamorous ringmistress” in the opening sketch. Out of Cambridge Circus came two future “silly” TV comedies, with Cleese and Chapman going on to create Monty Python’s Flying Circus, while Oddie and Brooke-Taylor formed the Goodies. The BBC was quick to pick up on this new array of talent. Barclay, by then a radio producer, hired the cast to continue their antics in what was billed as “a new kind of laughing” for the show I’m Sorry I’ll Read That Again (1964-73). Kendall’s popular sketches with Cleese as “John and Mary” were based on a routine from Cambridge Circus in which they played a married couple in the Malaysian jungle swatting flies and talking nonsense. When the unscripted I’m Sorry I Haven’t a Clue began its long run as an “antidote” to panel games in 1972, Kendall appeared in the first series. In the same year, she joined the original cast of the Yorkshire-set Emmerdale Farm as Peggy, and was given the first episode’s opening line: “Matt, who’s she?” The question was directed at her husband, the farm labourer Matt Skilbeck, and referred to a woman in the distance, riding a horse and watching the cortege for the funeral of her father, Annie’s husband. The woman was Marian Wilks, daughter of the newly arrived Henry Wilks, an old friend of the matriarch Annie who helped to map out a future for her farm. They turned it into a limited company with Peggy as secretary, using her previously untapped talents to keep the books in order. The character also gave birth to the soap’s first babies, the twins Sam and Sally, in 1973. Just three months after that, Kendall decided to leave, tired of the routine. “I didn’t like waking up on a Monday and knowing what I was going to do all week,” she said. She was born in Cleethorpes, Lincolnshire, to Martha (nee Charlton) and Bernard Robinson; her parents split up when she was a child. Jo attended Leicester Collegiate school and, on graduating from Central School of Speech and Drama in London in 1961, taught English and drama in a Cambridge secondary school. Taking the stage name Kendall, she acted with the university’s Amateur Dramatics Club in the ADC theatre, playing Desdemona in Othello (1962) and Maisie King in Expresso Bongo (1963). Barclay said she was “the obvious choice as the female component” when he was casting A Clump of Plinths. On radio, she then had a prolific 35-year career in dramas (1964-99), as well as taking over from Denise Coffey to appear, from 1977 to 1980, in the sketch series The Burkiss Way and playing Lady Cynthia Fitzmelon in The Hitch-Hiker’s Guide to the Galaxy (1978-80), who christens the bulldozer that knocks down Arthur Dent’s house in the first episode. She also had a 1974-75 stint as Kay Munro in the serial Waggoners’ Walk and starred as the parish council leader Mrs Roberts in the satirical soap Little Blighty on the Down (1988-92). On television, Kendall was reunited with some of her Cambridge Circus cohorts in the surreal sketch series At Last the 1948 Show (1967) and Broaden Your Mind (1968-69), and voiced the Queen in a 1980 Goodies episode. Her other roles included Anne Stanhope in The Six Wives of Henry VIII (1970), Mrs Joe in The Good Companions (1980-81), a 1982-83 run as the mother of Roland Browning in Grange Hill and the spirited Aunty Maud in the children’s comedy series Marlene Marlowe Investigates (1993). Although she retired in 1999, Kendall was persuaded by the producer Barnaby Eaton-Jones to make two guest appearances, alongside Brooke-Taylor and Garden, on a 2017 stage tour of I’m Sorry I’ll Read That Again. She was unable to join a 2020 tour after suffering a stroke. • Jo Kendall (Josephine Mary Robinson), actor, born 17 February 1940; died 29 January 2022THE USA! USA!! USA!!! GO LOW The 1967 NFL Championship Game between the Green Bay Packers and the Dallas Cowboys is the single most famous sporting event ever held on US soil, a statement The Fiver makes with the caveat that we don’t know what we’re talking about but have decided to run with it anyway. The match has become immortalised as the Ice Bowl, on account of temperatures being -26C, with a wind chill as low as -57. The field turned into a skating rink, the referee’s whistle stuck to his lips and several players lost toenails due to frostbite. Green Bay won, and afterwards there were snacks. By comparison, soccer’s version of this meteorological lunacy, the semi-legendary Snow Clásico between the USMNT and Costa Rica in 2013, was positively balmy. A thick blanket of white powder covered the pitch, the lines required constant clearing, and a yellow ball was required, but while there was certainly quite a nip in the air, at least there was no sense of extremity-bothering doom. However, on Wednesday night in Saint Paul, Minnesota, the soccer world finally put on a show to rival the Ice Bowl for notoriety, when the USMNT were sent out to face Honduras in temperatures of -16C with a wind-chill factor of bloody hell. Visiting coach Hernán Gómez described the conditions as “inconceivable”, before bringing his pre-match interview to a dramatic end by stating he was off outside and may be some time. OK, what Gomez actually said was: “The game hasn’t started, but I can’t wait for it to end. Because it’s not for enjoying, it’s for suffering.” He was spot-on in that analysis, because Honduras, bedecked in tights, gloves and balaclavas, went on to lose the Human Rights World Cup qualifier 3-0, with a couple of their players substituted so they could be treated for hypothermia. USA! USA!! USA!!! head coach Gregg Berhalter insisted the game was played in a “safe environment”, which was a slightly more charitable reading than the National Weather Service’s “dangerously cold”, and ignored the fact his unoccupied keeper Matt Turner was at one point farcically reduced to warming his hands in a quarterback’s pouch. Berhalter went on to point out that fixtures in “those countries” are contested by “dehydrated” players in “unbearable humidity”, so all’s fair in love and war. You can sort of see his point, but then again this sort of sharp practice really should be beneath one of the major nations in the federation. It’s also storing up trouble for the future, and The Fiver looks forward to the USA! USA!! USA!!!’s next visit to Honduras, at a time and place yet to be decided, in conditions so stultifying they have no other option to play in their vest and pants. LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE! Join Scott Murray for hot Afcon semi-final MBM coverage of Cameroon 2-1 Egypt from 7pm GMT. QUOTE OF THE DAY “It’s a victory of sorts for the hundreds of people who make the club, who were appalled at the board’s original decision and who were not afraid to speak out. But it’s just the first step on a long road back. The same people who made the decision are still in charge. Those who love and value the club are still on the outside; they need to be on the inside, shaping the future for the community” – Val McDermid, who withdrew her sponsorship of Raith Rovers following their signing of David Goodwillie, responds to the club’s belated U-turn and decision not to play him. “This very unfortunate episode is something we all bitterly regret,” sobbed chairman John Sim, one of those still in charge. FIVER LETTERS “This goal by Canada’s Atiba Hutchinson in HRWC qualifying has to be the goal of the year; it’s not every day that you have a Fifa glitch come to life! Just your everyday run of the mill head, post, heel, back of head goal. The fact that it also helped take us one point from automatic qualification is just poutine gravy!” – Craig Sagert. “Similar to Pierre–Emerick Aubameyang and Jim Hearson (yesterday’s Fiver letters), I too was on holiday, albeit Greece, when in a bar one balmy evening the subject of football came up. Once the details of my stellar career with Patcham North End and Dartington United were revealed, the owner tempted me with the vacant No 9 shirt and the enticing prospect of bar work to eke out the lack of readies in the off-season. I was promised 40,000 drachma a month, and after a long, protracted and alcohol-infused discussion I accepted, ready to leave the grey of England for the sun-drenched beaches and possible Big Cup opportunities of Greece. The next morning, and suffering from an almighty hangover, I worked out that 40,000 drachma, far from being a fortune, was a tad over £20 a week. Unlike Pierre, I took the first flight home” – Spike Ewens. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’ the day is … Craig Sagert. RECOMMENDED LISTENING Get your listening gear around the Football Weekly Extra podcast. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS Fifa will request more details about the appointment of a coach accused of sexually abusing and harassing female players in Barbados, after it was suggested that he was given “positive recommendations” to take over as director of football in St Kitts and Nevis by the president of the Barbados FA. IOC members are using Big Winter Sports Day as a chance to stick the ski into Gianni Infantino’s biennial World Cup plans. “The plan would create immeasurable damage and would put sport in danger and in particular football,” sniffed Mustapha Berraf, National Olympic Committees of Africa president. “It would simply push away other sports and relegate them to the back benches – which is unacceptable.” You’ll like this one: Steve Bruce is being considered for the West Brom gig. You’ll like this one too: Roy Keane is being considered for the Sunderland gig. The Bhoys are back in town – well, the top of the Scottish Premiership – after a 3-0 smiting of the Pope’s Newc O’Rangers. “Our end goal is to play football a certain way but win things,” warned boss Ange Postecoglou. “We haven’t done that yet.” Senegal are one win from Afcon glory after seeing off Burkina Faso 3-1 in the semis. And Mr Roy is back, so his weird quotes are too. “This job was one I was never going to turn down because it was quite literally the siren call from the mermaid as the sailor passes by on his ship,” he hooted after being unveiled by Watford. “They got the right mermaid going past the right ship.” STILL WANT MORE? Tom Dart points at a whiteboard and gives us some lessons from this week’s Concacaf qualifying. Josh Butler meets Arjan Wijngaard, who has collected 3,000 football shirts and wants more. And if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! FROM BIG WEBSITE’S VERY OWN …The former president of the Human Rights Campaign, the largest LGBTQ advocacy group in the US, filed a lawsuit on Thursday accusing the organization of racial discrimination in his firing last year, the Washington Post reported. Alphonso David was fired on 6 September after a report by the New York state attorney general, Letitia James, said he had advised the former New York governor Andrew Cuomo on how to handle sexual harassment allegations, the organization’s board said at the time. In the complaint, David accused HRC of fostering a “racist, biased culture”. He also said that he was told that he was initially paid less because he was Black and that an organization board member told him to stop mentioning race in public comments, the Post reported. At the time of his firing, David said the Human Rights Campaign board had “unjustly” terminated him, and said it should expect a legal challenge. There has not yet been any official comment from the organization. David arrived at the HRC in 2019, after working for Cuomo. The organization was founded in 1980 and is based in Washington. It has long come in for criticism from progressives and activists for a culture associated with advocating for change from inside the political and business establishment, in contrast to groups that focus on direct action-type protests. And HRC has been under fire for slow progress towards racial diversity and gender equality, including transgender rights. David’s lawsuit was filed in New York and is claiming violations of state and federal law and is seeking damages and his reinstatement at HRC. As part of the action, he alleges a senior HRC executive told him his high-profile advocacy for racial justice could be off-putting to the organization’s core of wealthy white donors – specifically “white gay men”, the Post reported. “I had to challenge a system and a pattern of bias that has not only affected me, but it has affected way too many Black and brown people. Discrimination and bias are rife within HRC. And I’m just the latest person to be affected,” David told the newspaper in an interview. He added: “I’m hoping that we recognize that institutions that purported to represent all members of our community actually have to do just that.” David was involved in some of Cuomo’s efforts to fight back against multiple allegations of sexual harassment. Cuomo resigned last summer.The 1971 Immigration Act was a novel and complex piece of legislation. As a young barrister, Sibghat Kadri argued a number of the early cases on it, seeking to humanise it so far as feasible. After he argued one of these cases before the lord chief justice’s court (a pretty intimidating forum), the government’s standing counsel, Gordon Slynn, said to me that Sibghat’s was by far the best argument he had heard on the legislation’s meaning and effect. Sibghat’s characteristic response, when I told him, was: “He can afford to say that. He won.”A 17-year-old girl and two men have been found guilty of the sadistic homophobic murder of a consultant psychiatrist in a city centre park. The three “tortured” Dr Gary Jenkins by kicking and punching him and stamping on his head for up to 30 minutes as he begged them to stop. During the attack and robbery in Bute Park, Cardiff, Jenkins was subject to homophobic abuse and the three left him with his trousers pulled down. Afterwards, Dionne Timms-Williams, who was 16 at the time and had not met her fellow attackers before that night, said: “I needed that.” The prosecution said that Jason Edwards, Lee William Strickland and Timms-Williams were motivated by a combination of homophobia, greed and a liking for violence. After the verdict, a statement from Jenkins’ family said: “Gary was such a kind soul who would never hurt anyone. He was an incredibly generous and creative man who had only good intentions. “Gary’s private life being put on display through a crown court trial has only intensified the impact of this event on our family, friends and colleagues. It has been horrible to have to listen to the details of what happened. “Gary’s untimely death has also had an impact on his patients. Gary was one of the most humane, kind, compassionate doctors one could ever come across.” The charity Stonewall expressed deep concern. Iestyn Wyn, the campaigns, policy and research manager at Stonewall Cymru, said: “Lesbian, gay, bi, trans and queer people should be free to go about their lives without fear or restriction, but the tragic death of Dr Jenkins is reminder of the hate our communities face for simply existing.” Stonewall also raised concerns at the way the prosecution presented the case, telling the jury that the victim’s “sexual predilections would be his undoing” and that he was well liked despite his “lifestyle choices or peccadilloes”. Wyn said: “Remarks made during the trial have further eroded the trust that our communities have in our justice system – where four in five (81%) of LGBTQ+ people already do not report hate incidents to the police. As people across the UK mourn the heartbreaking loss of Dr Jenkins, the government must take urgent action to challenges anti-LGBTQ+ attitudes and ensure all our communities are safe and free.” Edwards, 25, Strickland, 36, and Timms-Williams pleaded guilty to manslaughter and robbery but denied murder. They also admitted assault occasioning actual bodily harm to a man who tried to save the psychiatrist. The jury at Merthyr Tydfil crown court was told that Jenkins, a 54-year-old father of two teenage girls, had separated from his wife six years before his murder and moved back to his home city of Cardiff. He was in the park in the early hours of 20 July last year when the three, who had been drinking, pounced on him. Audio of part of the attack was picked up by a CCTV camera in a shuttered cafe. He could be heard crying out: “Please help me” and repeatedly called out: “Stop it” and “Why?”. One of the men could be heard subjecting him to homophobic abuse and one urged: “Stamp on his head.” A man who tried to help described the tone as “bullying … like they were having fun, like they were right to do it, like they think it’s funny and it’s just enjoyment for them. It seemed like they were loving what they were doing.” He said Timms-Williams had seemed “evil, sadistic and weird”. Dafydd Enoch QC said the assault could be seen as “torture” because of its prolonged nature, and claimed the killers saw it as “sport”. After the attack, Edwards and Timms-Williams embraced. Strickland bought a bottle of whisky using a card stolen from Jenkins. The girl appeared cheerful, contacted her mother to say she did not need picking up and stayed the night with a friend. When he was arrested, Strickland told police he was a beggar and had taken the drug spice that night. Edwards told the police the park was “dirty”. Timms-Williams, who lived with her mother, a company director, in a village in the Vale of Glamorgan, claimed she joined in the attack because she was scared that the other two would hurt her if she didn’t. Jenkins suffered a brain injury and fractures to his face and ribs, and died 16 days later. Wales’ education minister, Jeremy Miles, expressed concern over the language used by the prosecution, tweeting: “He was not ‘undone’ by his ‘sexual proclivities’. He was brutally attacked and died. We have a long way to go.” A Crown Prosecution Service spokesperson said: “The only people responsible for this horrific crime were those convicted today by the jury. The suggestion that Dr Jenkins was in any way to blame is completely wrong. We apologise for inappropriate and insensitive remarks made during the opening statement.”Standing next to the snowy Belarusian border, Vladyslav Gorban showed off Ukraine’s latest defences against Russian attack. New wooden posts topped with coils of gleaming razor wire ran alongside a slush-covered road. There was a shallow defensive ditch, dug some time ago, and a yellow and blue customs post. Plus a dog, used to sniff out narcotics. Gorban, a border guard, admitted Russian tanks would be able to smash through this flimsy ensemble of barricades and continue towards Kyiv, 140 miles away. But he had a warning. “If the Russians come, they can expect a nasty surprise,” he said, hinting at the new portable anti-tank weapons sent by the UK to Ukraine’s embattled pro-western government. He and his colleagues would try to hold off any attack using light arms, he said. They would summon help from operative reserves located in bases nearby. “We are all military-trained. We have enough weapons. Morale is high. We will defend our country,” Gorban said as a waiting truck driver stretched his legs in the cold. An arrow-straight road leads south from the border village of Novi Yarylovychi to the capital. It goes through dense pine forest. There are deer, elk and wild boar. The route offers perfect cover for the Ukrainian army to ambush and harry any trundling military columns. In Belarus, the Kremlin has brought together the largest concentration of soldiers and modern weapons since the cold war. According to the Nato secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, Russia has deployed 30,000 combat troops, elite Spetsnaz units, Su-35 fighter jets and S-400 missile defence systems. It is a formidable force. The soldiers have been moved to Belarus ahead of military exercises due to begin on 10 February and to finish on 20 February. Russia’s hawkish defence minister, Sergei Shoigu, a close ally of Vladimir Putin, arrived in Belarus on Thursday. In total there are now 135,000 Russian troops on Ukraine’s border. Experts believe these are not sufficient numbers for a full-scale invasion. But the Ukrainians worry about an operation to encircle and then overwhelm Kyiv, possibly beginning when the Russian exercises and the Beijing Winter Olympics finish in 17 days’ time. But what about the weather? Could armoured vehicles operate in the muddy conditions of spring? “This isn’t the first world war,” Gorban said, swatting aside claims by some pundits that the Russian army needs frozen ground. “The weather doesn’t make much difference. It isn’t a problem for any 21st-century tank.” Putin insists he won’t invade Ukraine. At the same time, Russia’s president has made a series of unrealistic and maximal security demands: that Nato rules out Ukrainian membership for ever and pulls out of eastern Europe. The west’s refusal to agree to these terms gives Putin a pretext for offensive military operations, couched as self-defence. In response to the unprecedented Russian military buildup, the Biden administration has decided to send more than 3,000 troops to Germany, Poland and Romania. Moscow has condemned the move as a “destructive step”. Tensions between Ukraine and Belarus are growing, too. On Thursday the Belarusian foreign ministry summoned Ukraine’s ambassador to protest at what it said was Kyiv’s use of a drone to spy on a military training facility across the border. Ukraine dismissed the accusation, widely reported by Russian state media, as provocative and false. Those who live in the crumbling village of Novi Yarylovychi, seem indifferent to what Boris Johnson, visiting Kyiv this week, called “a clear and present danger” posed by Russia. One shopkeeper said he saw nothing wrong with Moscow’s military exercises. “Nato does the same thing in the Baltics,” he said. Another owner of a general store, Natasha, said she wasn’t worried. “War won’t happen,” she predicted. “Why would Russia attack us”? Natasha said her sister lived across the border in Gomel, Belarus’s second city, about 25 miles up the road. “It’s a big place, very clean, with lots of monuments. Everyone there has a car,” she said. Natasha said her brother-in-law worked in Belarus’s security services. Her sister’s family lived better than she did, she said. She pointed to her clunky Ukrainian-made Stork bike, rusting and with a ponderous frame, propped up against the window. “That’s my Mercedes,” she joked. “We don’t have work here. My pension is small. In Belarus they have collective farms.” In the event of an invasion, Russian tanks would advance through Polissya, a primordial natural area of swamps, forests, grasses and lakes. It includes Chernobyl, an exclusion zone after the 1986 nuclear disaster. Forty miles south of Novi Yarylovychi is Chernihiv, an ancient city that was once part of the original Slavic dynasty known as Kievan Rus’. History is never far away. Novi Yarylovychi’s war memorial features a gold-painted Soviet soldier holding a helmet in one hand and a laurel crown in the other. Below him is a tablet with the names of those who died in the second world war. Side by side in Russian and Ukrainian are the words “never forget” and a hammer and sickle medallion. If Russia attacks from the north, Ukraine’s first tank brigade would swing into action. It is located in a former Soviet barracks close to the Belarus border and within the Mizhrichynskyi landscape park. It has a crisscross of forest tracks used for training, as well as a shooting range and box-like accommodation blocks, visible from the road. The Guardian’s scheduled visit to the base was cancelled because of a local outbreak of Covid. Security sources in Kyiv believe a similar epidemic has swept through the Russian soldiers and conscripts due to participate in next week’s Belarus exercises. It is one more variable that may affect Putin’s thinking on when – if at all – to attack. The same officials suggest that while the world has been looking anxiously at Ukraine, the Kremlin has in effect militarised and taken over Belarus. After Moscow annexed Crimea in 2014, Belarus’s dictator, Alexander Lukashenko, rejected the idea of giving up his country’s sovereignty in exchange for a closer union with Russia. His calculation changed in the summer of 2020 when there were massive street protests after a rigged presidential election. Moscow offered him political support and helped to quell the demonstrations. But there was a price: the seemingly permanent occupation of Belarus by Russia’s armed forces. Lukashenko has sided with Moscow in its fight with Kyiv. He recently agreed to give Russia nearly unlimited use of four airbases, a surface-to-air missile base, and approximately 30 storage sites on Belarusian territory. Russian forces now face off against Nato on a new eastern European front, encompassing the states of Poland, Latvia and Lithuania. Few believe Russia will remove its troops from Belarus once this month’s exercises are over. They look to be a permanent presence along the 600-mile border with Ukraine and a new potential attack vector. Russian forces are also stationed in Crimea, in the breakaway republic of Transnistria next to Moldova, and – covertly, Kyiv says – in separatist-held territories in the east. Back in Novi Yarylovychi, Gorban said traffic had fallen dramatically since the start of the pandemic. About 1,000 people a day used the crossing, he said, compared with 10,000 a day in the pre-Covid era. For now, the vehicles that cross drag building materials and logs rather than missiles and artillery pieces. “Putin is wrong. Ukraine and Russia are separate countries,” Gorban said, surveying a scene, for now, of calm. He added: “We were founded first. It was a Kyiv prince who went to Russia and established Moscow. Back then it was just a few bogs.”The men’s FA Cup fourth round gets under way on Friday, and from Middlesbrough visiting Manchester United to Boreham Wood’s game at Bournemouth on Sunday, it is full of potential upsets. In theory this should be a normal week of preparation for the top players but when you are facing a side from a lower division things can change in training. Looking back I can see how it affected teammates I played with. Managers would often alter the side for a cup tie against a team who, on paper at least, are weaker and this could affect the squad in many ways. For a player who knows they will be given a chance to impress, it puts extra pressure on them to perform. They know it could be their one chance to prove to the manager they can be trusted more often and if they fail to seize the opportunity they might not be in the side for a long time. Then there is the danger of regulars dropping their effort levels in training, knowing they effectively have a weekend off if they are being rested. If an individual does not operate at their usual standard on the training ground, it does not help teammates who need to be at their best at the weekend but could end up undercooked for a match that the opposition will be desperate to impress in. Squad players give it their all in training each week to ensure the regular starters are in the best condition to win, so if they are not shown the same respect when it is their time to shine, they will not be happy. It is down to the culture at the club to ensure everyone’s attitude is right throughout the season for the good of every player. It is the manager’s choice who is selected but they do need to get the balance right, especially when wanting to give squad players and youngsters a chance. The key thing for all the players is to maintain the intensity required for any fixture regardless of opposition, whether they are top of the league or struggling in the fourth tier. If a squad become complacent they are only helping their opponents, who will be desperate to knock them out. I remember losing a cup game when we did not apply ourselves throughout the buildup and therefore performed badly on the day. In those situations you can only blame yourself. We came into the tie not 100% match fit, our preparation was not at the right level and we performed poorly against a side we should have beaten. There will be a lot of external noise about the opposition and the potential for a shock. It can make a player apprehensive when they hear about the risk of failure or the prospect of 90 minutes of being kicked up in the air by an opponent. This is another reason to ensure the buildup does not change and a player carries out their usual process to prepare for a match. With the resources available to top clubs, they will be able to prepare fully for any opponent, so it should not be a case of not knowing about the skillset of the striker they are set to come up against. When I played it was possible to turn up to games against lesser sides and have no understanding of who we were facing. That can be a strength as well as a weakness, because sometimes players can be fed too much information which can overwhelm them. At Arsenal, for example, we would always focus on ourselves and what we could do as a team, with the emphasis on us performing to the best of our ability to win, regardless of the opposition. When playing away from home as the favourites in a cup tie it is important to silence the crowd early because they can make a huge difference if they are vociferous inside a tight stadium. It is imperative to start well by keeping things simple, moving the ball quickly and not reacting to any feisty tackles as opponents look to rile you. I’ve been an underdog, too, where the mantra is very much to get into the opposition because they will not like it – so you have to expect it. The opponents need to know you have reached a higher level for a reason. It is key to prepare for all eventualities to avoid being put off your gameplan. If you are a team that like to pass and you turn up at the ground to find the pitch is in poor condition after training all week on good surfaces, it can mean you have to adapt quickly. This is not a regular occurrence in an era when pitches are pretty good across the board but there are still underhand methods for lower-league sides to earn an advantage, such as slowing down the pitch by not watering it. The key is to know what is coming. Make no mistake about it – if a team do not prepare and perform to their absolute maximum, it is their fault and no one else’s when they become a victim of a shock.Future, the UK’s biggest magazine publisher that is home to titles from Country Life to Metal Hammer, has been forced into an embarrassing sit-down with investors after a bruising shareholder revolt in which 60% failed to support its annual pay report – including a controversial bonus scheme in which its chief executive could be awarded £40m. The board of London-listed Future has been forced to initiate a new consultation process with shareholders after failing to gain the 50% support required to pass its report on remuneration at the company’s annual general meeting on Thursday. The level of executive pay at Future has been contentious for a number of years, with 40% of shareholders failing to back a scheme in which the boss, Zillah Byng-Thorne, could receive £40m in the coming years if the company continues to perform strongly. Byng-Thorne, who was paid £8.8m last year, has made almost £34m over the last five years as a remarkable turnaround in the company’s fortunes has paid off handsomely. The shares were down 9% after the pay revolt on Thursday, making Future the biggest faller on the FTSE 250. Future said the shareholder revolt was against the value creation plan (VCP), in which staff will share an annual pot of £95m for three years if its stock rises 10% a year from September 2020 to 2025, as well as the terms of a payout to the former financial chief Rachel Addison. While the vote is advisory and not binding – meaning the VCP which was passed by a separate vote last February cannot be unwound – the level of opposition forces the company into explaining and justifying its policies to shareholders again. “The approval of the directors’ report on remuneration did not pass,” the company said. “As a result, the board will initiate a new consultation process with shareholders regarding the matter.” There were also significant levels of voting against the reappointment of Mark Brooker, the chair of the remuneration committee, and the committee member Rob Hattrell, as shareholders vented their displeasure with the company’s decisions on pay. “The board remains of the view that the all-employee value creation plan, which was approved by shareholders at the 2021 annual general meeting, incentivises and rewards the whole Future workforce and supports the long-term success of the business, and the continued creation of sustainable long-term shareholder value,” the company said. “The plan is directly aligned to shareholder interests and will only vest if the company delivers exceptional performance.”The majority of Australians would support restoring funding to the ABC, according to a new poll, after new figures showed funding has been cut by $526m since the Coalition’s first budget. The poll of 1,000 voters conducted by the Australia Institute found that 52% want the $84m cut from the ABC in the last three years to be restored, more than double those who oppose it (25%). Despite being elected after promising no cuts to the ABC and SBS, the Abbott government reduced funding to the ABC in the 2014 budget, with a further pause in the indexation of funding imposed in 2018 under Malcolm Turnbull. There have been $526m in cuts to the ABC budget since 2014, with an ongoing reduction to base funding of $106m per year by 2021-22, the ABC has told Senate estimates in reply to questions on notice. In that time, the ABC has slashed 640 jobs, from 4,704 staff to 4,064. In addition to staff cuts, the ABC’s savings have come from discontinuing the 7.45am radio news bulletin, reducing spending on independent production and discontinuing ABC Life. The poll shows despite a majority of voters backing increased ABC funding, the issue is polarised along party lines. Coalition voters narrowly favoured increased funding, with 43% in favour and 36% opposed, whereas Labor and Greens voters had solid majorities of 65% and 63% in favour and just 17% an 16% opposed. Support for more ABC funding is highest in Victoria (57% in favour) and New South Wales (54%), whereas in Queensland 44% wanted increased funding and 29% were opposed. The Australia Institute poll found that 61% of respondents agreed that “a strong, independent ABC is critical to a healthy democracy” with only 19% disagreeing. In the 2021 budget the Morrison government gave an extra $30m to SBS, but the ABC copped a $10m reduction in its operational funding from $880.56m in 2021-22 to $870.34m in 2022-23. In 2020 the independent thinktank Per Capita did a report for progressive lobby group GetUp estimating that total funding cuts to the ABC totalled $783m since 2014. Labor has pledged to protect the ABC and SBS against “arbitrary ideological cuts and political interference” by granting the public broadcasters funding in five-year cycles. Australia Institute senior research, Bill Browne, said “Australians depend on the ABC for quality news reporting, emergency broadcasting and documentaries, drama and comedy that tell Australian stories”. “Cuts to the ABC undermine its truth-telling mission, cost hundreds of people their jobs and mean Australians miss out on quality broadcasting,” he said. “The ABC is an essential part of Australia’s democracy and accountability infrastructure. “The government could start by restoring and increasing ABC funding for its next three-year funding cycle, coming in July.”A family member of mine (who, out of embarrassment, wishes to remain anonymous) recently had an incident of the pongiest proportions. It involved a two-litre bottle of milk mistakenly left in her car for an entire weekend in the hot summer sun. The result: an explosion that covered the front passenger side of her car in milk that curdled and seeped into the upholstery. Along with the maggots that wriggled out from her carpet, it left a foul, pungent smell that would just not go away. While it isn’t always a detonating milk carton, most of us have been in a similar situation – one that leaves a lingering stink in our car. Professional crime scene cleaner and the director of Clean Queens, Gabrielle Simpson, says the most common bad smells in cars are from spilt takeaway coffee, or windows left down after rain which leads to excess moisture in a car’s carpets and fabrics. The hot, wet weather much of Australia is experiencing certainly isn’t helping keep that new car smell either. Simon Cook, who is a partner at Star Car Wash, says that bacteria in the air conditioner unit, cigarette smoke, body sweat, stale food left in difficult-to-locate crevices or any liquid or wet food spillage – especially milk and seafood – are also quite common sources of stink. “Always clean the contaminant before it gets the opportunity to generate an odour,” he says. But if the smell has already set in, Simpson says you should “remove, wash and rinse out the cause of the smell. This usually means a steam clean machine and high-powered wet and dry vacuum.” Importantly, do not just mask the smell. “Using any type of masking spray is just that, it will mask a smell it will not eliminate it,” she says. To effectively remove a bad smell, you need to look at what exactly is causing it and where it is, then employ the right strategy depending on the source. Pet smells If you are a pet owner or carer, it’s always better to protect the car interior than to remedy the smell. Seat and floor coverings can help with this. But if the damage is already done, Cook’s advice is to “steam clean where the damp hairs are more readily removed from the upholstery. At home, a vacuum with a power head can help.” Milky spills Mop up the milk or coffee as soon as possible, preferably with an absorbent paper towel or microfibre cloth. Blot the stain rather than rubbing it, as rubbing can cause the liquid to penetrate further into the fabric. After this, “the most effective process is to use a powerful extraction system to suck out the liquid. It will be also necessary to rinse the area with water to thoroughly flush the milk from where it has been,” Cook says. This could be done at home with an enzyme-based cleaner, or through a professional service. For set milk stains, Cook suggests a steam cleaning tool to break down the hardened residue. “In some cases, it may be necessary to remove the affected seats and carpet in order to gain access to where the milk has run.” Body fluids Whether it’s sweat, vomit or something else, accidents happen – especially if you have kids. “Safe removal of any excess fluids off a carpet or upholstery is a start,” Simpson says. “Diluting a small amount of ammonia with water and patting it over the fabric or carpet will help break down any protein out. Apply pressure to the spill using something super absorbent like a towel.” But if you don’t have the time, or just want the best outcome, Simpson recommends engaging a carpet and upholstery cleaner to steam clean and deodorise the fabrics and carpets. Cigarette smoke The smell of cigarettes is often the trickiest to remove, because the smoke particles can reside nearly anywhere within a car. The managing director at All Aces Cleaning and Restoration, James Wright, suggests using sugar soap on the hard surfaces, and recommends changing the air filter of your car. “It is inexpensive and easy to replace.” But the odour can still sometimes hang around, in inaccessible locations within the car. If this is the case, the help of a professional car cleaner is probably required. “The process usually involves a complete detail where every internal surface is either wiped down or steam cleaned,” says Cook. Mould Mould occurs when fungal microbes meet spilled liquid or dropped food on an interior surface and begin to grow. “The best option is to wipe away any of the mouldy patches with an anti-bacterial product. This should also include steam cleaning all fabrics,” says Cook. This is because “the heat helps kill the spores”. “The most important final process is to then let the car fully dry with the doors open before use.”Refugees previously held in detention on Nauru have turned down the chance of a US visa because their partners – also accepted as refugees – have been denied permission to join them. Under its deal with the Australian government in 2016, the US agreed to resettle up to 1,250 refugees who had been held in Australia’s offshore system on Nauru or Papua New Guinea’s Manus Island. But the US does not guarantee that family members of anyone accepted for resettlement will also be granted a visa, and lawyers advocating for refugees in Australia say anyone with a temporary or permanent Australian visa is almost always rejected. Lara*, who fled Iran in 2013 and was on Nauru for more than five years, said she had refused her US medical examination after receiving an email from the US Resettlement Support Center confirming that her partner Parham* would not be allowed to join her. Lara declared her relationship to the Australian government in 2014 and began living with Parham in 2015. Their protection claims, which were logged separately, were approved in 2015 and subsequently both were recognised as refugees on Nauru. In 2018 Parham’s application was denied on the grounds that he had failed to “establish that you meet the definition of refugee” under US law. Lara’s application was also denied, but she successfully appealed, while his appeal was rejected. “I feel like I am swimming in a tsunami and can’t wait to flee persecution in Australia, but not without my partner,” Lara said. Lara was evacuated from Nauru to Brisbane for Parham’s medical treatment in 2019. Parham was granted a bridging visa in 2020 while she was kept on a community detention visa. Because they have different visa types they are forbidden to live together. Guardian Australia is aware of at least two other cases where refugees have turned down the possibility of US resettlement because it was clear their partner or other family members would be unable to join them. Josephine Langbien, a senior lawyer at the Human Rights Law Centre, said it had often been difficult for people to obtain clear information about the US resettlement process, and forcing people to choose between their family and permanent resettlement was “an unthinkable cruelty”. “Our understanding is that in the past, many people with permanent or temporary protection visas in Australia were told they were ineligible for resettlement in the US, regardless of whether their family members are eligible,” Langbien said. “This is an entirely unfair distinction, especially because many families were initially separated between Australia and offshore detention by the arbitrary date when offshore processing was reintroduced in 2013. That government decision could now potentially separate some families permanently. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “The US resettlement agency now says that temporary protection visa holders can be included in resettlement applications in some circumstances. Because of the lack of transparency, it is difficult to know how often this is happening in practice. But if this option was widely available to refugee families regardless of visa status, it would be an important and positive development. She said people resettled in the US were also entitled to apply for family reunion once they arrived – but only for their partners or dependent children. That also meant they would have to go through another bureaucratic process and wait even longer to reunite with their family, Langbien said. Nasreen, 62, a Hazara refugee whose story has been reported previously by Guardian Australia also rejected her second US interview as her husband, Mohammad, is not authorised to join her. Nasreen fled Afghanistan with her children in 2013 to join Mohammad in Australia. He was recognised as a refugee in 2012 and holds a permanent visa. She was transferred from Nauru to Australia for medical care in 2014 and was admitted to a mental health hospital. Mohammad has never been permitted to live with his family in Sydney due to holding different classes of visa. “After four years of separation from my children who were on Nauru, now the government wants to split me from my husband who is also my carer. It is not resettlement, but a forced separation for an elderly woman with multiple disabilities and in need of extensive support,” she said. Principal solicitor at the Asylum Seekers Resource Centre, Carolyn Graydon, said accepting resettlement in the US risked permanent separation for such families. “To be reunited with their families, they have to start all over with lengthy US family reunion processes, which are far from certain and still depend on the individual circumstances in every case and take years of processing. The Australian government has never made an effort to keep families together. These are the cruel, direct consequences of government policy,” Graydon said. A spokesperson for Australia’s department of home affairs said details of the US resettlement process were “matters for the US”. “We understand the US intends to return to Australia and Nauru in February 2022, subject to Covid-19 restrictions, to finalise resettlement interviews,” they said. As of May last year the cap on refugees accepted under the deal had almost been reached, with 936 refugees resettled and a further 258 provisionally approved. By 31 October the number accepted had risen to 990. • Real names have been withheldThe principal of a Brisbane school that demanded families sign anti-gay and anti-trans enrolment contracts previously lobbied senators to allow employers “the right to discriminate” against homosexuals. Citipointe Christian College principal Brian Mulheran, a Pentecostal pastor who has led the school for four years, does not hold teaching qualifications or registration, Guardian Australia can reveal. While such qualifications are not required by principals in independent schools, a group of furious parents is now calling for Mulheran to be sacked over his attempt to introduce the contracts. Mulheran released a statement on Thursday saying the school would withdraw demands that parents sign enrolment contracts that called homosexual acts “immoral” and “offensive to God”, and implied transgender students would not be recognised at the college. Mulheran said the college “does not and will not” discriminate against students on the basis of sexuality or gender identity, but that it will continue to assert its “freedom” to maintain its Christian ethos and beliefs. “It is central to our faith that being gay or transgender in no way diminishes a person’s humanity or dignity in God’s eyes.” But parents and teachers who spoke to Guardian Australia on Thursday said the withdrawal of the contracts did not address their underlying concerns about the direction of the school. Guardian Australia has learned that in 1996, Mulheran, then a pastor at the Christian Outreach Centre (which became Citipointe), gave evidence to a Senate hearing on sexuality discrimination. In his evidence, recorded in Hansard, he said homosexuality was an “immoral act” and argued that business owners should be allowed to discriminate against gay people. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “We have children whom we love and care about, and we do not want to allow them to be taught wrong morals and be influenced by wrong moral behaviour,” he said. “Our children should not have to bear the brunt because of legislation that forces an immoral situation. People who employ other people … should have the right to discriminate (against homosexuals).” The Queensland College of Teachers has no record of Mulheran – who holds degrees in science and theology – in its database. Registration with the teachers’ college is a requirement for all Queensland classroom teachers in state and non-state schools. Most principals also have teaching experience, training and accreditation – though it is not a legal requirement for principals of independent schools. In a statement, a group of 23 parents has called on Mulheran and the school board to resign. “We are still deeply concerned that those responsible for the catastrophe that has unfolded this week, the principal Brian Mulheran and the governing board members, remain in their positions,” a statement from the group said. “We hold that, by any reasonable standards of leadership and governance, Pastor Brian Mulheran is totally unfit to fulfil the duties required by his post.” Matilda Alexander from the LGBTI legal service said that despite the withdrawal of the contact, she had no confidence that LGBTI students would feel safe, or be safe, attending the school. She said the actions of the school showed exactly what could happen if the federal parliament passed a proposed religious freedom bill. Corrine McMillan, the local state MP for Mansfield, and a former state school principal, said families in the community “would absolutely expect that the school they send their child to is led by experienced and qualified educators”. “We have 19 schools in the Mansfield electorate. We don’t have cane farms or iron ore mines – what we produce is education,” McMillan said. “Just as very few people would trust an unqualified surgeon to operate on them, there aren’t many parents who would knowingly entrust their child’s education to anyone but a professional, qualified educator.” The Queensland education minister, Grace Grace, welcomed the withdrawal of the enrolment contract. “Comparing homosexuality to things like bestiality, paedophilia and incest is nothing short of abhorrent. In the interests of the mental health of students, staff, carers, parents, and indeed anyone impacted by this, I hope they abandon it completely and nothing like it ever surfaces again.” Mulheran did not respond to multiple calls and emails seeking comment.When is it happening? The opening ceremony is set to be staged on Friday, 4 February, from 11pm AEDT at Beijing’s National Stadium, and run until the closing ceremony at the same venue on Sunday, 20 February from 1pm AEDT. In keeping with tradition, competition has already started with the curling and luge under way. Australia’s very first curling team, Tahli Gill and Dean Hewitt, have been in action at the Ice Box, where they have lost their opening three matches, while Alexander Ferlazzo has completed several training runs. Where is it happening? The short answer is Beijing, which is the first city to host both a summer and winter Games following the 2008 summer Olympics. Those who remember the famous “Water Cube” which hosted the swimming in 2008 will this time be treated to the “Ice Cube” – the pool has been converted into a four-sheet curling rink. The slightly longer answer is that there are three cluster sites: one in Beijing proper and two others in the nearby mountainous regions of Yanqing and Zhangjiakou. Yanqing is a northern suburban district about 80km from the city centre. The Zhangjiakou zone in the neighbouring province of Hebei is about 220km from central Beijing. How can I follow from Australia? The Guardian will be extensively live blogging each day of the Games, while the action will be broadcast by Channel 7 and streamed on 7 Plus. Curling is among the earliest sports to get under way each day, from 8:35am local time – 11:35am AEDT, as Beijing is three hours behind AEDT. What are the events? About 2,800 athletes from 90 countries are expected to compete across 15 disciplines: alpine skiing, biathlon, bobsleigh, cross-country skiing, curling, figure skating, freestyle skiing, ice hockey, luge, nordic combined, short-speed skating, skeleton, ski jumping, snowboarding and speed skating. A total 109 gold medals are there to be won following the addition of seven new events: women’s monobob (an individual version of bobsleigh), men’s and women’s big air and mixed team events in speed skating, ski jumping, aerials and snowboard cross. Who are the strongest countries? Norway, according to sports statistics organisation Gracenote. It predicts – unsurprisingly – that the Nordic nation will win 45 medals including 21 golds, which would surpass its record-breaking total of 39 medals won at Pyeongchang in 2018. Russia and Germany are slated to take home 30 medals apiece. How will Australia perform? Gracenote predicts Australia will win three gold medals and one bronze, and a 15th-place finish on its virtual medal table. This would be a solid improvement on past Games, the most recent a 23rd place at PyeongChang with two silver medals and one bronze. Australia has won 15 medals across the last seven Games (five gold, five silver, five bronze) dating back to 1994. Before that the country had not won a single medal since 1936 when it first contested the Winter Olympics. Who makes up the Australian team? A contingent of 43 athletes, the nation’s third-largest in history and featuring the strongest female representation to date with 22 women and 21 men, who will compete in 10 of the 15 disciplines. Of those 43 there are 19 debutants. The oldest member of the team is 33-year-old Sami Kennedy-Sim and the youngest 16-year-old Valentino Guseli. Scotty James is the big-ticket name in the halfpipe against American rival and three-time Olympic champion Shaun White. The 27-year-old was Australia’s flagbearer at the 2018 Games, at which he won snowboarding bronze. Jarryd Hughes and Belle Brockhoff are 2021 mixed snowboard cross world champions and genuine contenders for gold in that event. What about the boycott? Australia is among the western countries whose officials will not head to Beijing as part of a diplomatic boycott amid global criticism over China’s human rights record. Australia, whose diplomatic relationship with China has deteriorated significantly, cited the wide-scale repression of Uyghurs and other predominantly Muslim ethnic minorities in its northwestern region of Xinjiang. The Morrison government is following the lead of the US, Britain, Canada and Denmark, while Japan will not send officials but did not explicitly define the move as a diplomatic boycott. The New Zealand and Netherlands governments have also steered clear of calling their absence a boycott, saying they will not send government delegations because of China’s Covid-19 travel restrictions. Those world leaders who will be in attendance include Russia president Vladimir Putin, Pakistan prime minister Imran Khan and Saudi Arabia’s crown prince Mohammed bin Salman, among other Middle Eastern and central Asian countries. Have you heard there’s fake snow? Generally in recent years there is at least a bit depending on weather conditions, but this will be the first time almost 100% of the snow used will be artificial. Before you ask yes, this is down to climate change, which has caused shorter winter seasons, less snowfall and melting ice. This was also a problem at the 2014 Games in Sochi, where snowboarders recall the halfpipe melting. There are some challenges with this. Artificial snow is icier than its natural counterpart, which could compromise safety, and there are also concerns about environmental damage. More than 100 snow generators and 300 snow-cannons will work to to cover the slopes but Chinese organisers say the machines will use 20% less water. They also insist the Games will be carbon neutral. That means venues powered by renewable energy, ice rinks using natural CO2 technology for cooling, instead of ozone-damaging hydrofluorocarbons. There was, however, a surprise dump of real snow earlier in the week. Will the Great Firewall be up? Authorities have pledged unrestricted internet access for foreign athletes at the Olympics, a rare break in the so-called Great Firewall of China that blocks access to popular messaging apps, social media platforms, search engines and websites deemed a threat to national security. But technology experts have warned that using Chinese WiFi services to connect to apps such as WhatsApp, Instagram, Twitter or YouTube will leave visitors susceptible to surveillance. Australia is among a number of NOCs who have advised athletes to use burner phones to safeguard their privacy and security against the Chinese government and to leave their personal electronic devices at home. The US, British, Canadian and Dutch Olympic associations have issued similar advice. Human rights and athlete advocacy groups have also warned competitors could put themselves in danger if they speak out in support of the Uyghur Muslims and used the case of tennis player Peng Shuai as an example of the potential consequences of speaking out. What’s the Covid-19 situation? This is where surveillance and the pandemic may overlap. China is utilising technology as a primary means of controlling the spread of coronavirus, through contact tracing apps, drones and robots. Robots will be used to transport equipment between venues, ensure social distancing and sanitise areas, while robot chefs will prepare and serve some of the food to athletes and delegates. All visitors to the Winter Olympics will be subject to artificial intelligence, predictive policing, Big Data databases and extensive surveillance of social media platforms, which Human Rights Watch says constitutes an “Orwellian surveillance state”. Also in place will be a “closed loop”, also known as a biosecurity bubble. All athletes, officials and media will be separated entirely from locals, staying in hotels inside the “loop” and required to be tested daily and sometimes twice daily. Volunteers and Beijing residents working at the Games face three weeks of quarantine before returning to their homes. Will there be crowds? Despite the regulations, organisers are hoping for stadium capacities of at least 30%. Tickets will be distributed to targeted groups of people, though it is still unclear who those people will be. Those who do attend will be required to undertake strict Covid-19 prevention measures.I was on a walk with my friend Ivan, talking about the time I had Covid, and how it was bad but not too bad, and on the bright side at least now I had some antibodies, before he interrupted me and said: “You didn’t have it.” “What? I didn’t have Covid? Yes I did!” “No you didn’t. You didn’t get a positive test.” “I couldn’t get a test.” “So you don’t know you had it – and therefore you can’t say you had it.” “But I was sick. I had all the symptoms.” “It was probably a cold.” “You weren’t there. What are you, a pathologist?” And so on. I’ve had this fight with a few different people. They are Covid deniers … as in, they are denying that I had Covid. Like a lot of people, I reckon I caught the virus in early January during the perfect storm of the Omicron wave, mass infections, an unprepared government and a stressed and broken testing regime. I had gone to a Melbourne wedding that was held indoors – and two days following the event, the bride’s step-dad and the groom’s father, as well as various cousins and friends, all got Covid. And so did I – or so I thought. Their symptoms were similar to mine: a scratchy throat, muscle aches, fatigue, a cough. But I tested negative on my one and only RAT, no other RATs were available and I didn’t have access to PCR testing. It left me wondering – if you had been to a super-spreader event, could you assume a positive result by proxy? It was the epidemiological equivalent of that philosophical conundrum: “If a tree falls in a forest and no one is around to hear it, does it make a sound?” If you were exposed to the virus and had the symptoms, but no one is around to test you, did you have Covid? I was not alone in believing I had Covid but lacking the proof to back up my claim. When the Omicron wave hit in late December and early January suddenly half the people I knew were sick – but half of those people, with all the classic Covid symptoms were testing negative on RATs or couldn’t get RATs or had PCR test results delayed and then voided or were testing negative on as many RATs as they could get their hands on, but positive on PCR tests. Or negative on four or five RATs until they stuck a swab right down their throat and then got a positive result. It was a confusing time – the predictable extension of what happens when the government pivots sharply to personal responsibility – making everyone into their own mini-health department of one, and tasked with having to take over the detection, management, treatment and reporting of the virus. Last week news.com.au political reporter Samantha Maiden tweeted, “Has anyone else in Melbourne or elsewhere experienced a strange phenomenon where they have lots of Covid symptoms – sore throat, spots on throat, extreme fatigue, nausea but test negative? Including via PCR?” In the more than 1,500 replies, the answer was overall a resounding “Yes”. For those of us who were sick but lacked a positive result it could have been ineffective tests or some other illness such as a cold – but I got to thinking that maybe some people, including myself, could have been suffering from a variation of Havana syndrome. Havana syndrome was named after the mysterious illnesses, experienced by CIA officers around the world and originally thought to be a result of the use of biological weapons, but later thought to be a form of mass hysteria and a psychosomatic illness, to eventually – as of this week – found to probably be a bit of both. The victims of Havana syndrome reported a variety of symptoms, including headaches, dizziness, hearing loss, fatigue, mental fog and difficulty concentrating after hearing an eerie sound. But after extensive testing, nothing came up. According to Professor Robert Baloh, writing for the Conversation in September, “Mass psychogenic illness typically begins in a stressful environment. Sometimes it starts when an individual with an unrelated illness believes something mysterious caused their symptoms. This person then spreads the idea to the people around them and even to other groups.” In my case, I had been writing about Covid for two years and it had so completely taken over my psychic, physical (restrictions and lockdowns) and online landscapes, that when a real life situation (a wedding in a closed room with 75 people) occurred where it might be likely to catch it, I was probably psychosomatically primed to think I would get Covid. In fact, at the wedding reception, several of the guests said they had feared they might catch the virus at the event and so had cleared their schedule for the next couple of weeks to allow them to recover. This week, a report by a panel of expert scientists named pulsed electromagnetic energy and ultrasound as plausible causes for the mystery Havana syndrome symptoms but said that psychosocial factors could have worsened symptoms. Such factors could also explain other incidents which “could be due to hypervigilance and normal human reactions to stress and ambiguity, particularly among a workforce attuned to its surroundings and trained to think about security”. That all sounds pretty familiar.How will history record these years when the pandemic is finally over? How will our children start the story, when they tell their grandchildren about the great pandemic of the 2020s? They’ll surely include tales of the months we could not leave our homes, of the empty toilet paper shelves in supermarkets, and the years when we reached for a mask when we went out, as instinctively as reaching for the keys. But death will lead the stories. That’s what we have been afraid of, either personally, or for vulnerable friends and family. That’s our collective trauma. More than 5.7 million deaths around the world so far. More than 5,900 in Australia. Somehow though, right in the thick of it, it’s not what we’re talking about. It may be because we’re so busy coping day to day, taking one step at a time and not planning or thinking about what Covid-19 variant lies around the corner. But it’s also because the discussion of death is conducted with statistics; numbers and graphs without human names and faces attached to them. If we are not directly affected, or frontline workers, it happens out of sight. When governments were trying to persuade us to stay at home they brought weary health workers to press conferences and occasionally allowed reporters into hospitals. Now we’ve been moved on to the “personal responsibility” phase, we get the bare figures, written to a formula. “Unfortunately X people in New South Wales lost their lives, including X in their 90s and X in their 80s.” Even when Omicron tore through the nation and the death toll climbed alarmingly higher, we didn’t really confront it. We were all supposed to be getting used to “living with Covid”, just as more Australians were dying. I note this not to dismiss the importance of statistics, nor to stoke fear, and certainly not to argue for a return to lockdowns. But it is important that human stories are not diminished or obscured by the numbers. Stories inspire compassion. They force decision makers to take responsibility. Which brings me back to the deft deployment of numbers. At its mildest it happens with the daily report on how many of the dead had “underlying conditions”, possibly as a signal to healthy people to worry a bit less. The Omicron variant is milder. But the term “underlying conditions” covers ailments suffered by millions, and as the Burnet Institute’s director Prof Brendan Crabb pointed out, what distinction are we really trying to draw? Just because someone has “underlying conditions” doesn’t mean their death is less tragic. More overt are the politicians hiding behind statistics when faced with the rising death toll, particularly the crisis in aged care. The minister for aged care services, Richard Colbeck, when challenged about the obscene absence of those services at a make-up parliamentary committee after he skipped the last one to attend the cricket, insisted the sector was performing “extremely well”. And yes, he backed that extraordinary assertion with statistics. As political reporter Paul Karp wrote, Colbeck noted in 2020 there were 28,000 Covid cases in Australia, of which 2,051 were in aged care (7.2%), but now of the 1.8m cases, just 10,500 were in aged care (0.58%). He didn’t add that those “just” 10,500 cases have resulted in 650 deaths since last July. The health minister, Greg Hunt, sought refuge in a different set of numbers when asked about aged care mortality. “I think an important piece of information as well, the latest advice that I have is that approximately 60% of those that have agonisingly passed have been in palliative care,” he said. Medical editor Melissa Davey reported this week that aged care and health workers considered it pretty disrespectful to appear to rationalise that the elderly patients were going to die anyway. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, goes even further, trying to claim credit for people who haven’t died. “We have saved 40,000 lives based on looking at the average among the OECD,” he says whenever he can possibly fit it into an interview, a comparison skewed by Australia’s relatively lower death rate in the first years of the pandemic. Early in the pandemic Guardian Australia began a series called Lives Lost to Covid, to record the stories of those who had died, when their families and friends were ready to tell them. We wanted to know about their loves and losses and idiosyncrasies and adventures. This week reporter Tory Shepherd has returned to the series, recounting the life of Sue Rees as remembered by her daughter Bec. Whatever history makes of these Covid years, people like Sue must be part of the story.The Morrison government is being urged by one of its own backbenchers to “face facts” and accept the use of the term apartheid in relation to Israel. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, said that “no country is perfect” in response to a new Amnesty International report that concluded Israel had “perpetrated the international wrong of apartheid, as a human rights violation and a violation of public international law”. But Ken O’Dowd, a Queensland Liberal National party MP, said he would encourage the Australian government to take the report “on board” and act on some of its findings. “The report has come as no surprise to me,” O’Dowd said. “It confirms what I’ve seen on my two trips to Palestine … I’ve seen it with my own eyes and you can’t deny what you see with your own eyes.” Asked whether the Australian government should accept the use of the term apartheid, or whether that was too politically difficult, O’Dowd said: “I don’t think it’s too difficult. Let’s face facts – the fact is there is a form of apartheid existing and it should be corrected. It’s not fair at the moment.” O’Dowd, who first used the term apartheid in a speech to parliament in November and is a member of Parliamentary Friends of Palestine, said in an interview on Thursday that human rights were being neglected and new settlements were “eating into Palestinian lands”. O’Dowd’s position on the term apartheid puts him at odds with the federal government’s official stance. It is not thought to be a widely shared view within Coalition ranks, although the Nationals MP for the NSW seat of Parkes, Mark Coulton, told parliament in November he thought the situation was “a level of apartheid, with a suppressed people”. A spokesperson for the foreign affairs minister, Marise Payne, said on Wednesday in response to the Amnesty report: “We do not agree with the report’s characterisations of Israel, and we remain a firm supporter of the State of Israel.” Labor, too, has stopped short of applying the apartheid label, arguing it was “not a term that’s been found to apply by any international court” and “not helpful in progressing the meaningful dialogue and negotiation necessary”. But the opposition’s foreign affairs spokesperson, Penny Wong, said the findings of the Amnesty report were concerning, and the government should “review it closely, assess the situation on the ground and make representations about Australia’s view”. On Thursday Liberal senator Eric Abetz and Labor senator Kimberley Kitching issued a joint statement to reject the report’s “attempts to equate Israel’s efforts to the abhorrent historical practice of apartheid in South Africa”. Abetz, who chairs the Australian Parliamentary Friends of Israel, and Kitching, the deputy chair, said: “Amnesty does such good work, which we support. But pretending Tel Aviv in 2022 is like Cape Town in 1976 is demonstrably wrong and needs to be called out, without rancour, just sadness.” “The misappropriation of hateful words does nothing to aid the peace process for a mutually negotiated and enduring two-state solution where Israel and a future Palestinian state can coexist in peace and security,” they said. The comments came after Amnesty called on the international community to “urgently and drastically change its approach” and “recognise the full extent of the crimes that Israel perpetrates against the Palestinian people”. “Indeed, for over seven decades, the international community has stood by as Israel has been given free rein to dispossess, segregate, control, oppress and dominate Palestinians,” Amnesty said in its 280-page report. The London-based human rights organisation said it had concluded “almost all of Israel’s civilian administration and military authorities, as well as governmental and quasi-governmental institutions, are involved in the enforcement of the system of apartheid against Palestinians”. Amnesty said it had identified acts that “amount to the crime against humanity of apartheid” under the Apartheid Convention and the Rome Statute of the international criminal court. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Israel’s government has strongly dismissed the report, saying the findings were “divorced from reality” and Amnesty “quotes lies spread by terrorist organisations”. Israel’s foreign minister, Yair Lapid, said if Israel were not a Jewish state, “nobody in Amnesty would dare argue against it”. Morrison said on Wednesday all countries were subjected to “criticisms” but his government would “remain a staunch friend of Israel”. The Australian government’s position is to support “a two-state solution, with Israel and a future Palestinian state establishing internationally recognised borders”. Australia urged “all parties to refrain from actions and statements that undermine the prospects for peace”, said a spokesperson for Payne.New buy now, pay later-style schemes targeting renters are “preying on the vulnerable”, say consumer advocates who have renewed calls for the federal government to overhaul credit laws to better regulate the sector. A recent entrant into the market, Tenanting, follows the model of buy now, pay later (BNPL) products such as Afterpay, which offer microloans for retail purchases that users can then pay back in four instalments. Tenanting advertises that it will pay rent on an individual’s behalf “instantly” with the user repaying it over four instalments with the addition of a 5% fee. Financial Counselling Australia (FCA) has taken aim at the company, calling it “yet another alarming example of a fintech company taking advantage of loopholes in the credit laws”. Spokesperson James Hunt said financial counsellors were increasingly seeing people harmed by BNPL-style products and they were warning people against using them for day-to-day living expenses such as groceries or rent. “Using products like these might seem easy and harmless but the charges quickly add up and the next thing you know you’re in even more financial trouble,” Hunt said. “We’re very worried that will only exacerbate financial hardship.” Greater Sydney’s median weekly rent for a two-bedroom apartment is $515, according to the Tenants’ Union of New South Wales. The addition of a 5% fee would leave the average renter paying $25.75 more a week, a significant amount for someone on a low income. Fiona Guthrie, the chief executive of Financial Counselling Australia, wrote on Thursday to the federal treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, and the federal minister for financial services, Jane Hume, urging them to commission an independent review of the legislation that governs financial products, with the view to developing more effective regulation. “Because these companies operate outside of the national credit code, there are no legal requirements to assess a person’s ability to repay, nor are they required to have proper hardship procedures in place if people find themselves struggling,” the letter states. An earlier letter sent by the organisation in December urging better regulation received no formal response. A spokesperson for Hume said on Thursday that while the minister had not received a formal request for a meeting she would welcome an approach to discuss “this important sector and the issues raised”. Hume and the Treasury had “worked constructively with FCA as valued stakeholders and will continue to do so into the future”. “The Morrison government values the vital community work undertaken by financial counsellors, a sector that has been vital in Australia’s response to the Covid-19 pandemic,” the spokesperson said. “Over the past two years, the government has allocated more than $7m to FCA, reaffirming their important role in supporting the financial well-being of Australians.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning But Hunt said “there’s a bigger picture here”. “We know a lot of people are feeling stuck financially, forced to take on debt,” he said. “People need more adequate and empowering income support, not more fintech companies preying on their financial vulnerability.” Tenanting’s fee schedule is more aggressive than some other companies offering similar financial products targeted at renters. RentPay, an offshoot of rental listings site Rent.com.au, bills itself as a long-term flexible payment planning service for renters. But it also offers a product called Safetynet, which allows the renter to draw a short-term line of credit to the total of one week’s rent, which they can then repay over four instalments. Each missed repayment accrues a $15 fee. RentPay also offers rental bond loans that don’t accrue interest if they are paid back within 21 days. The company told Guardian Australia, however, that 80% of its customers who received one of these loans did not repay within that timeframe. “We see ourselves as the champion of renters, and we believe that renting should be better,” the Rent.com.au CEO, Greg Bader, said. “A lot of the things we build are around making renting easier. I don’t think we take advantage of any loopholes or push people into debt spirals. I think the flexibility we offer in the product actually helps people manage their money better.” Bader said Safetynet was developed in response to customer demand as an emergency mechanism. “It’s not there to be used for an everyday thing.” In a statement, a spokesperson for Tenanting said: “We provide tenants with a flexible payment option to pay rent as a better alternative to predatory payday lenders. We are decentralising the rental system and putting control back in the hands of the Australian public.” Leo Patterson Ross from the Tenants’ Union told Guardian Australia the rental payments system could do with more flexibility for tenants, especially those with variable incomes, but BNPL-style schemes were “not the way to do that”. “The people who are most likely to have financial pressures that push them to a solution like this are the kind who are least able to ride those extra payments, so it’s least in their interests,” Patterson Ross said. In many states in Australia, unless a tenant is frequently late with rent, those who fall into arrears can retain their tenancy if they pay the rent in full before an eviction date, often even in cases where a tribunal has made an eviction order. State governments also offer hardship provisions and, in some cases, bond loans for renters who are struggling to come up with large lump sums at short notice. “The key here is that there’s no interest paid on that amount,” said Patterson Ross. “Australia can generally do better in bringing in hardship protections for people who are in some kind of financial strife – but they don’t need to borrow the money from [for-profit] lenders like this. And if they do, it’s a sign that the amount of support we have in place for them isn’t sufficient.” Frydenberg has been contacted for comment.When Gwen Kong lost her job in sales and account management in February 2020, she became one of the many women thrust into economic insecurity by the pandemic. During the following 12 months and amid several lockdowns, she left a long-term relationship, moved in with a family member, and picked up some contract work but missed out on many opportunities, some because she was “too qualified”. “It got to the stage where I took my CV to the supermarket and they just turned around and said, ‘What are we going to do with you?’” Kong said. By the time Victoria was onto its fifth lockdown, her confidence had taken a hit. “I was pretty much at the end of my tether when I got a call from my bank and they told me about Fitted for Work. So I bit the bullet and I reached out to them for help,” she said. “It was big for me because I never allow anyone to see me as the victim. You can call me proud; I allow no one to see me in that vulnerable state.” Donna de Zwart, the managing director of Fitted for Work, a not-for-profit organisation dedicated to helping women experiencing disadvantage find employment, said Kong’s story was one of many. “There is a real hidden epidemic within the pandemic of women that we just don’t know about. Women who’ve given up work, purely because they’ve had to take the brunt of those caring responsibilities, or lost work,” she said. The organisation supported Kong in several ways – it provided her with feedback on her CV, tips to improve her LinkedIn profile, clothes and makeup for job interviews and monthly check-ins on the phone. She also participated in online workshops alongside women in similar circumstances. “You know sometimes when you’re so down you can’t pull yourself up, then you speak to other people and you know it’s not that bad? That’s what it was. It was so nice to have a group of women to talk to, especially during lockdown,” Kong said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The 49-year-old has since found work – albeit casual – with a recruitment agency, secured a rental in Melbourne’s CBD and is slowly building her confidence back. “I’m determined to work my way back up,” Kong said. Fitted for Work is one of six organisations to receive a share of $1.1m in new funding from the Victorian government to help women overcome barriers to economic security. The funding will support more than 800 women at greater risk of economic insecurity, including single mothers, Aboriginal women, women over the age of 45, women with a disability and women from culturally and linguistically diverse communities, including migrants and refugees. The state’s minister for women, Gabrielle Williams, said the pandemic had disproportionately impacted women, given they have been more likely to lose work, suffer severe financial impacts and shoulder an even greater share of unpaid caring responsibilities. “As our state recovers from the pandemic, all Victorians need the opportunity to rebuild so that no one gets left behind. That’s exactly what this funding will do,” she said. De Zwart said the funding would allow the organisation to increase the number of services on offer to keep up with demand. While the organisation supports women of all ages and backgrounds, de Zwart has noticed an increase in older women struggling to find employment post-pandemic. “We’ve got a whole generation of women who are feeling incredibly anxious about their futures,” she said. “It’s the one time in a woman’s life where she’s really able to devote herself to her career because she’s got the space to be able to do that. But we do live in an incredibly ageist society.” Kong admits it’s been challenging trying to secure full-time employment. “Particularly as an Asian woman, people have this perspective that you don’t speak English well,” she said. “But I’ve decided that my life from now on, it’s all about positivity. If I’ve had a shit day, I will allow myself 20 minutes, half an hour to feel shit, allow myself to be down, allow myself to cry and after that I’m going to pick myself up.”“They were all saying she was coming home,” Bec Rees says. Her mother, Sue, had gone into hospital in Melbourne with a burst eardrum. She also had cancer. Then she got Covid. She didn’t come home. Sue Rees was 74, and when she died on 8 January she became one of more than 1,500 deaths reported in Australia in this latest surge of the global pandemic. As Australia’s death toll grows, we know very little about who has died. Daily press conferences reveal the rising number, often accompanied by the disclaimer that those who died had “underlying conditions”. The director and chief executive of the Burnet Institute, Prof Brendan Crabb, says that sort of language risks dividing people into the “ones we care about and the ones we don’t”. “A very large proportion of us do have an underlying condition – heart conditions, diabetes … even if that wasn’t the case, does it matter?” Sue would have hated being a statistic, her daughter says. “She always hated taking off her clothes, her pearls, her brightly coloured tops … if you dress the same as everyone else, they stop talking to you as an individual with a personality and start treating you like a two-dimensional cardboard cutout. “She got caught up in a system where she was just treated like a number and no one could see who she was. When you’re in those hospital gowns you just become one of thousands. Faceless, soulless, you’re just a nobody.” Sue Rees was not a nobody. She was the sort of person who saw Les Misérables six times – and convinced Bec to gatecrash the afterparty with her. She was the kindest soul around, her daughter says, but incredibly competitive. When it came to any sort of game she always played to win. Even Connect Four. She was a flowergirl at her daughter’s wedding. Once, Bec broke Sue out of hospital to see Hugh Jackman live in concert. She sang and danced for hours, Bec says, “with a Picc in her arm” to deliver her chemotherapy drugs. Sue got back, washed off the blood and hummed a Jackman song. Sue had lymphoma, a cancer that starts in the lymphatic system. She was undergoing chemotherapy in the oncology ward at Epworth Richmond. In early December, there was talk of her being discharged. A week later, she caught Covid from a staff member and was transferred to the Alfred hospital. Rees held her mother’s hand as she died, after being “100%” convinced she would come home. “All the feedback from the doctors, her nurses, her vital signs, they all were saying she’s coming home despite all the comorbidities,” Bec says. “It feels heartless and faceless for all of the victims when [other victims] have stories given to them, photos shown of them, they were memorialised, they were remembered. These Covid victims had a face and a story, and right now they’re just a statistic.” Sue’s memorial was at One Tree Hill in Tremont, in the Dandenong Ranges, which bears the same name as the spot on Hamilton Island where Bec got married. Sue declared her time there “the time of her life”. “She has been taken from you sooner than she would have otherwise been, had it not been for Covid-19,” celebrant Jacqui Chaplin told the mourners, as she invited them to both grieve and celebrate Sue’s life. They heard about a childhood accident, Sue’s love of tennis, her marriage (after it ended she declared she had “downsized” both her home and husband), work, children and grandchildren. She was a “cool mum” and a “great cook” who became a personal carer. Then she needed care, after she was diagnosed with non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma. Over 10 years she had 18 specialists and more than 50 surgeries, but she survived. Until Covid. Bec has taken off on a road trip up the east coast. She’s thinking about Cairns next, or Palm Cove, or somewhere else. And, of course, she’s thinking about her mum. Asked what first comes into her mind, she says: “She was the kind of person that would go to any length to help others, protect others, support others, and make sure that they were OK before worrying about herself. “She was so much more than a statistic.”The warring New South Wales Liberal factions have taken time out from actively trying to solve their preselection woes to try to lower the temperature in the fractured party following the leaking of text messages critical of the prime minister. With Scott Morrison’s threat of a federal intervention now public, the factions are expected to regroup over the weekend ahead of a last-ditch attempt to finalise who will be endorsed in eight winnable federal lower house seats and the third Senate spot. “We need some alternative thinking,” one factional organiser told Guardian Australia. The NSW president, Philip Ruddock, wants the factions to come up with a negotiated solution. “A champion team always beats a team of champions,” he said while refusing to speculate how the impasse could be resolved. Liberal party rules require 90% support from the 27-strong state executive. This requires all three factions to agree – and for the factions to in turn get their own members to toe the line. The right has championed plebiscites which give branch members a greater say in preselections – and some feel very strongly democracy must be honoured. A limited midweek resolution to automatically endorse the current ministers Sussan Ley in Farrer and Alex Hawke in Mitchell, and the sitting MP Trent Zimmerman in North Sydney, failed. It was defeated 16-7 by a combination of the left and right factions who wanted to preserve their bargaining position on the remaining seats. Zimmerman, appearing on ABC TV on Thursday afternoon, stated the obvious – that the clock was ticking ahead of the federal election expected in May. “I really don’t want to talk about the internals of the NSW division to any great extent,” he said. “But what I’d say is it is obviously important that we do have candidates in the field as quickly as possible. I’m sure a lot of work has been done to achieve that outcome.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Zimmerman would not speculate on who leaked damaging texts allegedly sent between the former NSW premier Gladys Berejiklian and an unnamed federal cabinet minister. In the testy exchange, Morrison was referred to as “a horrible, horrible person” and a “complete psycho”. “I think it does become a bit of a political parlour game,” the North Sydney MP said. “People will speculate but I suspect [Network Ten journalist] Peter van Onselen will keep his source to himself and we’ll never know the truth of where this has emerged from or the context in which it happened.” Moderate sources suggested the faction was ready to support a compromise deal that would see Ley, the environment minister, Hawke, the immigration minister, and Zimmermann protected from any challenge with preselection ballots in all other seats except Hughes. But other moderate sources said it was a work in progress with Hughes and Dobell still under discussion. Of particular concern to some members of the executive is a plan to parachute Young Liberal Alex Dore, from Manly, into the southern Sydney seat of Hughes, held by the maverick rightwinger Craig Kelly who quit the party to become an independent. The lack of local input into choosing candidates – Kelly was also parachuted in – has deeply angered southern Sydney-based Liberals from all factions. The seat is under threat from the independent movement campaigning partly on a platform that Hughes needs local representation in line with the electorate’s values. One senior right figure said Dore as the pick for Hughes was a “non-negotiable” within any deal. Dore was originally from the moderates but is the nephew of Chris Dore, the editor-in -chief of the Australian newspaper. He is close to the former rightwing broadcaster Alan Jones, who loomed large over NSW politics for 30 years. The other seat that remains controversial is Dobell, with Morrison supporting Jemima Gleeson, a Pentecostal preacher, for the seat and the right backing Dr Michael Feneley, a cardiologist who has previously run in Kingsford Smith. There have been persistent rumours but no official confirmation that Gleeson is no longer running. If Hawke’s centre-right faction supported the compromise deal, the state executive could potentially achieve the 90% majority needed to override plebiscites in certain seats by using special powers. Under these provisions, the NSW state executive can override preselection processes if it deems it “imperative to campaign effectively for an imminent election”. If factional powerbrokers cannot agree to the deal, then two options remain: the “nuclear option” of federal intervention, which is unpopular and would be open to legal challenge, or allowing preselections to happen in all seats, which would see Ley sacrificed.Western Australia’s food supply crisis is “the worst in living memory” with the state’s umbilical cord to the eastern states severed, not by Covid or border closure, but by extreme weather. Flooding in South Australia has washed out more than 300km of the only rail line that brings food and supplies into WA from the east coast. With border closures already isolating WA from the nation and the world, a one-in-200-year weather event is squeezing inbound supplies, leaving many supermarket shelves bare. Staples such as pasta, sugar, toilet paper, medicines, sanitary items, some meats and frozen foods are running low but fruit, vegetables and milk that are locally produced are less affected. Major supermarket chains, including Coles and Woolworths, were forced on Thursday to introduce buying limits on some products and the Independent Food Distributors Australia chief executive, Richard Forbes, said the crisis could continue for up to six weeks. “This is the worst disruption to the food supply chain into Western Australia in living memory because of the reliance the food industry has on the Trans-Australian Railway,” Forbes said. The 100-year-old rail line runs for nearly 2,000km from Port Augusta in South Australia to Kalgoorlie in WA and is the world’s longest completely straight track. “It’s a logistical nightmare to try to solve because we now have to think how we are going to get 90% of our product that comes from rail transported in, in another form – and that’s with trucks. “In the trucking industry, we are short of truck drivers because of Covid and it’s costing small business a fortune because of price gouging.” The Australian Trucking Association was contacted for comment. The WA transport minister, Rita Saffioti, said a “rail bridge” had been established to allow normally prohibited 53.5 metre-long road trains with three semi-trailers attached to travel to Kalgoorlie. They are likely to arrive on Friday and depart for Perth two days later, with double road trains now allowed into the metropolitan area. “We are getting more trucks and bigger trucks and we are looking at the shipping option,” Saffioti said. “I have spoken to Coles and Woolworths today and they have some committed shipping options, but they will take a while and it’s really about making sure that the backlog of supply that is over there [on the east coast] can be brought over here. “It highlights that we need to ensure that we have a more resilient east-west supply chain connection.” Saffioti said the rail line should be re-opened by 17 February and that air charter was also an option. She reassured people that there was plenty of fresh produce in WA. A federal emergency meeting was discussing the use of defence ships and aircraft to transport products into the state, Saffioti said. But Forbes said using boats and ports was a slow option. He is calling for compensation for WA food distributors who supply 6,500 venues, including schools, military bases, hospitality, care homes and hospitals. He said thousands of tonnes of food was usually sent across the railway line every day and perishable items – such as dairy, cream, bacon and pork – would need to be dumped. “The loss of revenue for food distributors would easily be in the tens of millions of dollars and these are family-owned warehouses,” Forbes said. Across Australia, poultry and meat products are already in short supply as Covid affects the workforce at meat processing plants and suppliers. The flooding has also affected roads running up and down the country and the NT Road Transport Association executive officer, Louise Bilato, said that trucks were being forced to detour 3,000km through Queensland from Adelaide, affecting supplies into the territory. “It’s the perfect storm, unfortunately, because we were already compromised by the distribution of networks in NSW and Victoria impacted by Covid,” she said. Forbes said the issue wasn’t going to be solved as soon as the rail line was fixed because it would take time to get the network up and running again. A wave of Omicron cases is continuing to grow across WA that has forced hundreds of teachers and students into isolation in the first week of school. Authorities and supermarkets are urging customers to be respectful and only buy what they need. A Coles spokesperson said from Thursday, temporary limits were in place across all WA supermarkets, online and Coles Express stores to help manage demand for key items. Items limited to one unit a customer include rapid antigen test kits and toilet paper. Regular pain medication is limited to two packets a customer as are chicken breasts and chicken thighs from the meat department, and sausages, tissues, flour, sugar, rice and pasta, among other items. At Woolworths, a two-pack limit has been issued for flour, sugar, rice, pasta, eggs, and paper towels, among other items. A stricter one item-only limit applies to rapid antigen test kits and toilet paper.Palm Springs, in the words of Andy Samberg’s character, Nyles, is “one of those infinite time loop situations you might’ve heard about”. Which serves as the baseline for a hugely enjoyable, feel-good romantic comedy that incorporates a compelling science fiction element and a nice bit of existential dread to stop things getting too sentimental. Nyles and Sarah (Cristin Milioti) meet at a wedding in Palm Springs. After an eventful reception, Sarah follows Nyles into a cave in the desert where she steps into a glowing red light, only to awake once again, on the morning of the ceremony. It becomes clear that an earthquake opened up a fissure in space/time, and in entering the cave the pair became caught in time loop, doomed to repeat the day of the wedding forever. It transpires that Nyles has been trapped in this infinite loop for longer than he can remember, resigned to the fact he will never experience linear time again. It also comes to light that Sarah is not the first person to have accidentally joined Nyles in this temporal purgatory. Another wedding guest, Roy (JK Simmons), also entered the cave rift and is pretty furious about it. He is determined to make Nyles pay, infinitely, for ruining his life. As Nyles and Sarah explore the all the potential paths and limitations of circular time, they begin to have fun and enjoy each other’s company, all while trying to find a way back to their own reality. Released in 2020 as the pandemic was in full swing, Palm Springs’ modest, temporal adventure could not have landed at a more appropriate time. Repeating the same day again and again suddenly became relatable. But it’s Palm Springs’ good heart that really makes it resonate. Despite the wry, sarcastic vein of humour that runs through it and its deviations into existential despair, Palm Springs’ goal is to lift your spirits. There is a perverted optimism to its idea that life is pointless, but less pointless in the company of someone else. It would be remiss not to mention Harold Ramis’ iconic time loop comedy, Groundhog Day, which transcended its status as a movie to establish an entire subgenre unto itself. But although Palm Springs is certainly a part of that subgenre and shares common DNA with the Bill Murray classic, Groundhog Day does not cast a long shadow over it. Palm Springs has more than enough questions and original ideas bouncing around to make it equally satisfying. Nyles and Sarah’s initial approach to being caught in the time loop is what might best be described as joyfully nihilistic. Nyles is long resigned to the fact escape is impossible and, by the time Sarah joins him, “nothing matters” is virtually his mantra. The only wisdom he can share is that she needs to “learn how to suffer existence”. To that end, Nyles spends his time day drinking and living “with as little effort as possible”. But Sarah, too, was unhappy with her life and shares Nyles’ outlook, believing everyone is alone and that people marry simply out of fear of loneliness. Now, that might all sound a bit bleak and, I guess, ideologically that might be accurate. But Palm Springs has a light touch and, as Nyles is quick to inform us, “being a source of terror is not fun” so things never get dark enough to drain the story’s energy or pour cold water on Samberg and Milioti’s spark. It helps that both Palm Springs’ leads are very appealing and share a great chemistry. Sure they’re both cynical, but they’re utterly charming with it. They ponder philosophical reasons for their predicament, as well as the scientific, but at the end of the day it’s simply great fun to watch them explore their corner of space/time together and slowly grow closer. Simmons is also on top form as the angry and vengeful Roy – equal parts Charles Bronson and friendly neighbour. It feels conceptually appropriate to have rewatched Palm Springs quite a few times and it displays no law of diminishing returns. It is as absolutely joyful the second time, the third time and so on, as it is the first. Which means Palm Springs has quickly become a member of that most treasured of genres – the comfort movie. Palm Springs is one of those rare films that never gets old, whose repetition only makes it more endearing, so it can be relied upon whenever we need a pick-me-up.In one scene in Cold Enough for Snow, the unnamed narrator explains to her mother why she likes Greek myths. They work like a camera obscura, she says, but for human nature: “By looking indirectly at the thing they wanted to focus on, they were sometimes able to see it even more clearly than with their own eyes.” What, exactly, our narrator might be focusing on animates this novella like a ghost. Cold Enough for Snow is the second book from Melbourne writer Jessica Au. It won her the first Novel prize in 2020 and comes a decade after her acclaimed debut, Cargo. The plot is simple; “deceptively” so, as some reviews have noted: mother and adult daughter visit Japan, see the sights, take in art and food, go home. What we hear of their conversation is quotidian and understated, at frustrating odds with the narrator’s pressing hunger for connection. Memories swirl of interactions with others: her partner Laurie, with whom she’s considering a child; the lecturer who introduced her to “the classics”; an unsettling customer at the Chinese restaurant where she once worked. What links these apparently undirected reminiscences is a preoccupation with care. The narrator’s mother and uncle, born in Hong Kong, are “careful” in their gestures, take “care with [their] clothes and appearance”. She recalls her mother “perfectly repairing and adjusting” her childhood clothes; the objects “carefully chosen” in her lecturer’s home; Laurie “carefully measuring and planing back the wood” for his father’s studio. “Attention, taken to its highest degree,” as Simone Weil wrote, “is the same thing as prayer. It presupposes faith and love.” Au’s calm, unrelenting focus would be hard to take over a longer book – but this novella is graceful and precise. Like the narrator fine-tuning the aperture on her Nikon camera, Au seems to say, we have to choose our scale, what we pay attention to. The narrator, hunting for deeper significance, is shadowed by the possibility this choice might just be random. She envies Laurie’s ability to “see things that others might miss”, and alerts herself to the “small details” in Japan’s subdued museums, bathhouses, bookshops. Glazed ceramics, fabrics, leaves, paintings: meaning floats to the surface, then scatters, as on rippling water. She takes her mother to an impressionist exhibition in Tokyo, full of “paths and gardens and ever-changing light, [showing] the world not as it was but some version of the world as it could be, suggestions and dreams.” The two women peacefully make their way through shaded parks and forests, muted subways and shops. An older Japan – of villages, lanterns, temples – “halfway between a cliche and the truth”, shimmers through the “gentle rain”. In contrast, the narrator’s home in Australia seems soulless and overly bright, with its vast freeways, sprawling suburbs and screeching birds. The objects that stand out to her on the trip – a piece of jewellery, a photo, a bowl – betray her yearning for a more intimate scale. What the narrator wants is ways to “know someone and to have them know me”. The trip seems obsessively planned around experiences that might spark some shared vocabulary with her mother, down to the time of evening that “might be nice” for a certain restaurant. A melancholy detachment seeps into all this perfect composure – an anxious sense of being outside the moment, not dissimilar to that seen in Katherine Brabon’s The Shut Ins, or Katie Kitamura’s Intimacies. Another, lost vocabulary hovers: her mother’s first language is Cantonese, hers is English – “we only ever spoke together in one”. Cold Enough for Snow is filled with meticulous observation: temperature (“the subtropical feel, the smell of the steam and the tea and the rain”); colour (“a blue plate, the colour of agate, on which white flowers, probably lotuses, were painted, and … a mud-brown bowl, whose inside was the colour of eggshells”); light (as a rule, “milky”). The narrator reflects on the way she too is observed – by her lover as she falls asleep, in the way “one is able to look upon a person one knows well”. One way to know anything, perhaps the only way, is looking. Finally, we bump up against what is not knowable. Au has mentioned her taste for “subverting narrative expectation … open endings, scenes in which nothing happens yet everything happens”. Cold Enough for Snow is exactly this, a book of inference and small mysteries. The stories, memories and images Au puts on the table escape easy conclusions – like the lines of a screen painting the narrator admires: “Some were strong and definite, while others bled and faded, giving the impression of vapour. And yet, when you looked, you saw something: mountains, dissolution, form and colour running forever downwards.” Aesthetic, opaque, endlessly uncoiling. Cold Enough for Snow by Jessica Au is out now in Australia ($24.95, Giramondo), in US on 15 February (New Directions) and in the UK on 22 February (Fitzcarraldo).An Italian former priest dubbed “Don Euro” by his parishioners because he kept pestering them for money has been jailed for extorting a former bishop. Luca Morini served as a priest in the Tuscan village of Pontasserchio before being defrocked by the Vatican amid a series of scandals, culminating with a court in Massa Carrara sentencing him on Wednesday to seven and a half years in prison for extortion. He was also convicted of assuming a false identity after masquerading as a judge when hiring male sex workers but acquitted on charges of extorting a nun, drug dealing and money laundering. Morini was reportedly considered “a good-natured priest” when he first arrived in Pontasserchio, a village of about 2,600 inhabitants close to Pisa. But he soon earned the nickname Don Euro after persuading his mostly elderly parishioners to donate generously to the church’s collection plate, with the money allegedly being splurged on parties, diamonds, luxury holidays with sex workers and visits to swingers’ clubs. Legal investigations into his shenanigans only began in 2015 after one of the sex workers blew the whistle on him and his lavish spending, revealing that Morini had posed as a judge, and after he was exposed by the TV show Le Iene. Four men, including the original whistleblower, brought a case against Morini for false identity and were awarded €14,000 (£12,000) in compensation by the court. Morini’s parishioners claimed to Le Iene that he was always pestering them for money, even during confessions, although they never officially reported him. Morini’s conviction for extortion related to Giovanni Santucci, the former bishop of Massa Carrara. Santucci had suspended Morini from priest duties and was allegedly blackmailed into loaning him thousands of euros and buying him a €200,000 house. Santucci resigned from his post last year. Prosecutors had asked for a prison term of eight and a half years, but Morini’s defence team argued that he was suffering from mental illness and his sentence was reduced. Morini’s conviction comes two months after a court in the Tuscan city of Prato handed a jail term of three years and four months to a parish priest who was found guilty of stealing money from his church’s offertory and using it to buy drugs for sex parties.Trevor Noah Trevor Noah unpacked the Cuomo scandal fallout at CNN, also known as “the channel you watch at the gym while you listen to a podcast”, the Daily Show host said on Wednesday evening. Earlier in the day, the network’s president, Jeff Zucker, announced his surprise resignation after he disclosed a consensual relationship with a colleague. “As part of the investigation into Chris Cuomo’s tenure at CNN, I was asked about a consensual relationship with my closest colleague, someone I have worked with for more than 20 years,” Zucker said in a statement. “I acknowledged the relationship evolved in recent years. I was required to disclose it when it began but I didn’t. I was wrong.” “Man, this must’ve been a really weird day for CNN,” Noah said. “On the one hand, it’s bad that your boss is resigning under a cloud of scandal. On the other hand, you got the scoop! “You may not know this, but he’s the one who made CNN what it is today,” Noah added on Zucker, who joined CNN in 2013. “He’s the one who pushed it toward entertainment more, and less news. He’s the one who said, ‘Enough of those international correspondents, let’s just get people fighting on camera!’ Like you remember when CNN would just make us watch Trump’s empty podium for an hour? That was his choice.” Zucker often kept Donald Trump on air, even before his election in 2016, “because he liked Trump”, Noah explained. “Because he knew Trump was good for ratings, because Jeff Zucker is the one who gave Trump the job for The Apprentice, and The Apprentice is the only reason that Trump went on to become the president – agh!!!” But the craziest part of the story, Noah concluded, was how far the blast radius from former New York governor Andrew Cuomo’s scandals reached. “So Andrew Cuomo was such a creep that he took down himself, his brother Chris and the president of CNN,” Noah said. “He’s like Ronan Farrow but by accident.” Seth Meyers On Late Night, Seth Meyers responded to a statement from the National Archives that Trump tore up many of his official White House documents. “It doesn’t surprise me that Trump treated official presidential records the way the rest of us treat credit card offers from Discover or the way I treat autograph requests from my wife’s niece,” he said. “Also, let’s all spare a thought for the federal employee who had to tape all of Donald Trump’s presidential records back together,” he added. “Just getting Ziploc after Ziploc of confetti soaked in hand sweat, trying to figure out which words to put together to form sentences. Piecing together Trump’s notes is like fishing a bunch of magnetic poetry out of a garbage disposal.” Meyers also lamented more news of Trump’s attempts to overturn the 2020 election, such as a report from the House committee investigating January 6 that he directed Rudy Giuliani to ask the Department of Homeland Security about seizing voting machines in key states. “Man, Trump tried everything: the justice department, homeland security, swing state lawmakers, even Rudy Giuliani,” Meyers said. “Of all people, I can’t believe and yet I can believe that he had Rudy call the Department of Homeland Security. Although, who knows with Rudy – it could’ve been a butt dial.” Stephen Colbert On The Late Show, Stephen Colbert looked into the lawsuit against the NFL by former Miami Dolphins coach Brian Flores for racial discrimination. “Now, sure, almost 70% of NFL players are Black, and there’s only one Black head coach in the entire league, but the NFL can’t be racist! They spray-painted a tiny ‘end racism’ next to the Kansas City Chiefs logo!” Colbert joked. Flores was fired by Miami on 10 January, despite leading the team to its first back-to-back winning seasons since 2003. “Despite his overall record, winning seven of his last eight games this season, Flores was fired, apparently because he did not get along and go along with the owner,” Colbert said. But eight other teams also lost their coaches, and Flores got several interviews for open positions, including with the New York Giants. Such coaching searches are bound by the NFL’s “Rooney Rule”, which requires NFL teams to interview a diverse range of candidates for head coaching jobs and other leadership positions. “It’s a great idea, gives everybody an opportunity, unless you don’t give an opportunity to anybody, which is what happened in this case,” Colbert explained. Flores learned via mistaken text from Bill Belichick, the New England Patriots coach, that the head coaching job had gone to someone else – three days before his interview with the team. “So he’s saying they wasted his time just to check a pretend box about how they pretend care about diversity,” Colbert noted, “though I imagine it did take the pressure off the job interview – ‘Where do I see myself in five years? Uh, I don’t know, suing you?’” Flores is still in the running for two other head coaching jobs, “which is what makes this lawsuit even more impressive”, Colbert concluded. “You see, the NFL, generally speaking – not very forgiving to anyone who stands up to them, or kneels near them. So Flores, who is only 40 years old, has put his future livelihood on the line here, but he’s doing it for a higher purpose.”As British households face a record 54% rise in energy billsfrom April, the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, has announced a £9bn plan intended to mitigate the cost-of-living crisis facing the nation. All households will receive a one-off £200 upfront discount on their energy bills this year, which, however, will be automatically recovered from people’s bills in £40 instalments over the five years from 2023. Four-fifths of UK households will further qualify – on average – for a £150 rebate on council tax for homes in bands A to D, which will not be repayable. The number able to claim warm homes discount, which is available for those receiving benefits, will be extended by a third, to 3 million. Here, four householders share their reaction to Sunak’s announcement. ‘I do not know how people worse off than us will manage’ John Lancaster, 72, from Burnley, feels partial relief about the news that he will benefit from the council tax rebate, which will go some way towards mitigating a huge rise in his energy bills. He and his wife were recently quoted a 12-month fixed dual-fuel tariff of an estimated £255.51 a month – a 145% increase in their current monthly direct debit payment of £104.06. “We live in a band D property, so we will get the council tax rebate,” Lancaster said. “My wife, who is also retired, is disabled, so we are not going out a lot and heating our home is quite important. We will have to stop using some rooms and turn the heating off in them, and watch carefully what we spend on groceries. “We hopefully will be able to absorb the new payments somehow by cutting down on shopping and meals out for example. I really do not know how people worse off than us will manage.” The couple’s fixed dual-fuel contract with Octopus Energy is due to expire on 23 February. Lancaster tried to log into his account this morning to see whether their quote had changed since the announcement on the new energy cap. “But I couldn’t get in, there may have been too many people trying to do the same thing,” he said. “After getting our last quote, we decided not to renew to another fixed tariff until the new price cap was announced to see whether the tariffs offered would alter. We now have a couple of weeks until our contract runs out, so we will check whether other suppliers make more attractive offers.” ‘The measures don’t go far enough’ “I don’t pay council tax so even though I’m eligible for the rebate it doesn’t apply to me,” said Sarah Moorby, from Kirkby Lonsdale, Cumbria. “It just won’t make any difference to mine and my children’s situation.” Moorby, who spoke to the Guardian earlier this week about the rise in energy bills, said she applied for a council tax reduction and as she receives universal credit, her council decided she did not have to pay anything. Even though her household is in council tax band C, she said the rebate and the £200 repayable discount were “not as helpful as [they] could be” and did not “go far enough”. The 39-year-old welfare assistant, who has three children, said she would have to prioritise her energy bill, which she fears may increase by about £2,500 a year, over other expenses such as food and clothing. “They should be a priority too but they will just get pushed further and further down the list,” she added. Moorby was paying £105 a month with People Energy before the supplier went bust in September and moved to paying £209 a month with British Gas, a 99% increase. “The only other option will be to turn the heating and electricity off. They’re basic commodities that people should have access to, like shelter, food and water. But now they’ve become almost luxury items,” she said. “Even if I did turn the heating and electricity off and sat in a duvet in the dark, I would still have to pay standing charges. Also who wants to do that anyway? That’s not living.” ‘I’m not going to gain anything from the chancellor’s support package’ Aaron Warren, 37, a business development manager from Colchester, has done the maths and is mentally preparing for a huge financial monthly hit from April. “I’m not going to gain anything from the chancellor’s support package, nothing at all. I will qualify for that energy bills rebate of £200, but that will have to be paid back. “Since last year our house is in council tax band F, so no luck there. My family will be around £400 a month worse off from April, due to a combination of higher energy bills and a national insurance rise of around £80 a month for my wife and myself each.” Warren and his wife both work full-time and several days a week from home to save thousands a year on commuting. The couple and their two young children, aged four and five, live in a four-bedroom semi-detached house built in the late 1980s. “Our house is pretty energy efficient, but according to our latest quote we will be paying £365 for energy a month if we stay on a variable contract, and £387 if I fix our tariff for two years. In November 2020, our monthly bill was £118. Just enormous increases, it’s pretty upsetting. “Some companies have quoted me over £400 a month – I never in a million years thought that’s how much I’d be paying for gas and electricity. The British Gas website kept crashing today, people are panicking now.” Warren said the family’s spending behaviour would have to be adjusted to make up for this substantial rise in living costs. “We’re fortunate enough to be earning quite well, but we have two young children and costly childcare, and we’re changing our shopping habits already. I can see that many families will be in dire straits. You just feel like you keep getting hit.” ‘“How much is that going to equate over a year?’ “I don’t know how they [the government] expect people to afford it,” said Kate Ross, from Isleworth, west London. “I work from home mostly and when you do that your bills are bound to be more than usual,” added the 34-year-old. Ross, who works for a design-and-build company, said she and her wife used to pay about £63 a month in September 2020 for their gas and electricity with Bulb Energy, which they have been with for five years. They were asked to increase their monthly direct debit on their fixed-rate tariff to £154.94, a rise of 146%. She said the one-off £200 discount for households was “not enough” and even though they were also eligible for the £150 council tax rebate, it “doesn’t really cut it”. “How much is that going to equate over a year? It’s nothing really,” she added.It was a risk and Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang knew it. Arsenal were always going to take a dim view of his trip to Barcelona on Monday morning, which was where the striker felt he had needed to be. Just in case. To give himself the best opportunity of making it happen. It was not authorised by Arsenal and so there was the possibility of the club fining him although, given the state of his relationship with them and, more specifically, the manager, Mikel Arteta, it had to have felt low down his list of concerns. What was rather higher up was the potential to for him to become a laughing stock, a latter-day Peter Odemwingie. In January 2013 the then West Brom centre-forward had driven to QPR on deadline day, believing he was about to complete a transfer only to be left in his car outside Loftus Road. For Aubameyang, his father’s house in Sitges – a little way down the coast from Barcelona – was not exactly the Shepherd’s Bush roundabout but the reputational damage stood to be the same if things did not work out. And yet he has not got to where he is without having the courage of his convictions, without seeing a chance and going for it. As Aubameyang basked in the excitement and acclaim of his Barcelona unveiling at the Camp Nou on Thursday, having got his move at the last moment, there was a candid admission about Arteta. Had the problem at Arsenal simply been with him? “I think it was only with him and then he took this decision,” Aubameyang said. “He wasn’t happy and that’s it. I was calm.” More broadly, as Aubameyang held court in Spanish – his second language behind French and in front of Italian, English and German in that order of fluency – he was reminded of two things. First, the wisdom of trusting in his instincts and second, how it is possible in this crazy game for fortunes to change in the blink of an eye. Aubameyang had been dropped from the Arsenal squad by Arteta on 11 December for a disciplinary breach – a late return from an authorised trip to France; not his first problem with punctuality – then stripped of the club captaincy and cast into exile. The 32-year-old went to the Africa Cup of Nations with Gabon but he did not feature after testing positive for Covid and then being diagnosed with heart lesions. Gabon released him back to Arsenal on 17 January, where he remained in the deep freeze; overlooked for selection, barred from training with his teammates. He was pushed towards a club in Saudi Arabia but did not want to go. When Arsenal went to Dubai for their warm-weather training break, he was left in London. Now Aubameyang stands at Barcelona, one of the biggest clubs in the world, with a contract until 2025, albeit with a break clause after 18 months. And the chance to prove a point to one man, in particular. “I am living a dream and I will work to stay here as long as I can,” Aubameyang said. “It has been a long time since I played a match but I am clear that I am ready to play and help. I have spoken to Xavi [the manager] and he sees me as a No 9. “Monday was a very long day, madness, and we signed in the last two minutes. I was at my Dad’s house, waiting for everything to be OK. In the afternoon, they called me to go and do the medical. There was a bit of stress at the end but it was all good.” What we know about Aubameyang’s crimes against Arteta is that one of them came last March when he reported late for the derby against Tottenham and was dropped to the bench. The month before, the forward had been reminded of his responsibilities by the club after apparently breaching Covid rules to get a tattoo. Then it all kicked off in December when he missed his flight back from France. There had been lots of muttering about how he was always late; at which point, it is perhaps worth remembering the words of Thomas Tuchel, the Chelsea manager, who had Aubameyang at Borussia Dortmund. “When we wanted him to be on time, we told him the meeting was 10.45am when it was 11am,” Tuchel said last May. “He did not miss one single training session in two years. Maybe he arrived five minutes late – that can happen with him. But if he does this, he is in a hurry, he is sorry and he has still a smile on his face. That’s him, and it’s hard to be really mad with the guy. He has a big heart. A bit crazy but nice crazy.” Jürgen Klopp, who also managed Aubameyang at Dortmund, would say the same things and so would Christophe Galtier, the Nice coach, who worked with him at St Étienne. In other words, count to 10 when it comes to the scattiness; embrace the exuberance. Was there something else between Aubameyang and Arteta? Something more egregious? It almost feels as if there had to be. According to Ian Wright, there was nothing. “The saddest thing for me was that we don’t know what’s happened,” the former Arsenal striker said. “I don’t know and I’m in touch with Aubameyang.” When attitudes are perceived to be wrong, when conflict arises, Arteta does not tend to negotiate. Just ask Mattéo Guendouzi or William Saliba, the Arsenal youngsters on loan at Marseille. Precocious talent can be petulant, challenging. Arteta seems to have zero tolerance; it is his way or the highway. Arteta has insisted that Aubameyang’s poor form this season was not a factor in his treatment of him, even if it is easy to wonder. What if Aubameyang had 14 Premier League goals instead of four? The player had no desire to leave Arsenal – unlike some of the club’s superstars from the not too distant past he did not put in a transfer request. Rather he was forced to go, with Arteta wanting him out permanently, and not on loan. Aubameyang’s solution was to make his leap of faith, to travel to Barcelona, to show the club he meant business. The move drew nods of approval from them, as did his decision to accept a lower salary until the end of the season as Barcelona seek a way out of their economic crisis. “You know that when Barcelona’s finances are healthy, Barcelona will show gratitude to those who have helped Barcelona,” Joan Laporta, the president, told him. Aubameyang is back on the up. “They were difficult months,” he said of the end at Arsenal. “Football is like that sometimes. If I have to say anything about that, for my part I never believed I did anything bad. But it is behind me. I want to think of the present.”The white former Chicago police officer who killed the Black teenager Laquan McDonald has left prison after serving less than half his sentence. Jason Van Dyke was released from state prison on Thursday morning after serving a little more than three years behind bars for the 2014 murder of McDonald. The Chicago Tribune reported that an undisclosed source had indicated that Van Dyke was “no longer in IDOC custody” by mid-morning on Thursday, referring to the Illinois department of corrections. Van Dyke will be on parole for a further three years. The prospect of his early release, having originally been sentenced in 2018 to less than seven years, had already sparked anger among relatives, community organizers and politicians who questioned the decision to shave three years off his sentence for “good behavior”. In a press conference last Thursday held by McDonald’s relatives at a local church, his grandmother Tracie Hunter called Van Dyke’s punishment a “slap on the wrist”, according to the Chicago Tribune. “I just want justice, the right justice,” Hunter said. “I’m not going to rest or be satisfied until this man does his rightful time.” Police dash-cam video taken at the time but which did not surface for more than a year, showed Van Dyke shooting McDonald 16 times as the teen was moving away from police, and Chicago’s mayor at the time, Rahm Emanuel, the former top aide to Barack Obama, was accused of cover-up. Backlash against Van Dyke’s release has been magnified by Chicago’s shaky record on police reform after McDonald’s murder and more police-involved shootings since, despite a consent decree mandating reform. The decree was issued after a blistering justice department investigation into the Chicago police department found excessive, racist force and widespread corruption. The current mayor, Lori Lightfoot, had said: “We are not where we want to be when it comes to police reform and accountability, but we are further along in two-plus years of doing this work than any other city that has been under consent decree.” Ahead of Van Dyke’s imminent release, Lightfoot issued a statement. “I know some Chicagoans remain disheartened and angry about Jason Van Dyke’s sentence for the murder of Laquan McDonald. As I said at the time, while the jury reached the correct guilty verdict, the judge’s decision to sentence Van Dyke to only 81 months was and remains a supreme disappointment,” the statement read. It continued: “I understand why this continues to feel like a miscarriage of justice, especially when many Black and brown men get sentenced to so much more prison time for having committed far lesser crimes. It’s these distortions in the criminal justice system, historically, that have made it so hard to build trust.”His lorry loaded with British Airways aircraft parts, Ivo Hradilik was expecting to drive on to a ferry heading to Calais, before delivering his cargo to the outskirts of Paris. But there is a problem with the customs paperwork, and the 26-year-old HGV driver from the Czech Republic will have to park up near the Port of Dover while the haulage company sorts everything out. “From the new year it has got worse with the paperwork,” Hradilik said, clutching a handful of documents. He usually visits Dover five times a month bringing goods between Britain and the EU. Hradilik expects to wait for hours before setting sail. On Wednesday, long queues of lorries built up once again on the approach roads to Dover, with as many as 100 vehicles waiting on the A20. The sheer volume of HGVs meant the town’s temporary traffic management system was activated twice on Wednesday, once at 5am and again at midday. Known as TAP – Operation Travel Access Protocol – it can be triggered by a request from the port authority or the police to the National Highways agency. Lorries heading for the port are required to stay in the left-hand lane of the A20 dual carriageway. Then small groups are called forward by a police officer stationed at the Aycliffe roundabout, once space becomes available at the port for them to enter the terminal. According to National Highways, TAP has been activated 20 times so far this year, compared with 69 times for the whole of 2021. The Port of Dover claims the main cause is a rise in freight traffic, rather than Brexit. The drivers see things differently. Many blame the introduction on 1 January of the first controls on imports from the EU, and a new UK government IT system for goods entering and leaving the country. “Since 1 January, I have queued every time in Dover,” Hradilik said. “From Calais it is better – there is only about two hours’ waiting.” Time spent queueing in his cab is time that goes unpaid. Under Hradilik’s contract, he gets paid per kilometre driven, rather than time spent on the road. When out of their vehicles, HGV drivers are easy to spot in Dover – they walk around holding sheaves of paperwork. Ciaran Donovan, a driver based in the UK who regularly travels back and forth to the continent, said the holdups were due to the extra time needed by staff to check the forms. He is unable to charge his customers more for extended journey times – including the hours spent queueing to reach the port – as he fears they will find another firm to carry their goods. “Having to sit there in the queues for free in order to earn money is soul-destroying,” Donovan said. Donovan has also been caught out on the other side of the Channel when returning to the UK. Last Friday, he was stuck in Calais for 16 hours because he had not received the paperwork required to enter the UK. “I think the customs agents can’t cope. They’ve got too much work,” he said. Snaking up the A20 on Wednesday, the vehicles were from a host of countries including Ireland, Germany, Poland, Lithuania and Serbia. Doug Bannister, the chief executive of the Port of Dover, said the new import controls were partly to blame, along with a 25% increase in freight traffic in January compared with a year earlier, combined with roadworks and two of the 12 ferries that serve the port currently being refitted. “If folks were expecting the whole trading system to operate after we left the EU as it did before, that is clearly not possible. There is increased friction, that is what Brexit is partly about,” he said. Freight traffic usually begins to climb in mid-January, after the Christmas break, but the long tailbacks seen so far this year have taken many drivers who regularly travel to Dover by surprise. Some point to teething problems for users of a new IT platform – the goods vehicle movement system (GVMS), required when moving cargo into or out of Great Britain and Northern Ireland – which launched on 1 January. “No doubt as people get more used to the paperwork which is required, and links to systems and codes used, it will get a lot smoother and slicker,” said Bannister. The Guardian can reveal that the new GVMS portal, which is the responsibility of HM Revenue and Customs (HMRC), was not available to users for 15 minutes on 31 January, when there was a system outage. An HMRC spokesperson said: “The goods vehicle movement system and other customs systems are online and working as planned. Traders and hauliers are adapting very well to the new processes.” This will come as scant consolation for Fernando Naranjo Sanchez, a driver from Seville in Spain, who said he had regularly queued for several hours to reach the port in January. The 35-year-old visits Dover two or three times each month, bringing clothing manufactured in Morocco to the UK. “Two Mondays ago I was waiting on the A20 for seven-and-a-half hours,” he said. “It is worse than it used to be. There is more paperwork.” Meanwhile, Vitalii Shulha, a driver from Ukraine, said he had been stuck in an eight-hour queue to reach the port in the final week of January. Haulage firms warn of further hurdles on the horizon, when physical controls on the import of EU products of animal and plant origin, which have been delayed several times by the UK government, are implemented in July. For many drivers, haulage firms and customs agents the queues and complications are a new reality, additional frictions that will be a continuing feature of post-Brexit trade.Mark Zuckerberg’s social media empire felt the full force of investors’ concerns about its growth prospects on Thursday, as the revelation of Facebook’s first-ever drop in daily users helped trigger a selloff, with shares down by a quarter. Here are some key points to help explain the selloff, which has wiped about $220bn (£162bn) off Meta’s market value. Declining user numbers at Facebook Facebook is Meta’s biggest app and it recorded its first fall in daily active users – a key growth metric – since the company was founded in 2004. Global daily users dropped from 1.93 billion in the third quarter of 2021 to 1.929 billion. It was led by a decline in users in Africa and Latin America, which is worrying for Meta because it needs to grow outside of its main market in the US, where growth fell too, albeit not for the first time. Last year a whistleblower, Frances Haugen, released internal documents that included presentations warning that Facebook was losing young users. One document revealed that “engagement is declining for teens in most western, and several non-western, countries”. TikTok is a problem Zuckerberg, Meta’s founder and chief executive, identified the video-sharing app TikTok as a key contributor to the user growth problem. “People have a lot of choices for how they want to spend their time, and apps like TikTok are growing very quickly,” he said on Wednesday’s earnings call. Chinese-owned TikTok has 1 billion users worldwide and is one of the reasons why Meta is struggling to compete in the market for young consumers. On the call, Zuckerberg said he was hopeful Facebook’s rival to TikTok, Reels, would help win back young users. “This is why our focus on Reels is so important over the long-term, as is our work to make sure that our apps are the best services out there for young adults.” In the meantime, however, it means slower revenue growth, he admitted. Hits to revenue growth Meta makes 97% of its revenue from advertising, by building up profiles of its users that can then be matched to advertisers’ needs. So if an advertiser is looking for a consumer in a certain location, of a specific demographic and with certain hobbies, then Meta can direct those ads towards particular groups thanks to the data it has compiled about them. Meta, which also owns Instagram and WhatsApp, saidrecent changes with Apple’s iOS software for iPhones had hurt the business. Apple now requires users to give permission for companies such as Meta to gather data about them as they browse across the web. Unsurprisingly, users have said no thanks and it has made its ad targeting less effective. Sheryl Sandberg, Meta’s chief operating officer and architect of Facebook’s advertising strategy, said during an investor call on Wednesday that the company had ways of targeting users with less data. “There are also a lot of things that small businesses and large businesses can do to take advantage of the many targeting and measurement tools we have,” she said. It should be pointed out that overall revenue did grow in the three months to December, up to $33.7bn compared with $28.1bn for the same period last year. Net income – a US measure of profit – was $10.3bn for the quarter, down nearly $1bn on last year. Nonetheless, Meta remains a very wealthy and profitable business. Patience – and money – is needed for the metaverse The metaverse is a catch-all term for a blending of the physical and digital worlds, where people carry out their professional and social lives via a mix of virtual and augmented reality. Zuckerberg is so convinced it is the next big thing in tech that he renamed the company from Facebook Inc to Meta. But it is years away from being a fully fledged part of people’s lives. So the results from Meta’s virtual reality unit – Reality Labs, which includes the top-selling Oculus VR headsets – showed a loss of $3.3bn on revenues of less than $1bn. This is the future of Meta’s business, so expect the revenues to grow, as well as the costs.Joe Biden on Thursday said US special forces “successfully removed a major threat to the world” after the leader of the Islamic State, Abu Ibrahim al-Hashimi al-Qurayshi, blew himself up in a pre-dawn raid in Syria. “As troops approached, in a final act of desperate cowardice,” Qurayshi blew himself up the third floor of a house, killing his own family members, the US president said. Biden called Qurayshi “Haji Abdullah”, said he had been responsible for a massive prison strike last month, and called him “the driving force between the genocide of the Yazidi people”. “Our forces carried out the operation with their signature preparation and precision and I directed the Department of Defense to take every precaution possible to minimize civilian casualties,” Biden said. Biden said: “Knowing that this terrorist had chosen to surround himself with families, including children, we made a choice to pursue a special forces raid at a much greater risk to our own people rather than targeting him with an airstrike. We made this choice to minimize civilian casualties.” When special forces approached Qurayshi, he detonated a bomb that blew himself up, “not just with the [suicide] vest but to blow up that third floor, rather than face justices for crimes he has committed, taking several members of his family with him, just as his predecessor did”, Biden said. By predecessor, Biden was referring to Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, who was killed in October 2019 in a village nine miles south of Atme in the jihadist-controlled Idlib region, where Wednesday’s overnight raid took place. Thirteen people were killed, including women and children, according to the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, a war monitoring group. Unicef has confirmed that at least six children died, and Betrand Bainvel, the acting Unicef regional director for the Middle East and North Africa, said another girl was badly injured. In his remarks, Biden said that “thanks to the bravery of our soldiers, this horrible terrorist is no more”. He thanked the US special forces, the Syrian Democratic Forces for their “essential partnership”, the Department of Defense and members of the national security team. He also pledged to continue working with US allies including the Syrian Democratic Forces, Iraqi security forces including the Kurdish Peshmerga fighters, and the roughly 80 members of the global coalition involved in the fight against the Islamic State. “Last night’s operation … sent a strong message to terrorists around the world. We will come after you and find you … We continue our unceasing effort to keep the American people safe and the strength and security of our allies and partners around the world,” Biden said. The president added that the government was in the process of “compiling the report” on the raid.Tensions in societies around the world over the current Covid situation are going to be very difficult to handle, one of Britain’s most senior scientific figures has warned. Sir Jeremy Farrar, the director of the Wellcome Trust, who stepped down as a government scientific adviser in November last year, warned the idea of simply “exiting” a pandemic is not realistic. “I just don’t think you wake up on Tuesday and it’s finished. It’s not going to happen like that,” he said in an online meeting of the Royal Society of Medicine. “The transition from [the] acute phase of the pandemic to something new, not yet defined, it’s really difficult – bumpy, different around the world, different within a single country, with the degree of inequity that’s happened globally, but also nationally,” he said. Farrar noted one problem is that while some people may argue the pandemic is now in the past, and the situation in the middle of the pandemic was exaggerated, others believe it’s far from over. “And so the tensions, I think, within societies are going to be very difficult to handle,” he said. Farrar added that while he has sympathy with the disruption of education and the health and economic impacts of Covid he is concerned about the speed at which some want to move on. “My concern is that there will be too fast a shift to saying it’s all over and we will lose the humility of accepting that we’re only two years into a novel human pathogen, that is still a huge amount of uncertainty,” he said, adding it is also crucial to resolve the problem of vaccine inequality. While Farrar said the most likely scenario is that there will be a transition to Omicron becoming endemic, as the variant is less severe than others, it is not the only possibility. “My worry in the push to try and move on from this [is that] we ignore those other scenarios, which are less rosy but we should be absolutely prepared for,” he said. Farrar added that while he agreed it is time to begin easing Covid restrictions in the UK, he is in favour of keeping some measures. “I would be in favour of continuing for instance, mask wearing on public transport, in enclosed spaces, etc,” he said. “And I would be pushing ever harder on trying to encourage people to be vaccinated, get their boosting doses, and make sure that everybody has access to the vaccines from a UK perspective.” Farrar also warned that he has deep concerns about the global Covid situation, warning that the pandemic has been made worse “by a catastrophic failure of global diplomacy”. “The ongoing geopolitics of east /west but increasingly, understandably, north/south, because of vaccine inequity is going to lead to really troubling years ahead and will have ramifications beyond pandemics to our ability to come together to solve issues of inequality, of issues of climate change, of issues of drug resistance, of issues of migration and conflict,” he said.Being an Islamic State leader is not what it used to be. The death of the latest IS supremo, Abu Ibrahim al-Hashimi al-Qurayshi, far from the heartland of the terror group’s rise in Iraq in a frugal home in the back blocks of Syria, is another painful blow to an organisation that only five years ago held significant territory in both countries and cast a shadow across an entire region. Its slide ever since has been dramatic. Unable to hold land, its old guard wiped out, its finances shredded and rank and file depleted, IS looks – at face value – like a group that has had its day. And yet it still lurks amid the rubble of both countries, where it is slowly yet assuredly stirring. To many who study IS, a prison break last month in north-eastern Syria looked to be a sign of things to come. Dozens of extremists were able to plan and gather in the heart of one of the biggest cities in the country’s north-east and launch an audacious bid to free the up to 2,000 men inside. The battle to reclaim the prison raged for six days and, while it was eventually returned to the control of the Kurdish forces who run the province, the gap between disaster and triumph was narrow. The fighting was the first time since IS capitulated in the far eastern Syrian town of Baghuz in March 2019 that the remnants of the organisation had revealed itself en masse. That it could still stage a large operation in a major centre was a surprise to some – but not to Kurdish leaders, who had warned of this day since inheriting thousands of prisoners from the IS era and tens of thousands more of family members from towns and villages on both sides of the Iraqi-Syrian border. A journey though what was formerly a centre of IS’s self-proclaimed caliphate late last year revealed broken, impoverished communities still unreconciled after nearly a decade of upheaval. On the Iraqi side of the Euphrates River, in Anbar, the grievances date back nearly a decade more to the ousting of Saddam Hussein in the 2003 US-led invasion. A common theme in both countries remains that Sunni Muslims remain largely excluded from a flatlining political process and an ascendant regional push by the smaller Shia sect. Without Sunnis being able to meaningfully shape their outcomes while watching political rivals cement their gains, IS’s message of restoring lost glories and dignities will remain potent for some – just as it was when the terrorist juggernaut first gained steam. It is consequently still active. In Deir Azzour province, the anti-IS coalition is carrying out raids against IS targets most days. Further west in Rojava, Kurdish counter-terrorism forces are also busy trying to weed out sleeper cells and ward off hit-and-run attacks – the type of low-intensity insurgency that the group used so effectively in Iraq from 2004 to 2011. Except, this time it can carry out such attacks on both sides of the river. The risk of an escalation with a large number of prisoners and potential sympathisers in detention camps remains high. Kurdish leaders in Syria have been warning of the immense dangers in allowing thousands of IS men and families to gather on their soil and have urged the US and Europe to help find a solution. The ghosts of Camp Bucca in Iraq, the US post-invasion detention centre that acted as a an academy for the forerunners of IS, looms large in Kurdish thinking. Qurayshi was an alumnus, so too was his predecessor, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, his anointed successor, Abu Hassan al-Muhajir, and the IS number two, Sami Jassem, who was arrested in Idlib last year and handed over to Iraqi forces. All four leaders had chosen Idlib as a refuge. With so many itinerants passing through and nondescript homes to hide in, many of the group’s most committed members now call it home. Its role as a new ground zero, so close to Turkey, has sounded a new alarm. Even more disturbing though would be to ignore the menace gathering in the shadows elsewhere in Syria.Parents who choose to home educate but fail to register their child with the local authority in England are likely to face sanctions, under government plans for a compulsory national register of children who are not in school. Under the proposals, parents who educate their child at home will face a new legal duty to supply information to a council-maintained register. There will also be a duty on local authorities to support families educating their children at home, offering general advice and examination support if requested. Local authorities and child protection charities have long pushed for a mandatory national register of children not in school to help keep track of them, ensure they are receiving a suitable education, and ensure support and safeguarding for vulnerable children. The pressure has mounted during the course of the pandemic, with increased numbers of pupils being taken out of school for elective home education and high absence rates in England. In November the Association of Directors of Children’s Services estimated that 115,542 children were home educated in 2020-21, a 34% increase on the previous year. The true figure could be far higher; the lack of a register makes it impossible to know. Ministers have promised to bring forward legislation at the earliest opportunity, but the government’s response on Thursday to a 2019 public consultation on the issue said the rollout was still “subject to securing the necessary resources”, and details of what penalties parents may face have yet to be determined. Responses to the consultation suggest there is likely to be fierce opposition from home education devotees. Among the 4,800 responses to the proposal that local authorities should be obliged to maintain a register of children who are not in school, 96% of local authorities agreed, while 82% of parents and young people disagreed. Those opposed to the register and the associated duty on home-educating parents to provide information said it was an invasive and intrusive attack on parents’ rights and a waste of resources, while maintaining that education is a parental responsibility. Victoria Campbell, of the Portsmouth Home Education Group, said: “We are not surprised that the government will be pushing ahead with the register, even though there is no evidence to support its stated aim of protecting children. We also have concerns over it being abused by local authorities who already have a tendency to overstep their remit, causing damage to families in the process.” The Department for Education said: “The vast majority of home education is already done well but, particularly in light of the pandemic contributing to a rise in children not being educated in school, the government will support local authorities to make sure they know where every child is being educated, that it is of the right quality and that support is offered to home-educating families.” Rachel de Souza, the children’s commissioner for England, welcomed the proposal. She said: “The register of children not in school is vital in making sure that we are able to keep children safe and engaged, wherever they are learning.”Two judges on the reality show The Masked Singer walked off after the contestant singing and dancing beneath a disguise was revealed to be Rudy Giuliani. Last week, during a taping of the first episode of the seventh season, judges Ken Jeong and Robin Thicke walked off the stage when the former New York City mayor and former attorney to Donald Trump removed his elaborate headpiece and costume, for which the show is known, to reveal himself. Fellow judges Jenny McCarthy and Nicole Scherzinger remained on stage. According to Deadline, which first reported the incident, they “bantered with Giuliani … for pressing what is widely derided as a baseless claim” that the 2020 presidential election was stolen from Trump. Jeong and Thicke eventually returned. In 2020, Sarah Palin, the former governor of Alaska and another controversial political figure, made a similar reveal on the show. Palin said she appeared as a “walking middle finger to the haters out there in the world where I could do whatever I wanted to do”, prompting shock and criticism of the show. In 2019, Trump’s controversial former White House press secretary, Sean Spicer, appeared on Dancing with the Stars. Tom Bergeron, the show’s host, responded to the ensuing criticism by saying the competition aimed to offer “joyful respite from our exhausting political climate” free from “party affiliations”.While a number of people who have worked alongside Munira Mirza praise her intellect and character, it appeared paradoxical that having led No 10’s efforts in stoking culture war issues she has eventually resigned in protest over low politics. Mirza, who quit over Boris Johnson’s false claim that Keir Starmer held back attempts to prosecute Jimmy Savile, was the official behind Downing Street’s much criticised report into racial disparities, which downplayed structural factors. She also defended earlier statements by Johnson, dismissing as “hysteria” the reaction to his 2018 newspaper column that likened Muslim women in burqas to letter boxes and bank robbers. What is certain is that her loss will be significant. Mirza worked with Johnson for 14 years, including his eight-year stint as London mayor. She began as an adviser on the arts and became his deputy mayor for education and culture. While largely associated in No 10 with culture war issues, as is her husband and fellow No 10 adviser, Dougie Smith, Mirza was seen as valued by Johnson because her views were not easily defined and could be unexpected, with the prime minister praising her as a “powerful nonsense detector”. In a 2020 profile of Mirza, Andrew Gimson, the prime minister’s biographer, said she and Johnson were both not easily pigeonholed by ideology. He said: “Of the two of them, she is the more rigorous and scientific, he more inclined to rely on instinct and intuition. But there is an affinity between them, especially as she also possesses, in the words of a senior minister, ‘a wonderful, waspish sense of humour which is attuned to the prime minister’s’.” Her political journey has certainly been a long one. Born in Oldham in 1978 to parents who came to the UK from Pakistan, she went to her local comprehensive school and Oldham sixth form college before studying English at Mansfield College, Oxford. Unlike Johnson, who was president of the Oxford Union and involved in Tory politics, Mirza was a student radical, becoming a member of the Revolutionary Communist party, contributing to its magazine Living Marxism. But she got frustrated at what she saw as the narrow-mindedness of the left, and embarked on the journey across the political spectrum that resulted in her being hired by Policy Exchange, the modernising Tory thinktank, and ultimately took her to Downing Street. One of her most-expressed views has been to contest the idea that challenges faced by black and minority ethnic people in the UK result from structural racism. In 2018, she accused the then universities minister, Sam Gyimah, of “a cynical game of hot potato” after he criticised Oxbridge for failing to admit more black students rather than investigating the deeper causes of the disparity. And she repeatedly criticised the Labour MP David Lammy’s report on the justice system, which was commissioned by David Cameron and expanded under Theresa May. Framing the issue in terms of institutional racism “only clouds the reality of what is happening and in the end could lead to worse outcomes for ethnic minorities”, Mirza claimed in an article for the contrarian website Spiked. • This article was amended on 4 February 2022 to name David Cameron as the prime minister who commissioned the Lammy Review, rather than Theresa May. The latter supported continuation of the review, published in September 2017.Judith Chester, who has died aged 83 from cancer, was a fiercely independent working woman and activist before feminism took centre stage. She was my wife from 1961 until our divorce in 1970 and for a second time from 2017 until her death. Born in the Oxfordshire village of Hook Norton, she was the daughter of Tom Williams, a farmer and pacifist, who became a conscientious objector during the second world war. Her mother, Mary (nee Sturdy), delivered most of the village babies as the district nurse. All the Williams children, Judith and her three siblings, were educated at a Quaker school nearby in Sibford. On leaving Sibford school Judith rapidly climbed the hospitality ladder, becoming manageress of the Wimpy Bar in St Giles, Oxford, while still in her teens. Not long afterward, she met and married me, and we settled in London, where I was a journalist on the Sunday Times. We had two children – Saul and Cal. When we divorced we agreed child support, but Judith adamantly refused any maintenance for herself. Within a few months she emerged as one of the founder members of an organisation calling itself Gingerbread, which aimed to improve life for single parents mainly by developing local self-help groups. From a standing start, almost 400 such groups were established nationwide by 1980. Meantime, Judith combined child-rearing with a solid career in social work that would take her from her home in Brixton to local authority welfare offices all around the capital. Camden, Hammersmith, Lambeth and Lewisham were among the boroughs who employed her. Aside from one brief departure, working at the Royal Marsden cancer hospital, most of her effort was concentrated in foster care. Her empathy and wit were reckoned to be best deployed in this area, especially when homes for the most difficult teenagers were being sought. She also won prominence and respect for her pioneering advocacy of the benefits of same race foster placements. At the age of 59, she was appointed to a prestigious training post with the British Association for Adoption and Fostering (now CoramBAAF), but soon decided that she would rather be doing than teaching. On moving to Brighton she joined Families for Children, a large private agency, and clocked up another 15 years of close encounter fostering work, only faltering towards the end when our older son, Saul, died from cancer. Judith and I remarried in Brighton soon after Saul’s death but with our other son, Cal, living very close by. We remained by the seaside for four happily married years until the day she died. She is survived by me, Cal, our grandson, Izaac, and her three siblings, Pat, Sue and Tom.The organist and composer Francis Jackson, who has died aged 104, began his career as a chorister under the distinguished organist of York Minster Edward Bairstow. Jackson was still active as both performer and composer 90 years later, having been organist himself at the minster for three and a half decades (1946–82). A virtuoso executant and prolific composer, he bestrode the world of English church music as a powerful if traditional force throughout the second half of the 20th century. His large output of Anglican sacred music included the frequently used Magnificat and Nunc Dimittis in G (“Me in G” as he liked to refer to the setting), hymn-tunes such as East Acklam, sung to the words of For the Fruits of His Creation at harvest time, and anthems. The six organ sonatas are the most substantial of his works in that genre, though there were many other pieces that both reflected his heritage of Bairstow, Herbert Howells and Edward Elgar, as well as his love of Ravel and admiration for Paul Hindemith and Max Reger. In addition to the church music he wrote a symphony, an organ concerto, chamber music, songs and a pair of monodramas with narrator. His compositional style was generally a conservative one, more modernistic neoclassical traits held in counterpoise with Romantic tendencies. Not the least of his claims to fame was the bringing to worldwide prominence of the final Toccata of Widor’s Fifth Organ Symphony, which he recommended to the Duke and Duchess of Kent (then Katharine Worsley) as the outgoing music for their wedding at York Minster in 1961. This was on the basis that it was genuine organ music rather than a hackneyed arrangement of a piece written for a secular purpose. With that recommendation of a movement bristling with bravura fingerwork he was to set a challenge for generations of church organists to come. Among his many pupils was the Hollywood composer John Barry, creator of the scores for James Bond films. This was not his only connection to lighter music, however. During the second world war, as a member of the 9th Lancers armoured regiment serving in north Africa and Italy, he took up the saxophone, and became known for his “Jive with Jackson” and “Francis Jackson plays Boogie and Bach” sessions. For many years, his enthusiasm for dance bands remained a secret pleasure, for fear that it would be deemed incompatible with a career in church music. In later life, as a devotee of the BBC’s Big Band Special, he was inseparable from his radio on Monday nights. Born in Malton, north Yorkshire, he was the son of William Jackson, the local borough engineer and sanitary inspector, and Eveline May (nee Suddaby), a talented pianist. Both parents sang in the local church choir, as did Francis and his brother, Paul. Having auditioned for Bairstow at the minster, he was admitted to the full choir, serving only three weeks as a probationer. He was organist of Malton parish church from 1933 to 1940, continuing to study with Bairstow until the end pf that period. His war service was undistinguished: “I tried my best, but it wasn’t really what I was cut out for,” he recalled, “each side trying to blow the other to bits – and to what purpose?” It did, however, provide an opportunity for the broadening of his cultural horizons, his fellow troopers introducing him to the writings of Aldous Huxley, Christopher Isherwood and WH Auden. Returning to the minster after the war, he was appointed assistant organist, and on the death of Bairstow in 1946, took over as organist. In 1956 he gave his first recital on the new organ in the Royal Festival Hall, London, beginning with Bach’s D major Prelude and Fugue, BWV 532, which starts with a rapid D major scale played on the pedals alone. To open with this “dicey solo pedal scale” was a “brave (or foolhardy)” decision, he later noted. In 1957 he played Poulenc’s Organ Concerto under Basil Cameron at the Royal Albert Hall Proms, making further appearances in 1960 and 1964. He wrote a biography of his mentor, Blessed City, The Life and Works of Edward C Bairstow (1996), and recorded his complete organ works, an act of homage that may or may not have been appreciated by Bairstow, for whom the gramophone was anathema. Jackson also made four CDs of his own organ music. His Leeds-based peer Simon Lindley praised the “magical colouring, depth of expression and technical control” of his playing. In his later decades he was much in demand as a consultant on church organ design. For the instrument he advised on in Blackburn Cathedral he wrote his first organ sonata, playing it at one of the inaugural concerts. He remained active as both performer and composer after his retirement from the minster in 1982, when he was named organist emeritus. In the garden of the house in the Ryedale hamlet of Acklam that he shared with his wife, Priscilla (nee Procter), whom he married in 1950, stood an outhouse furnished with a grand piano, an antique horn gramophone and, taking pride of place, a splendid two-manual chamber organ with gleaming pipes relocated from a church in Derbyshire. For Lindley, the “bold lines, surprising corners and sense of wonder” that characterise Jackson’s liturgical music reflected features of his “glorious Acklam garden”. His love of French impressionist art, especially that of Corot, was similarly congruent with his life-long enthusiasm for Ravel and Debussy, and his espousal of the French school (notably César Franck, Widor, Louis Vierne and Marcel Dupré) in his recitals. His autobiography, Music for a Long While, was published in 2013. Priscilla died that year. He is survived by their children, Alice, William and Edward. • Francis Alan Jackson, born 2 October 1917; died 10 January 2022Rudolf Serkin ranks among the greatest of 20th-century pianists; his repertoire ranged from Bach to Reger, but Beethoven was always at its very heart. In a career of well over half a century, he made numerous recordings of the piano concertos, but only two studio sets of all five – with Eugene Ormandy and the Philadelphia Orchestra in the early 1950s, and another in Boston 30 years later, with Seiji Ozawa conducting the Boston Symphony. I heard Serkin live only a handful of times, all of them remarkable occasions, but those who were able to follow him more regularly always maintained that in the recording studio his playing seemed to lose some of the intensity that it conveyed so powerfully in concert. In the autumn of 1977, in the Herkulessaal in Munich, he played all five Beethoven concertos as well as the Choral Fantasy in a series of concerts with the Bavarian Radio Symphony Orchestra under Rafael Kubelík, another musician who, like Serkin, always put himself at the service of the music. Recordings of those performances were first released on disc in 2005, but in Britain at least they seem to have disappeared quickly from the catalogue; their reissue now makes available again what is in every respect a historic musical document. Serkin was never interested in ingratiating himself through honeyed phrases or silken tone. Instead in these interpretations there is musical purpose and intellectual rigour in every detail. Whether it’s the almost combative muscularity he brings to the piano’s first entry in the third concerto, or the instant authority of his torrential opening to the Emperor, it sets the tone for all that follows, constantly drawing equally intense responses from Kubelík and his superb orchestra. The accounts of the slow movements are just as remarkable; there’s a hymn-like calm to the Largo of the third, a consoling sweetness to the fourth’s exchanges between the soloist and the orchestra. All are in short, remarkable performances, not only among the finest available on disc, but further reminders of just how peerless a Beethoven interpreter Serkin was. This week’s other picks There are new instalments this month in two continuing surveys of the Beethoven piano sonatas. On BIS, Andreas Haefliger groups together the three sonatas of Op 31, and plays them without any self-indulgence, but with a finely calculated combination of exuberant bravura and beautifully controlled introspection. For Hyperion, Angela Hewitt pairs the two mightiest of the late sonatas, Op 106 in B flat, the Hammerklavier, and Op 111, in C minor. She brings all her textural clarity to the fugal sections of the Hammerklavier, with no lack of weight in its great climaxes, even if the slow movement seems rather episodic at times, while Op 111 moves through its numinous final variations with total assurance.Dear Prime Minister, It is with great regret that I am writing to resign as your Head of Policy. You are aware of the reason for my decision: I believe it was wrong for you to imply this week that Keir Starmer was personally responsible for allowing Jimmy Savile to escape justice. There was no fair or reasonable basis for that assertion. This was not the normal cut-and-thrust of politics; it was an inappropriate and partisan reference to a horrendous case of child sex abuse. You tried to clarify your position today but, despite my urging, you did not apologise for the misleading impression you gave. I have served you for fourteen years and it has been a privilege to do so. You have achieved many important things both as Prime Minister and, before that, as Mayor of London. You are a man of extraordinary abilities with a unique talent for connecting with people. You are a better man than many of your detractors will ever understand which is why it is desperately sad that you let yourself down by making a scurrilous accusation against the Leader of the Opposition. Even now, I hope you find it in yourself to apologise for a grave error of judgement made under huge pressure. I appreciate that our political culture is not forgiving when people say sorry, but regardless, it is the right thing to do. It is not too late for you but, I’m sorry to say, it is too late for me. Yours sincerely, MuniraThe toppled statue of the Bristol slave trader Edward Colston should be displayed in a city museum – horizontally and still daubed with paint – and its former plinth topped with temporary artworks but sometimes left empty, an independent commission has concluded. After a citywide consultation, the We Are Bristol History Commission recommended the statue be preserved in the damaged state it was in when it was retrieved from the harbour after being pulled down and thrown into the dock. It has been exhibited at the city’s M Shed museum alongside information about the history of the enslavement of people of African descent. The commission said the plinth in the city centre should act as a focal point for temporary pieces and activities that reflect important issues for Bristol, including the slave trade, and also at times be left empty to remind people of the statue’s fate. Prof Tim Cole, chair of the commission, said there were some irreverent suggestions from people about what should happen to the statue, toppled during a Black Lives Matter protest in June 2020. One claimed the city was so divided over it that it should be broken in two, with half put in the museum and the rest on the plinth. A second person suggested putting it back – but hauling it down and throwing it in the harbour once a year, a new “civic ritual”. But Cole said the city was more united than may have been expected, with 80% of Bristolians saying it should go on display. Of the one in five who did not want it exhibited, half of this group said it should go back on to the plinth and a quarter said it should be destroyed. The commission was pleased with how many young people took part in the survey, with four out of five Bristolian 18- to 34-year-olds saying they were very positive or positive about the toppling. About half of those aged 65 and above were either very negative or negative. The commissioners were surprised that black/African/Caribbean/black British residents were – by a slight margin – the least positive over the toppling. They dug into why, and the comments from people in this group suggested they did not like the fact that it could be considered an unlawful act. Men were less likely than women to feel positive about the fall of the statue, but there was no difference in attitudes in richer or poorer areas of the city. The commission’s suggested wording for a new plaque includes the phrase: “In the late 20th and early 21st century, the celebration of Colston was increasingly challenged, given his prominent role in the enslavement of African people.” Some may want more detail – he rose to become the equivalent of a modern chief executive in the Royal African Company, which shipped 84,000 Africans into slavery, including 12,000 children. Cleo Lake, a former lord mayor of Bristol who long campaigned to have the Colston statue removed, called for a permanent space in the city to tell the story of the transatlantic slave trade. She said: “We need a dedicated space in Bristol to tell the full history, that is accessible for as many people as possible, and empowers people of African descent.” The commission’s recommendations will be considered by the city’s mayor, Marvin Rees, and his cabinet in April. Katie Finnegan-Clarke, a co-founder of the Countering Colston campaign, said: “The commission’s report shows what we’ve always known: Bristolians have a strong, uniting belief in social justice, which means most people support the toppling of Colston’s statue. We hope Marvin will take this report as a green light to push for a permanent memorial for enslaved Africans in Bristol.” Last month four anti-racism campaigners responsible for toppling the statue were cleared of criminal damage by a jury in the city after their defence argued the monument was so indecent and potentially abusive that it constituted a crime.This may destroy them, a cost of living explosion such as few have known in their lifetimes. The £350 of support for most households, announced today by Rishi Sunak, the chancellor amounts to only a fraction of the extra bills heading towards most households. It came on the day that the Bank of England raised interest rates, and on the day Shell boasted of a “momentous” 14-fold rise in its profits to £12bn. Labour’s promise of a windfall on soaring energy company profits never looked more prudent. Expect people to understand all too well that these easements Sunak offers are nothing more than disguised loans. This “heat now, freeze later” debt will be clawed back from every future energy bill until 2027 – and prices may rise again. Labour’s Chris Bryant spelled out in parliament why £350 doesn’t “touch the sides” of the problem for his constituents in Rhondda: household costs are increasing by £2,875 a year, he said, in a constituency where the average wage is £27,000. How crafty to shift some of the payment of this temporary relief on to local authorities, through the rebate on council tax bills. Prof Tony Travers, of the London School of Economics, warns that as this is just a one-off, when council tax bills soar next year the blame is likely to fall on hard-pressed local authorities, not on Westminster. “Many councils will try to make more cuts to keep that rise down,” he tells me – but there is no more to cut. Just before the 2010 election, I first heard a soon-to-be Tory minister tell colleagues with glee they would “devolve the axe” to councils – and so they did, with local authorities bearing the brunt of austerity. In this week’s “levelling up” white paper, with its lyrical evocations of localism in Jericho and a hymn to the Medicis, Gove absurdly promised to “turbo-charge the whole of the country” on less than a shoestring. He said nothing of the last decade’s devastation of local libraries, swimming pools, bin collections and pothole repairs. Labour’s Lisa Nandy says levelling up would make up for just £1 for every £13 lost by councils since 2010. “We get a partial refund and they expect us to be grateful.” Everything about this energy policy is wrongheaded. The Social Market Foundation and the Joseph Rowntree Foundation want any subsidy delivered as cash directly into people’s pockets – £500 to all on low incomes on universal credit, which was an efficient way during the pandemic of paying out that £20 uplift (and then snatching it back). It’s greener and more dignified to give people money to spend as they choose, not forcing it on to their energy bills: with out-of-work benefits their lowest for 30 years, hard-pressed families may need to choose to spend less on energy and more on other necessities. I regularly keep in touch with the Big Help project in Merseyside’s Knowsley, one of the very poorest authorities in England, with seven food banks and 11 food clubs. Toni Bell, one of the managers, says already existing price rises are drawing in more full-time workers who have never asked for help, often needing debt advice as well as energy vouchers and food. Rock-solid Labour Knowsley has had no levelling up money to date, unlike many wealthy Tory seats, such as Sajid Javid’s Bromsgrove, which was given £15m. Here’s the question: are public attitudes changing towards the poorest in society, as British Social Attitudes has recently begun indicating? Nearly half of households on universal credit have suffered what’s politely called “food insecurity”. That means sometimes going hungry, as Marcus Rashford has described so movingly about his childhood. One in three children now live below the poverty line, according to the government’s own report, 700,000 more since 2012. That’s been a hard fact for most people to believe: one in three children you see in the street. Really? Just possibly, the price shocks this year, felt by almost everyone, will bring home to more voters how severe poverty is in Britain. Maybe the experience will put an end to brutal Benefits Street-style TV shows and imagery of feckless layabouts, with Middle England itself feeling the pinch. The reason so many children half starve, have no holidays or treats and lack the basics to share the same ordinary lives as schoolfriends is quite simple: not enough voters care enough about it. Could that be on the turn now? Might the Tories in their callousness find themselves on the wrong side of history, wrongfooted by a surge in public sympathy? I note a story from this week in the Bournemouth Echo: “Dorset MP questions food bank use as numbers rocket.” The local food bank reports a 43% rise in the number of clients. But Poole’s MP, Sir Robert Syms, said: “Well, I’m a bit surprised because at the moment unemployment continues to fall and the economy is continuing to grow and I can’t see any particular reason why [the number of food bank users] would pick up … I can’t see yet how energy bills would have made that much of an impact on people’s finances.” The news story went on: “Sir Robert added he would ‘have a word’ with the Department for Work and Pensions to see if there were more people applying for help.” Well, as MP for the millionaires of Sandbanks he may not know much about the DWP, and his Dorset is among the regions that have had the fewest cuts in the last decade, while Liverpool has had the most. There’s a lot of levelling up to be done, not least in hearts and minds and Tory attitudes. Polly Toynbee is a Guardian columnistThough Uschi Gatward, who has died aged 49 of cancer, produced just a single collection of short stories, it proved to be a remarkably effective one. English Magic (2021) is a book with an atmosphere of its own, the whole greater than the sum of its parts. The first story, The Clinic, opens with a deceptively simple declaration: “It’s set up to look like a home, with sofas and a coffee table, but nobody’s fooled.” Immediately, the familiar becomes discomfiting. From there, the straightforward reality of taking a toddler to a clinic becomes a disturbing whirl of paranoia, state surveillance and societal disapproval. Soon the toddler’s family is fighting for survival – heading out for the wilderness after buying camping supplies in a shop where even the plastic mannequins are ominous. Reviewers compared this dystopian nightmare to Cormac McCarthy’s The Road, but Uschi had a humour and an eye for detail of her own: “Cara’s dressed in her smartest clothes. I’m wearing my dumbest outfit, complete with slogan.” The apparently mundane could be imbued with significance. In other stories, a bird stuck in a chimney begins to feel like a terrible portent, a popped balloon takes on tragic weight. The ritual of a picnic was viewed with the same eye for the uncanny as that of a pagan ceremony, taking the reader into the depths beyond the page. “She invites us to trust our imaginations,” noted Lara Pawson in the Guardian. Uschi wrote about overlooked lives, seeing magic as a “resort of the dispossessed as much as the powerful, a rival to the established orthodoxy”. She thought of her work as protest fiction, detailing the experience of hard-up mothers, political prisoners, artists and political agitators. But while her characters were often on the precarious fringes of society, she did not romanticise or patronise them, because she was part of their world. Born in Mile End, in the East End of London, Uschi (Urszula) was the daughter of Francesca Ellul, who had migrated from Malta in 1954, and Michael, later Stefan, Gatward. They were clerical workers; after they separated when Uschi was six, and divorced the following year (1979), she was brought up by her mother. Her ability as a student was noticed early and she was given a fee-assisted place at Alleyn’s school, Dulwich, from which she went on to gain an English literature degree (1994) at King’s College, Cambridge. After graduating she worked in community theatre, writing, producing and directing her own plays including for New Wimbledon theatre and Charles Cryer theatre, Carshalton. But she made little headway, and one of the jobs she supported herself with was as a cleaner on the Heygate estate at Elephant and Castle in south-east London, where she had lived for part of her childhood. In 2002 Uschi completed an MA in creative writing at the University of Sussex, and took a job with Arts Council South East. As a trade union representative there she helped colleagues receive a decent redundancy package when the organisation was downsized following the crash of 2008. That year, too, she married the artist Matthew Krishanu. Uschi left Arts Council South East herself in 2010, and they had a daughter, Pearl. The family moved to a Live/Work council flat managed by Bow Arts Trust and Poplar HARCA housing association in the East End, in a scheme set up to benefit local residents through the arts. From this home, she and Matthew ran workshops and put on exhibitions. One of Matthew’s paintings featuring Uschi is in the Arts Council collection. Uschi was finally able to write about the world around her, and her stories began to be anthologised and published online. My Brother Is Back won the 2015 Wasafiri prize; Oh Whistle And was shortlisted for the 2016 White Review prize. They formed part of English Magic, and I got to know her through my publishing firm, Galley Beggar Press. The book’s first print run sold out within a month, its protest fiction being well and widely received. In the Daily Mail, Eithne Farry wrote of how in her “uneasy, excellent debut collection, the boundary between the earthly and the eerie is thin”. Uschi’s cancer diagnosis came in the same month, September 2021, as the book’s publication. She is survived by Matthew, Pearl and her mother. • Uschi (Urszula) Gatward, writer, born 12 June 1972; died 30 December 2021“If anybody here questions the need for the police to change, I am here to tell you that it’s time to face up to reality.” After yet another shameful week for the police, those words could have been spoken yesterday. But in fact they date back seven years to a furious showdown between the then home secretary, Theresa May, and a stony-faced Police Federation. The cherished British ideal of policing by consent was, she told them, in danger of being destroyed by scandals ranging from the covert surveillance of murder victim Stephen Lawrence’s family to allegations of corruption, bribe-taking and covering up fatal police errors during the Hillsborough football stadium disaster. At the time, May thought it was worrying that only two-thirds of the public trusted the police to tell the truth. Now that feels like a figure from some lost golden age. An Ipsos-Mori poll this week found that fewer than a third of Britons are confident that the police investigation of alleged lockdown-busting parties in Downing Street will actually result in anyone who broke Covid rules getting punished, while considerably fewer than half expect the police to be thorough or independent. The Metropolitan police’s strange, foot-dragging reluctance to investigate, at least until shamed into it by a Whitehall inquiry, now looks like a catastrophic misjudgment; how could it not see that this was about showing that nobody, no matter how powerful, is above the law? But it wouldn’t have been so damaging had it not reinforced a more longstanding sense that something has gone very wrong in British policing. Fear and distrust of the police is, sadly, nothing new in some communities, stemming often from bitter experience. But it’s spreading now to parts of society where officers would once automatically have enjoyed the benefit of the doubt. The publication this week of a series of stomach-churning WhatsApps exchanged between officers at Charing Cross station – in which they joked casually about hitting their wives and girlfriends or turning “Africans” into dogfood – has reawakened all the same fears stirred up by the murder of Sarah Everard at the hands of a serving Met police officer, and the revelation that officers posed for grotesque selfies with the bodies of murdered sisters Nicole Smallman and Bibaa Henry. These are the men we’re expected to call on at our most frightened and vulnerable, in the wake of a sexual assault or after having finally summoned the courage to escape a violent relationship, for heaven’s sake. Yet one of them messaged a female colleague “I would happily rape you” – supposedly in jest. And while this particular Independent Office for Police Conduct investigation involves the Met, there’s no reason to expect such attitudes magically stop at the edge of London. Greater Manchester police was judged by an inquiry last year to be so badly run as to be actively putting public safety at risk. Victims of crimes including domestic violence waited in some cases weeks for a police response that should have come within hours, reportedly thanks to short-staffing and lack of training. Last autumn, newspapers were briefed that the current home secretary had finally lost patience with an institution she considered dysfunctional, misogynistic and tin-eared. The Met was, a Home Office source said, “like a horrible onion. You start peeling back [the layers] and you cry more and more.” There was talk of big reform plans. Yet so far, we have had a police, crime and sentencing bill handing yet more draconian powers to an institution Priti Patel herself supposedly considers dysfunctional, and briefings about how she wanted to ditch the Met commissioner, Cressida Dick, last year but was overruled. That may be true, but public sniping undermines any authority Dick had left to drive change in her own force. Who will take hard truths from someone so politically friendless, knowing she might not be around that much longer? This is a dangerous moment for decent officers trying to do a good job in thankless circumstances, including female officers horrified by some male colleagues’ behaviour who may have felt forced (as one told the Charing Cross inquiry) to “play the game or stay quiet”. Given this government’s proven tendency to ignore constitutional niceties, it may also be a dangerous moment for the perennially delicate balance between police operational independence and political meddling. But reform needn’t mean overstepping that line. Patel could replicate the continuing inquiry into culture and standards in the Met across all forces, focusing on misogyny and racism in the ranks. She could insist the findings of police misconduct hearings aren’t swept under the carpet and overhaul recruitment and vetting, examining whether standards have slipped under the pressure to recruit. And she could ensure that whoever succeeds Dick is chosen for all the right reasons and then backed to get on with the job, rather than treated as a political football. Without substantive reforms, however, sooner or later May’s warning seems doomed to come true. Robert Peel’s famous dictum that the public are the police and the police are the public was a reminder of the symbiotic bond between the law-abiding majority and the officers to whom they willingly yield authority in return for protection. But that bond is visibly unravelling now. It’s in the interest of both sides to fix it before it snaps. Gaby Hinsliff is a Guardian columnistThe worst part of anything film-related is the context-free montage. The worst part of going to the cinema is being pummelled with a context-free montage of upcoming attractions before the movie starts. The worst part of watching awards shows is being pummelled with context-free montages of all the films that were released in the previous 12 months. A context-free montage is less than a trailer. It isn’t even an advert. It’s a sizzle reel that reveals nothing about anything. There is no information. It’s the movie equivalent of sitting in front of the washing machine as a kid. However, Netflix prides itself on being a bold new disruptor in the movie industry, so it only makes sense that it should also boldly disrupt the context-free montage genre. Behold, Netflix’s new 2022 movie preview video, where the montage talks to you. Netflix’s movie preview ultimately serves two purposes. The first is to tell you all the films that are coming out this year, in the form of an over-edited supercut. And if that’s your thing, there’s plenty to dissect here. There’s going to be a sequel to Enola Holmes, a sequel to Knives Out, a Russo Brothers movie where Ryan Gosling appears to be playing Jason Bourne, an animated Guillermo Del Toro Pinocchio movie, one of those Adam Sandler movies that critics like, a film with Kevin Hart and Mark Wahlberg, a neat-looking animated pirate movie and something called We Have a Ghost. Some of it looks fantastic, lots of it looks mediocre and some of it – were their success measured in traditional box office grosses – look destined to be monumental flops. But that’s not the real reason why Netflix made the montage, though. No, the real reason for the montage was to allow Netflix to gratuitously flex all over the place. Because, at key points during the montage, the stars themselves turn and address us in the middle of the action. This is a big deal. Previously, it had been considered a big deal if a movie star listlessly presented a clip of the movie from an independently shot clip of them in full blown junket mode. But this is something else. This is a demonstration that Netflix has the power to shut down a movie’s production so that the star – on location, in costume and from within the scene of the movie they’re making – can promote the platform. It starts with Jennifer Lopez, scowling on a boat in a wooly hat. “Tonight is movie night,” she sighs with weary resignation. Next is Chris Hemsworth, wearing glasses. “In here is the great big world,” he intones with all the enthusiasm of someone ordering a starter from a restaurant that only serves human faeces. I’m not going to type out everything that all the stars say, because it adds up to the sort of inept tone poem usually reserved for cologne adverts, but I will list the other stars who talk. Jason Momoa, dressed as a sort of militaristic sex goat. Jamie Foxx, driving a car. Ryan Gosling, fighting a guy on a tram. Henry Cavill and Millie Bobby Brown, walking down an alley. Queen Latifah, overlit next to a car. Mark Wahlberg and Kevin Hart, pretending they’re 20 years younger than they actually are. Halle Berry, looking into a hole. Ryan Reynolds, in a lift. Kerry Washington, dressed as royalty. Charlize Theron, dressed as Noddy Holder. Judging by their slightly downbeat demeanour, it’s safe to assume that all these actors were all just getting into the swing of filming when a Netflix representative shut everything down and got them to read out their line of their meaningless spiel. None of them are happy about it. Charlize Theron actively looks like she had to be tranquillised to do it. But that doesn’t matter. They still did it. Once again, Netflix triumphs over the human spirit. Presumably, none of these stars did this for free. There was a line in their contract stipulating their appearance, and probably a slightly increased pay packet. But what’s interesting to see is who held out. Adam Sandler didn’t say anything. Daniel Craig didn’t say anything. Eddie Murphy didn’t say anything. Julia Louis-Dreyfus didn’t say anything. Mark Ruffalo was standing right next to Ryan Reynolds in his clip, but he didn’t so much as think about saying anything. Mark Ruffalo cannot be bought or sold. His integrity is rock solid. Despite this, though, the message is loud and clear. Netflix has some films out this year. And it can make the most famous people on Earth dance like performing monkeys whenever it wants.Rishi Sunak has been playing the long game. Keeping his head down – there can be an upside to one of your close family getting Covid – and offering the bare minimum of support to the prime minister to appear loyal. Just hoping it was only a matter of time before the Met got round to fingering The Suspect’s collar and the necessary 54 no confidence letters were submitted to the chair of the 1922 Committee. Then and only then would he show his hand. It was with the greatest sadness and the utmost humility etc, etc that he was putting his name forward to become the new leader of the Tory party. But on Thursday the chancellor was forced out of hiding to come to the Commons to give a statement on energy prices and the cost of living. It could have been a moment of some danger. An admission that people were getting worse off on his watch. Only he just about managed to ignore all that. Rather he made it all about his own brilliance. Just imagine how much worse everything would be if it hadn’t been for him! Dishi Rishi is turning out to be almost as much the narcissist as Big Dog. Even if his narcissism is more manicured and curated. Either way, he should have no trouble settling down in No 10. Sunak’s whole speech was a catalogue of reasons to be profoundly grateful for his existence. He claimed the UK was the fastest growing economy and there were more people in work than before the pandemic, before insisting that inflation running at 6% had nothing to do with him. Er … you’re the chancellor. He then went to say the energy price cap would be going up by £693 and that he would be offsetting that with a £200 loan, to be repaid over five years, and a £150 council tax rebate. The shadow chancellor, Rachel Reeves, pointed out some obvious flaws with this. There was no guarantee energy prices wouldn’t continue to rise and, even if they didn’t, millions of people were going to be cold, hungry and broke. So how about cutting VAT, extending the warm homes discount and imposing a windfall tax on energy companies? It would be wrong to cut VAT, said Sunak, sounding most put out, as that would not target the poorest households. A bizarre line as he had moments earlier suggested cutting VAT was one of the great Brexit dividends. Presumably, another one that we will never see. As for the energy companies, they would be bankrupted by further taxes. After all, Shell had only quadrupled its profits to £14bn that very day. They were nearly on the breadline. Would no one think of the shareholders? This wasn’t the sharpest of defences but it was the best that Rishi could offer. Getting out alive and with his vanity more or less unpunctured was about as much as could be hoped for. Deep down, he knew someone would have to be back with a better bailout package before long. But hopefully, he would no longer be chancellor by that time. Besides which, he had a more immediate hazard to deal with: an interview with the BBC. Sunak had hoped he would be able to keep the conversation on the subject of his own fabulousness. Laura Kuenssberg wanted to talk parties. No, he’d never once looked out of the window of No 11. He’d had them all blacked out so he could focus on his work. Therefore he couldn’t have seen anything. And he’d certainly never seen any cake. Or been near a cake. Or knew what a cake was. It would be up to Sue Gray to tell him if he’d ever seen any wrongdoing. And of course The Suspect had never lied to him. Big Dog had prefaced every conversation with, “You know I’m lying to you …” so he must have been telling the truth. He was the prime minister! And prime ministers never lie. Even one whose main contribution to public life has been to make almost everyone disbelieve everything he said. Then Sunak turned coy. Of course it was impossible to believe that Johnson could have done anything wrong, he simpered. But if he had, then he was terribly flattered some MPs were considering him as a future leader. Not that he knew why! Though it could have been something to do with the dinners he had been hosting and the promises he had made. Just a thought. Still. Even though the chancellor’s interview hadn’t gone entirely to plan, he was much cheered by the fact that it wasn’t as much of a car wreck as Johnson’s. Big Dog had been up in Blackpool, trying to convince locals he was committed to the levelling-up agenda and that money previously promised could count as new providing it hadn’t already been spent. Brilliant. Then things fell apart. First he trashed the Northern Ireland protocol that he himself had negotiated as completely useless. Way to go, Boris. Then he tried to backtrack on his Jimmy Savile slur against Keir Starmer. Despite letting several of his more abject cabinet ministers defend him for it. What he had really meant to say was that he identified with the Labour leader. Like him, he had been trying to take responsibility for others’ wrongdoings. It was yet another lie of course. He breathes, he lies. The Suspect’s whole strategy over partygate has been the exact opposite of Starmer’s. His sole aim being to let others take the blame for him. And even when he tries to feign empathy – impossible for a shameless sociopath – he can’t even manage to mouth an insincere apology. He is the man that has never been able to say sorry. Under the circumstances, it wasn’t nearly enough. But it was way too much for Munira Mirza, his policy adviser of 10 years. She resigned. Big Dog had finally crossed a line. She couldn’t carry on giving him the benefit of the doubt when there was no doubt. Sunak couldn’t believe his luck. Was this the beginning of the end? • An evening with Marina Hyde and John Crace: join in person or online Join Marina Hyde and John Crace live in Kings Place, looking back at the latest events in Westminster, on Monday 7 March, 8pm GMT | 9pm CET | 12pm PST | 3pm EST. Book tickets hereThe alpine skier Dave Ryding has suggested he might cut his medal in half and give it to his “hero” Alain Baxter, who was controversially stripped of bronze in 2002, if he makes the podium at the Winter Olympics in Beijing. Ryding made the pledge as he was named as one of Team GB’s two flagbearers for Friday’s opening ceremony, alongside the curler Eve Muirhead. Both athletes will be competing in their fourth Games. Baxter, who lost his medal after he tested positive for a stimulant contained in a Vicks nasal inhaler bought in Salt Lake City that was not in the same product sold in the UK, is now working as one of Ryding’s assistant coaches. Ryding, who recently won his first World Cup race, said he wanted to give something back to the man who inspired him to become an alpine skier. “Alain is working with my team now,” he said. “He’s one of the assistant coaches. I remember growing up watching him. I was then fortunate enough to do a few months before he retired – they put me on to his team for a few months so I knew him quite well. I still remember watching him win the medal and it ignited something inside me whether it was passion, excitement, thrill. I don’t know what it was. “But I can still remember really getting this feeling and Alain will always be – whatever I achieve, Alain for me will be here because that’s how you perceive your heroes. If he didn’t do what he did in Salt Lake, who knows if I would have had the drive, the belief to do what I did?” Even though Baxter’s medal was taken away, Ryding said that it had not tarnished Baxter’s legacy in his eyes. “What went on after that was proven that it shouldn’t have been taken away and it was such unfortunate circumstances,” he said. “God help us that no one has to go through it again. It affected our sport. It affected him massively. If I was to get a medal, I think the best thing I could do was cut it in half and give him half of it.” Asked about carrying the flag, Ryding said: “I never dreamed of it. I was shocked to be asked. I am beyond proud to lead out the team.” Muirhead, who will lead the women’s curling team, expressed her shock and delight at being selected to carry the flag alongside Ryding. “To be asked to be one of the two flagbearers, it’s honestly like a dream come true,” she said. “It has been a rollercoaster to get here. I feel so honoured.” Muirhead also praised the mixed doubles team of Bruce Mouat and Jennifer Dodds, who are still in a good position with two wins and a defeat after beating the Canada team 6-4 and losing to Switzerland 8-7 on the second day of competition. “I don’t think there is anything stopping us coming away with three medals in the curling,” Muirhead said. “Bruce and the men’s team are the best in the world. And for us, we are capable of beating everyone out there.” Team GB chef de mission, Georgie Harland, confirmed that 28 of Britain’s 50 athletes for the Games are now in Beijing, and said none of them had tested positive for Covid since arriving. “The talent is there to give us our best performance at a Winter Olympics,” she said.‘I think of that person, or look at photos of that person, and it feels like a lifetime ago,” Gus Kenworthy says as he remembers winning a silver medal for the United States as a freestyle skier at his first Winter Olympics in Sochi in 2014. So much has changed since then. He is now about to compete for Great Britain, the country of his birth, in his third and final Olympics in Beijing and Kenworthy will ski as a gay man, an LGBTQ+ activist and an actor. The most important facet of his transition is that, as Kenworthy says: “I’m just much happier now than I was back then when I wasn’t living my life authentically. I wasn’t being my true self and it definitely took a toll.” Kenworthy will soon talk eloquently of his misgivings about competing in China, where there is disregard for some basic human rights, but I ask him first about Sochi. He had not come out then but was he distressed by homophobia in Russia? “It ate away at me. In the buildup to the Games we did lots of media training about the anti-LGBTQ legislation they had in place that foreigners wouldn’t be exempt from. We were told not to talk about it. You couldn’t paint your nails or wear anything rainbow. I remember being really upset – but I was still in the closet and I was scared.” Even before he returned home in American glory, Kenworthy felt distinctly uncomfortable. “In the media aftermath we had so much emphasis on our lives as young men because it was a US sweep [in the slopestyle] and the other two guys were single. I had a boyfriend but we were deeply in the closet and so to all intents and purposes I was also single. We competed on February 13 and on Valentine’s Day we were on the Today show talking about our celebrity crushes, who we would want as our Valentine and our favourite kind of girl. I just lied. I went on this whole media tour where I felt I was lying the entire time. I was very depressed and absolutely hated myself.” Did tabloid speculation that he was dating Miley Cyrus offer fleeting relief from such questions or simply deepen his unease? “Both. I was trying to keep up this facade I was straight. It sounds grimy but there’s also a culture around those events where you’re pulling girls at parties. I was sleeping with women and really trying so hard to fit this other narrative. But I cried after sleeping with women sometimes. It certainly was never the same after I slept with a man.” Kenworthy looks surprised when I ask who was the first person he came out to outside the gay community? “Oh, the gay community were the last people I came out to. I didn’t have a single gay friend. The first person I told was my ski agent, Michael Spencer, and it was a long time before I told anybody else. “I only told Michael because my first boyfriend and I were still in the closet and trying to figure ourselves out. He worked on the snowboard tour and we were inseparable. Nobody knew that we were together but we started to get grief. If one of us was anywhere without the other person, people would go: ‘Where’s your boyfriend?’ They were joking. But there was one skier, someone I had really looked up to, who was really harassing, He’d be like: ‘Hey, faggot, where’s your boyfriend?’ Super-vulgar, super-crass and really hurtful. He and the other skier were both associated with the same company and Kenworthy told his agent to sever their link. He remembers now that “Michael said: ‘You have a contract.’ I was like: ‘I don’t care. Get me out of it.’ I explained why and he was like: ‘He’s joking, it’s locker room talk, just brush it off.’ I broke down crying and told him the truth. Michael was wonderful and said: ‘I’ll get you out of the contract and I will keep your secret until you are ready to tell somebody.’ Michael’s just a very sweet straight guy and like a father figure to me now.” The same damaging terminology echoed around him. “I don’t think people were trying to be malicious but if a ski course was bad they’d say: ‘This course is so gay.’ It would be multiple times a day. ‘This is gay, that’s gay, don’t be a faggot.’ That language takes a toll on you.” Before he came out in 2015, Kenworthy felt so unhappy he came close to retiring. But a fellow skier, Justin Dorey, who is now his coach, changed his attitude. “My relationship had ended,” Kenworthy says, “and I remember feeling pretty alone. I was gay and I wanted to enjoy that part of myself but I felt I couldn’t do that because of my sport. I was not skiing well and so I thought: ‘It’s because I’m gay and so I want to quit.’ “My agent and I decided I would finish the season and then I was going to come out. Once I made that decision I went on a winning spree and climbed back to being the No 1 ranked skier. That was important because I felt like I was going to get a lot of shit. But Justin’s reaction was one of the biggest things that got me wanting to come out publicly. He actually asked me at the X Games in 2015: ‘Are you gay?’ I remember freezing and then saying: ‘Yeah, I am.’ His reaction was like: ‘No way? That’s fucking cool!’ I was like ‘What?’” Kenworthy laughs. “Justin kept saying: ‘That’s so cool. You should tell people.’ He said that the X Games are meant to be counterculture and going against the grain. But he was like: ‘You actually go against the grain.’ I had never thought of it like that and suddenly I told a few friends and every time I felt the weight being lifted.” The support Kenworthy received after coming out publicly in an interview with ESPN transformed his life: “I was prepared to lose a lot coming out. In the end I lost nothing and gained so much.” He noticed how people began to change their behaviour around him. “There were times in competition where I would hear someone say: ‘Oh my God, the judges are being so g-.’ They would catch themselves and say ‘bad’ instead. I would be like: ‘Thank you for catching that, for making an effort.’” Kenworthy was disappointed not to win a medal at the 2018 Winter Olympics in Pyeongchang but a kiss he shared with his boyfriend Matthew Wilkas before the slopestyle qualifying went viral after it was captured by NBC’s cameras. Kenworthy was the first gay athlete to kiss his partner on network television. “I was a medal favourite but I couldn’t put it together on the day. But my legacy in Pyeongchang was that kiss. It amplified my story and put an exclamation mark on it. I didn’t even know we were being filmed so to have it broadcast to the world felt amazing.” The 30-year-old was born in Chelmsford to an English mother and an American father and, when he was two, the family moved to Colorado. “I was very confident I could still make the US team,” he says of his switch to represent Britain in Beijing. “But qualification is really rigorous and at the last minute, and there’s lots of risk if you’re sick or hurt before qualifying. That’s your entire Olympic experience gone, and there are so many people fighting for those spots. So part of it was strategic. “I knew I could have a different approach to the Games and have time to focus on the actual run, and the tricks I want to do, instead of fighting tooth and nail for my spot. And because it is my last Olympics, my swansong, I thought it would be a sweet, poetic way to end, waving the union jack for my mom at the bottom of the run. But c’est la vie. Covid means she’ll be watching on television.” In terms of China hosting the Games, Kenworthy says: “The IOC has the power to really make a positive difference and if you’re a country with horrible human rights issues and bad stances on LGBTQ issues, you shouldn’t be allowed that giant honour and prestige of hosting the Olympics. And in countries where homosexuality is punishable by death or jail, you shouldn’t be allowed to compete in the Olympics at all.” Does he support the US and UK governments’ diplomatic boycott of the Beijing Games? “Yes, I do but I don’t think it does anything. It sends a message but it doesn’t create any actual change. Real, systemic change happens at the very top with the IOC. This should be in terms of which countries are allowed to host and which countries are allowed to participate, and certain criteria should be met in order to be eligible for either of those. “Adam Rippon and I were the first two openly gay men to go to the [2018] Winter Olympics for Team USA, which is insane. But last year I was in Tokyo doing correspondent work for NBC and one of our stories was the fact that there was more LGBTQ representation than in any other Olympic Games. It was the first time that there were trans and non-binary and gay and lesbian athletes. That felt like such a milestone.” While working at the summer Olympics, Kenworthy saw his friend Tom Daley. “Tom was a huge inspiration when I was coming out. I already followed him as an athlete and thought he was super-talented, smart and articulate. I got so much comfort from his coming out story. We met years ago in Los Angeles and have stayed in touch. He continues to be an inspiration. I was there, in person, when he won gold in Tokyo. There was almost no one there and so it was one of the most surreal experiences of my life to be standing poolside watching [Daley and Matty Lee] get gold. I burst into tears and then I got to interview Tom.” Even more than Daley, who has become a significant cultural figure in Britain, Kenworthy transcends sport in the US. The television producer Ryan Murphy handpicked him to play a starring role in American Horror Story and Kenworthy tells me that, in terms of acting, “I put myself on tape for an audition yesterday in my hotel room. My phone was stacked up on a pile of books, filming it. I haven’t even sent it yet, but I think it went pretty well.” Whether he ends up in television or the movies, politics or entertainment, Kenworthy is likely to build on his sporting success and personal courage to carve out an even more layered identity. And so, when I ask him to sum up his mood as a proudly gay athlete about to enter his final Winter Olympics for a new country, Kenworthy pauses. “If I was going to distil it in just one word it would be ‘grateful.’ I feel very grateful for everything I’ve been able to do and become.”Just before Christmas, Adam McKay released his all-star apocalypse satire Don’t Look Up, in which the political and media classes’ refusal to understand the danger of an approaching mega-comet was symbolic of climate-crisis denial. Sadly, that impeccably intentioned film turned out to be the celeb-comedy equivalent of Gal Gadot’s Imagine video. But its admirers said those critics disliking it were, as journalists, naturally complicit in the problem, and that they didn’t care about the environment. This liberal-arts version of Trumpian journalist-hate was all the odder as most of those expressing it were themselves journalists. None of these issues apply to Moonfall, a film that is part of the well-established but humbler “disaster” genre, which paradoxically signals its lack of real concern in its deadly serious manner combined with a tacitly agreed happy ending, as opposed to satire concluding in tragedy. This bizarrely leaden new example of the action spectacular is from Roland Emmerich, a longtime master of these end-of-the-world-but-not-really films. But here the formulaic silliness, sometimes part of the enjoyment, is just tiring. The idea is that the moon is spinning away from its axis towards us, causing environmental catastrophe down here on Earth. An ancient Nasa official working in a basement, played inevitably by Donald Sutherland, whisperingly confirms this awful truth. Patrick Wilson – set fair to be the Leslie Nielsen of his generation – plays maverick astronaut Brian Harper, who was unfairly dismissed for alleged incompetence which destroyed a satellite 10 years before, though actually it was his heroism that saved the life of his colleague Jo Fowler (Halle Berry), who is now a Nasa big cheese. Meanwhile, a wacky Brit weirdo with freaky theories about the moon is starting to get traction online: this is KC Houseman, played by John Bradley (Samwell Tarly from Game of Thrones), and it’s a rather Simon Pegg-ish role requiring much dorkishness. As the moon looms ever closer, with CGI waves washing over buildings, Nasa and the joint chiefs swallow their pride and realise that they’re going to have to send a special mission of freethinking heroes and heroines up to the moon to get it sorted: Brian, Jo and goofy KC. Meanwhile their stepfamilies have tense adventures back on Earth. It should be a laugh; it doesn’t pretend to be anything else, and certainly doesn’t aspire to contemporary satire. But the zany and somewhat Jules Verne-type revelations don’t put new life into the disaster genre; rather it feels as though the shark has jumped over the moon, resulting in what feel like hours and hours of solemn gibberish. For all the faults of Don’t Look Up, it was at least addressing something real and relevant. In this film the moon has fallen with a terrible clunk. • Moonfall is released on 4 February in cinemas.All coaches insist they never read the newspapers until the day comes when they wish to send a specific message. Thus it is that Eddie Jones spent a large chunk of his pre-Six Nations address insisting Scotland are the nailed-on favourites who will have to cope with the pressure of their lofty status. Say it often enough and maybe a few seeds of doubt can be quietly sown. The flip side, of course, is what that implies about his own team and a tournament buildup which has been on the grisly side of horrible. No Owen Farrell, Courtney Lawes or Manu Tuilagi. Ditto Jonny May, Sam Underhill, Jonny Hill, the Vunipola brothers, Joe Launchbury and Anthony Watson. A forced evacuation from the team hotel last week because of a fire nearby. A starting winger who has been training in isolation at home this week. Small wonder Jones is trying to shift people’s gaze elsewhere, even publicly suggesting Scotland are “probably two years ahead of us in terms of their development”. Er, what does that say about England’s strategic thinking since spring 2020? In fairness to Jones, he has made the best of a tricky selectorial hand in this instance. Tom Curry’s elevation to the captaincy at just 23 years old, making him the youngest England skipper since Will Carling in 1988, has been a popular move in the team room, while in several other positions the head coach has opted for the slightly bolder of the available options. It would have been easy, particularly with a foul weather forecast, to have stitched together a more orthodox combination. Instead, for better or worse, he has clung to the theme of a “new” England who, regardless of the odds, are not going to die wondering. A revved-up back row of Curry, Lewis Ludlam and Sam Simmonds will attempt to play Scotland’s flankers at their own disruptive game and, for once, Premiership form has clearly been taken into account. Both Nick Isiekwe and Elliot Daly have been producing for Saracens of late and, rightly, Jones has also retained Marcus Smith at fly-half, ignoring those who felt George Ford’s kicking would have been a more valuable horse for this particular course. If Jones had instead started Ford, who like Daly and Isiekwe was omitted from his original 36-man training squad, what message would that have sent about the management’s faith in the 22-year-old No 10? Instead, regardless of a few spots of rain, the boyish Smith has been invited to show he is already a man for all seasons. And if he can go toe to toe with Scotland’s creative director, Finn Russell, perhaps the reports of England’s certain demise will prove premature. Daly and Henry Slade may be the 21st different centre combination selected by Jones but they top the all-comers list for bazooka-length left-footed kicking options. With both Joe Marchant and Freddie Steward excellent in the air and Max Malins capable of popping up anywhere, Jones certainly has a backline perfectly suited to a helter-skelter game of chargedowns and skidding 50:22 attempts. Even the two most marginal calls – Ellis Genge over Joe Marler at loosehead prop and Simmonds over Alex Dombrandt at No 8 – look deliberately calibrated to ensure England have sufficient bench strength to replicate the second-half surge that ultimately took South Africa clear of Scotland in November. It also just happens to be how England ended up nicking the 2020 match in similarly bad conditions, albeit with Genge in the role of try-scoring replacement on that occasion. That said, what England currently lack is the hulking power and aura that has traditionally been their calling card. It puts a major onus on their set piece, their discipline around the tackle area – where Hamish Watson is so effective – and the ability of Genge, Simmonds, Kyle Sinckler and Luke Cowan-Dickie to carry dynamically enough to rock the Scots backwards. Ludlam, recalled for his first Test start for two years, will also be a crucial all-court cog. Interestingly, he is one of only five starting survivors from the 2020 Calcutta Cup game and is the type of player guaranteed to give heart and soul whatever the bookies or meteorologists say. As Jones told Sky News: “They brag about getting under the skin of England but we’ll see on Saturday. It’ll be mind over emotions for us. They’ll go at Marcus and guys like Genge and Sinckler but we feel all those guys will be able to handle it.” Game on.Magnus Carlsen was a class apart from his rivals last week at Tata Steel Wijk aan Zee, the “chess Wimbledon”. The No 1 capped a dominant performance with a virtuoso final game against an old rival, an unbeaten 9.5/13 total, and a record eighth victory. He has finished first at Wijk on more than half his appearances there, and the organisers have promised a gold-plated trophy if he makes it to 10 victories at the small Dutch North Sea resort. Norway’s world champion, 31, said that he felt “really good about my play. To some extent I took the obvious chances and left the more difficult ones on the table, which suggests there’s still quite a bit of room for improvement, but overall I’m very happy.” Carlsen reckoned to have had nine winning positions, but converted only five of them. He gained just three rating points, reaching 2868 in his stated quest for an all-time record 2900 rating, which he previously got within sight of in 2014 and 2019, when his peaks were 2889 and 2882. Carlsen’s penultimate round endgame win against Fabiano Caruana, his opponent in the 2018 world title match, was a vintage demonstration of how active pieces, here the black bishops, can defeat a more powerful but passive army, here the white rooks. However, it was his earlier game against Shak Mamedyarov, second on tie-break at Wijk, which attracted most praise, not least from the loser, who called it “an absolutely fantastic game… In 27 moves he played 25 engine first lines… I don’t know when I last lost like this without any chance.” Carlsen said: “I think that was certainly my best game… I just made some very, very good decisions, and the way chess has become now, you judge yourself on whether the engines like your play, and whenever you feel like you’ve played a good game it’s nice to get that confirmed.” The chess circuit moves to Berlin on Friday for the opening round of the Fide Grand Prix. This is a series of three elite tournaments, two in the German capital and one in Belgrade, which will decide the final two places in this summer’s eight-player Candidates in Madrid. Those qualified so far are Alireza Firouzja (France) and Fabiano Caruana (US) from the Fide Grand Swiss, Jan-Krzysztof Duda (Poland) and Sergey Karjakin (Russia) from the World Cup, Ian Nepomniachtchi (Russia) as loser of the 2021 title match, and Teimour Radjabov (Azerbaijan) as Fide nominee. Berlin began with a shock even before the first pawn was pushed. China’s world No 3, Ding Liren, the favourite in the eyes of many to win both the Grand Prix and the Candidates, withdrew due to visa problems so cannot now qualify as a Candidate. Ding has been very unlucky. His preparation for the 2020 Candidates was disrupted by a requirement to quarantine in Moscow before the tournament, while his results in the 2021 online Champions Tour were handicapped by poor internet connections and by playing hours which favoured his European and US rivals. In Ding’s absence, the US has a strong hand in the Grand Prix, with Wesley So, Levon Aronian and Hikaru Nakamura all having chances, while Mamedyarov is in fine form after his success in Wijk. Several others, including Russia’s Alexander Grischuk and France’s Maxime Vachier-Lagrave, should also be in the frame. Rounds start at 2pm daily from Friday. Two weeks from now, Carlsen begins the defence of his title in the online Meltwater Champions Tour, which opens on 19 February with the Airthings Masters. The format has been streamlined since last year. Won games now count for three points instead of two, while the quarter-finals and semi-finals are sped up from two days to one. The field of 16 includes Ding, Nepomniachtchi, five teenagers led by the world rapid champion, Nodirbek Abdusattorov, 17, and the women’s world rapid champion, Alexandra Kosteniuk. Carlsen is taking on a sizeable commitment in 2022 with his ambitious 2900 target while simultaneously playing the online tour with its different rhythms, challenges and time limits. Will it all prove too much, even for this exceptional world champion? Time will tell. The men’s team won the £100,000 Battle of the Sexes match which finished on Thursday in Gibraltar, scoring a clear 53-47 margin. Teams were 10-a-side, while average ages and Fide ratings were closely matched. The women’s team had a strong start and were 13-7 ahead after two rounds, but their missed chances in good positions proved costly. Olga Girya, the only Russian on the women’s team, surprised Joe Gallagher in the King’s Indian, an opening about which the former British champion has written several books. After the unusual 6 Be3!? e5 7 Qc2!? Qe7? 8 Nd5! White was already on top, and the blunder 19…Be8? only hastened defeat. Have you ever heard Emanuel Lasker or José Capablanca speak, or Vassily Smyslov sing? Many keen chess fans could easily recognise the voices of most or all of the world champions from Boris Spassky to Carlsen, but audiotapes by earlier greats are rare. Edward Winter’s online Chess Notes has just published a recording of Lasker, who held the world crown a record 27 years, interviewed during the 1935 Alexander Alekhine v Max Euwe title match. One startling claim by Lasker is that Alekhine did not lose a game playing Black in the Ruy Lopez 1 e4 e5 2 Nf3 Nc6 3 Bb5 for around 30 years. The reality, still impressive, is that the unbeaten sequence was 16 years, from a 1921 game up to 1937, when Alekhine lost to Paul Keres at Margate in a famous 23-mover. Capablanca, who beat Lasker in 1921 then lost to Alekhine in 1927, is heard talking in English when congratulated on his 50th birthday at Avro 1938. Later that day the Cuban lost to Alekhine and had a poor finish to Avro, usually blamed on a mini-stroke during the tournament. However, Capablanca himself gave a different explanation in the course of a long and interesting interview at Buenos Aires 1939. Smyslov, world champion 1957-58, once auditioned for the Bolshoi, and sometimes sang at the end of tournaments, accompanied by the concert pianist Mark Taimanov. Here he is on YouTube. 3801 1 Qc6+! Kb8 (if Ka7 2 Nb5+ wins) 2 Kc2! Black is in zugzwang (compulsion to make a losing move) because his queen has no safe square available to guard against Qb7 mate.For nearly two decades, the man who came to be known as Abu Ibrahim al-Hashimi al-Qurayshi was a central figure in the terror juggernaut that became the Islamic State. From fighter, to prisoner, strategist to leader, there were not many parts of the insurgency in which the 46-year-old jihadist had not had a hand. Born Amir Mohammed Abdul Rahman al-Mawli al-Salbi in the northern Iraqi district of Mahalabiya, Qurayshi, who was killed by US special forces in Syria on Thursday, was to become one of the most committed proponents of some of its most savage acts. He played a lead role in the genocide of the Yazidis, which led to the killing of thousands of men and the enslavement of women and girls. He was deeply involved in the overthrow of Mosul in mid-2014, the success of which paralysed a region and the armies of two nation states. And he orchestrated mass killings of Shia civilians and members of the security forces. Like many IS leaders, Qurayshi had served in Saddam Hussein’s military, where he became an officer and by definition a member of the Ba’ath party – an unusual port of call for someone described as ideological during his years at Mosul University, where he studied sharia law. His path to the leadership of IS followed another familiar path – a spell in the US prison Camp Bucca in southern Iraq, where he met his predecessor as IS leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi and others who would later help him to attain the terror group’s most senior role. Like the rest of the Bucca alumni, Qurayshi honed his skills in the back rooms of Iraq’s towns and cities on his release. They eventually served as a breeding ground for an insurrection that was without precedent in modern history. By the time Mosul fell, he had risen to be one of Baghdadi’s most trusted advisers, along with a handful of other seasoned hands who helped shape the course of the conflict in both Iraq and Syria. Yet for such an important insurgent, little was known about him. When IS announced Qurayshi as a replacement for Baghdadi when the latter was killed by US special forces, the name was not known to western intelligence agencies. It took several months for them to link the nom de guerre to Salbi. Nevertheless, the new name stuck and for the last two years he was one of the most wanted men in the world. Qurayshi was thought to have initially been hiding near Mosul, familiar terrain to a man from the area, but by Christmas it became clear that he was instead in Syria, where other senior IS members – including Baghdadi – had sought sanctuary. His death comes close to ending the old guard, who caused so much destruction. While he remained a relative unknown throughout his two years as leader, the next cadre of IS leaders, who were ranked far lower during the early years, are now stepping into the breach with even less known about them. Qurayshi’s legacy could well end up being who he was able to groom to replace him.Authorities in Argentina are advising drug consumers to throw away any cocaine they may have purchased in the last two days after at least 23 people died after ingesting adulterated cocaine in the Greater Buenos Aires area. Eighty-four others are are currently under intensive care, of which 20 have been intubated, but authorities fear the death toll could increase as further victims are found to have died alone at home. Dozens of the victims were saved after they were intubated in intensive care units usually reserved for Covid patients, Buenos Aires province health minister Nicolás Kreplak said on Thursday. “If it hadn’t been because of our pandemic preparedness, the number of victims would be far higher,” Kreplak told reporters outside the Bocalandro hospital where a number of patients are interned. The tainted cocaine causes lethal cardiac and respiratory arrest in less than an hour, prompting authorities to issue an epidemiological alert warning the public not to consume any cocaine they may have purchased in the last two days. Many victims have been taken ill almost immediately and died in their homes. Harrowing scenes of convulsing victims arriving at hospitals in private cars and being carried inside by relatives have been shown on television news and shared on social media. Most of the victims seemed to be male and between the ages of 30 and 50, according to early reports. Allan Santillán, 19, was rushed him to a public hospital on Wednesday morning after smoking the cocaine the previous night. “I woke up with my liver shot to hell, vomiting, and with stomach pains,” he told the Associated Press in a hospital interview. Early speculation pointed to a turf war in which the cocaine could have been spiked by rival drug gangs trying to squeeze competitors out of the market. But that hypothesis is now giving way to the view that the tainted cocaine was cut with a poorly manufactured opioid. “We have indirect evidence it was cut with an opioid, because patients who receive the opioid antidote [naloxone] recover very quickly,” said Buenos Aires security minister Sergio Berni. The minister speculated that the opioid may have been poorly manufactured in a drug “kitchen” rather than stolen from a pharmaceutical company because of its deadly effect. Paraguayan drug dealer Joaquín “El Paisa” Aquino was arrested overnight and authorities speculated he could be connected to the tainted drugs. In the operation, police seized 15,000 packages of cocaine in magenta polythene wrappers, similar to those which survivors of the tainted drugs had purchased. “In principle, it would seem that it is the same batch and the same substance, but this is all preliminary, there is nothing definitive,” Buenos Aires crime secretary Francisco Pont Verges told the press. Officials said the victims had purchased the cocaine at drug dens in Puerta 8, a low-income district in the Greater Buenos Aires area. “It is a regular place for retail drug sales and it has been raided several times,” said prosecutor Marcelo Lapargo. “But we are now talking about an event of a different nature, because one thing is the sale of drugs at these dens … and the death of so many people is quite another. We are extremely anxious today to tell those who are in possession of this poison that they should not consume it.” Cocaine consumption is high in Greater Buenos Aires, where 200,000 individual doses are sold each day among a population of about 15 million people, according to media reports. The illegal drug business accounted for $1.1bn in sales in Argentina during 2017, according to the most recent studies, the daily Infobae reported Thursday.On the eve of these Olympics, which have been scarred by more controversy and tone-deafness than any since Moscow in 1980, Thomas Bach was asked a simple question. What was his message to the Uyghur population of China, who believe they are being repressed? Say what you want about the president of the International Olympic Committee. But 46 years after he won a fencing gold medal, he retains an uncanny ability to parry and evade. “With regards to the Uyghur population, the position of the IOC must be to give political neutrality,” said Bach, before offering a history lesson on how the ancient Games in Greece came to an end after a thousand years because of Roman interference. “We are not commenting on political issues because … if we get in the middle of intentions and disputes and confrontations of political powers, then we are putting the Games at risk.” Bach was aiming for realpolitik, and also not to upset his hosts. The problem with his strategy, though, was that it was bound to upset everyone else. To claim an equivalence between the Chinese Communist party and the Uyghur Muslims, the powerful and the powerless, the elite and the damned, was damning enough. But when set against the backdrop of harrowing stories of millions of Uyghurs being forced into re-education camps, where some claim they have been raped or sterilised, his comments felt as cold as the tip of his old foil blade. Human rights groups, some of whom have dubbed these the “Genocide Games”, will attempt to keep the world’s attention on the issue by protesting outside the White House on Saturday. But in China, which denies any abuses in Xinjiang and calls the allegations the “lie of the century”, such criticism is an irrelevance. For them the focus of these Olympics is on delivery and glory. China Daily, the official English-language mouthpiece for the Chinese government, said on Thursday that the excitement for the Winter Games has already “hit fever pitch” in Beijing. They might be right. But what might be an iron truth could also be rampant propaganda; the sporting equivalent of reporting record grain harvests in a famine. It is impossible to know. That is because of a second strand running through these Games: the “closed loop” Covid regulations which are the most restrictive in history. For all their time in Beijing, athletes, officials and journalists will be cordoned off from the outside world; their lives restricted to the airport, hotel, special buses and the Olympic venues. Escaping the bubble is impossible. In the Guardian’s case it would involve evading nearly a dozen hotel security guards and vaulting over a 10-foot high fence. Beijing police have even warned locals to stay away from Olympic vehicles in the event of an accident. Even so, some of the world’s leading athletes will miss out. The top women’s ski jumper, Marita Kramer of Austria, is one of them, having failed to recover from the virus in time to make it to the Chinese capital. Others are in a government isolation facility, hoping they will be out in time. So far no British athlete is among them. Such measures are ostensibly designed to prevent Covid running rampant in the local population. But they have a handy byproduct of keeping journalists and athletes pegged in and perhaps less willing to speak out too. In this area, however, Bach was more encouraging and forceful, promising that freedom of speech would be protected. “We had this in Tokyo, it will be here, it will be in Paris, it’s irrespective of the host of the Games,” he added. There was, however, a kicker, with Bach clearly hoping that athletes will keep controversial opinions to themselves. “If an actor is engaging in a theatre playing Hamlet, then nobody ever asks the question when playing Hamlet he must or should express during the play his political opinion,” he said at one point. “The same is true for the athletes.” To protest or not to protest, that is the question. Meanwhile there was also good news for domestic fans, with organisers confirming that 150,000 spectators would be invited to attend events in the coming fortnight. No international supporters have been allowed into China, however. So what of Britain’s chances? There is always more jeopardy in winter sports than in their summer equivalent, where the risk of a crash landing is higher than on a track or bike. Nonetheless it is not out of the question that Britain beats its record of five medals at a Winter Games, with its world champion curlers and Charlotte Bankes in the snowboard cross leading the charge. Elsewhere the Jamaican four-man bobsleigh team will bring nostalgia and diversity to a Games that remains overwhelmingly white. But the battle to be the star of these Olympics is likely to be between Eileen Gu, a Chinese athlete born in California, who is gunning for three gold medals in the big air, slopestyle and halfpipe, and the American skier Mikaela Shiffrin. Shiffrin already has three golds to her name and, if she can bag another three, she will become the most decorated Olympic alpine skier in history. But she has already admitted that the pressure is on, saying: “It’s not like rainbows and sunshine and butterflies and everything that people sort of say.” Speaking of history, when the Games are declared open on Friday, Beijing will become the first city to host both the Summer and Winter Olympics. History, of course, is different from legacy. While that legacy is yet to be fully written, the early chapters are not exactly encouraging.Russia is to expel the German public broadcaster Deutsche Welle (DW) in retaliation for a German ban on broadcasts by Russia’s RT. The foreign ministry said the press credentials of DW’s correspondents would be revoked, its bureau in Russia closed, and its German-language broadcasts would be banned from Russian satellite television in the near future. It said this was the first stage of its “retaliatory measures”. The move marks an escalation in Russia’s media war with the west, in which there have already been expulsions of a BBC journalist and a Dutch reporter in the last year. It comes during a period of heightened geopolitical tensions as western governments have accused Russia of preparing to launch an attack on Ukraine and threatened crippling sanctions. On Wednesday German authorities banned broadcasts by RT DE, the broadcaster’s German-language channel, saying its Serbian licence was invalid in Germany. A Kremlin spokesperson called the decision political and said it was “nothing but an attack on freedom of expression”. Russia has said it will retaliate against journalists when foreign governments target RT, a state-funded news agency that western governments have accused of spreading propaganda. Ultimately, the foreign ministry went beyond a tit-for-tat decision to ban DW’s broadcasts, in effect blocking the broadcaster’s ability to report on the ground in Russia. RT DE journalists were not stripped of their accreditation as part of the German government decision. The Russian foreign ministry also said it would initiate a procedure to recognise Deutsche Welle as a “foreign agent” in Russia and it would draft a list of German state and public figures who were “involved in restricting the broadcasting of RT DE and otherwise putting pressure on a Russian media operator”. They would be banned from entering Russia, the ministry said. DW’s director general, Peter Limbourg, said in a broadcast interview that Moscow’s retaliation exceeded his expectations. “We had been expecting some measures by the Russian side, but I think this is a total overreaction from the Russian government,” he said, adding that it was “another sign that the Russian government is not interested in press freedom and freedom of opinion”. He said: “Even if we have to leave the country, we will intensify our reporting on the country. We will not just ignore what is happening in Russia, we will report. And we will do more and more.” RT’s head, Margarita Simonyan, hailed the decision and suggested that further retaliation could lead to all German media being expelled. RT DE had already been under considerable pressure. YouTube removed the channel from its site last year. On Wednesday the Russian foreign ministry said it would retaliate against “internet intermediaries” that had blocked the channel, in an apparent warning to YouTube. RT has been required to register as a foreign agent in the US and has faced heightened scrutiny from Ofcom in the UK. The regulator has fined RT for breaching impartiality rules in its coverage of Syria and the Salisbury poisoning.The first minister of Northern Ireland, the Democratic Unionist party’s Paul Givan, has resigned, plunging the devolved government at Stormont into turmoil two years after power-sharing with Sinn Féin was restored. His resignation, over Brexit checks in the Irish Sea, will also bring the parallel departure of the Sinn Féin deputy first minister, Michelle O’Neill, under the power-sharing arrangements. The move could result in a snap election, bringing forward the assembly polls scheduled for May. The DUP leader, Sir Jeffrey Donaldson, and the Sinn Féin president, Mary Lou McDonald, have both called for a snap election for Stormont. “I believe it is time for the people of Northern Ireland to have their say,” said Donaldson after Givan’s departure. McDonald said: “I want to be clear, we cannot stagger on in the months ahead without a functioning executive … an early election must be called and the people must have their say.” Holding back tears as he thanked his wife and family, Givan, who has been first minister for just eight months, said it had been the “privilege of my lifetime” to hold the position but he had to go as the principle of consent that lay behind the institutions of power were being “tested” by Brexit. It is the culmination of months of protests by the DUP against checks on goods crossing the Irish Sea. It came as polls indicated Sinn Féin is in contention to overtake the DUP as the largest party in Northern Ireland in local elections due in May, threatening the party’s right to the first minister position. Explaining the decision to withdraw leadership from Stormont, Donaldson said he had warned the British government the DUP would quit the executive if the party did not obtain a radical change to the Brexit protocol that eliminated all the checks on goods crossing the Irish Sea. “I think now is the moment when we say enough is enough,” he said. In a swipe at Sinn Féin, Donaldson added: “It has been a long established norm that arrangements and agreements [in Northern Ireland] can only flourish when supported by unionists and nationalists. One of most disturbing characteristics of this period is the total disregard of this principle by Brussels, by Dublin and the protocol cheerleaders here in Northern Ireland.” The departure of Givan came just hours after the DUP agriculture minister, Edwin Poots, ordered a halt to Brexit checks on food and farm products coming into Northern Ireland from Great Britain. The DUP’s decision was roundly criticised by opposition parties. The Sinn Féin finance minister, Conor Murphy, called it “reckless and self-serving”, while Doug Beattie, the head of the Ulster Unionist party, said it would “create more destabilisation” and “more hardship for the people of Northern Ireland”. He said it was an election stunt that would have no impact on Brexit checks. “At the end of it all, the protocol will still be there,” he said. The removal of the co-chairs of the Stormont executive is a serious blow to local government and will freeze decision-making on budget matters, healthcare and energy bill grants. Other ministers can continue with their portfolios, allowing Stormont to stumble on until the elections in May, but the executive’s function will be paralysed. The DUP manoeuvres are being seen by rivals as positioning for the May elections and come after repeated threats by Donaldson to quit Stormont over the Brexit checks. The Alliance party MP Stephen Farry said before the announcement that the first minister’s resignation would be “an act of huge harm” to Northern Ireland. The SDLP leader, Colum Eastwood, poured scorn on Donaldson’s reference to historic peacekeeper John Hume. “Citing John Hume while threatening the institutions of the Good Friday Agreement is just low. He couldn’t lace John’s boots.” The Traditional Unionist Voice leader, Jim Allister, told the BBC’s Stephen Nolan it was “about time” the first minister resigned. “There can never be a settlement on this issue,” he said of the Northern Ireland protocol. “The protocol is worse than a pandemic for our constitution position, the protocol kills the union [of the United Kingdom].”Piers Morgan “must have had knowledge of voicemail interception” and other unlawful information gathering techniques when he was editor of the Daily Mirror, it has been claimed at the high court. Lawyers acting for alleged phone hacking victims made the accusation while seeking financial records relating to Morgan’s time in charge of the newspaper in the early 2000s. They claim illegal techniques were used by individuals working for the Mirror during Morgan’s time as editor, including in relation to a story exposing Jeremy Clarkson for having an affair. Morgan recently signed an enormous contract with Rupert Murdoch’s media empire worth tens of millions of pounds to be the face of the forthcoming talkTV channel. He has always strongly denied any knowledge of phone hacking at the Mirror and previously told the Guardian: “I’ve never hacked a phone nor told anybody to hack a phone.” Yet the high court filings allege that, during Morgan’s time as editor, a Daily Mirror reporter had “been carrying out VMI [voicemail interception] on Mr Clarkson and trawling his phone bill” with the help of a private detective agency. The lawyers allege this information was then used to help paparazzi photographers capture pictures of Clarkson with a woman who was not his wife, which were then published by Morgan in the Mirror. In legal filings, they insist that it was inconceivable that Morgan would not have known how the story about a prominent celebrity had been obtained. One of their key sources is the Insider, Morgan’s own book about his time as Mirror editor: “Mr Morgan admitted in the Insider that he approached Mr Clarkson and must have known the origins of the story and the details of the UIG [unlawful information gathering] before he did so.” The court filings also state that Southern Investigations, a private detective agency run by former police officers which was entwined in the case of the murder of Daniel Morgan, helped the Mirror with the Clarkson story. While Morgan was editor the private investigators issued an invoice for help contacting “confidential sources” for information on Clarkson. In order to prove the accusations, the lawyers are seeking disclosure of what payments to private investigators, if any, were signed off by Morgan and Neil Wallis, the editor of sister title the Sunday People. Although it is more than 15 years since the start of the phone hacking scandal, which led to the closure of Rupert Murdoch’s News of the World, cases continue to make their way through the court system. Dozens of individuals, including the Duke of Sussex, are still filing new claims. Murdoch’s News UK and Reach, the publisher of the Mirror, have collectively paid out hundreds of millions of pounds in damages and costs since 2006.Millions of UK households are expected to be dragged into fuel poverty for the first time despite the support announced by Rishi Sunak to soften the blow from soaring energy bills. Several charities warned that the chancellor his plan was badly targeted and offered too little support for those most in need. The scale of the shock to low-income households would drive hunger, rent arrears, and ill health, and pile extra demand on to already stretched food banks and homeless shelters, they said. The Resolution Foundation thinktank said cases of fuel stress – where energy bills in a household exceed 10% of disposable income – would double to 5 million in April despite the steps announced by Sunak on Thursday. The Treasury’s intervention was designed to ease the pressure of a £700 increase in the regulated energy price cap to nearly £2,000 a year. Without the chancellor’s plan – which offers most consumers £350 of relief on their bills – fuel stress would have trebled to more than 6 million, the thintank said. However, it criticised Sunak’s decision to favour a moderate amount of help for a large number of people, rather than deeper support for those most in need. “The government’s package of measures might cushion the blow for some but it’s not enough to protect people who already need a food bank,” said Garry Lemon, the policy director at the Trussell Trust food bank network. He called for the planned 3.1% rise in benefits from April to be doubled to 7%. Almost all families in the poorest tenth of households in Britain face spending more than 10% of their disposable income on heating and electricity bills, according to the IPPR thinktankMeanwhile, it estimates 44% of those in Britain with the highest household incomes – the top 10% – would in effect get a tax cut from Sunak’s measures. Dame Clare Moriarty, the chief executive of Citizens Advice, said: “Even before these price hikes kick in, we’re seeing record numbers of people needing crisis support like food vouchers … If the government is serious about helping families facing the desperate choice between heating and eating it should use the benefits system.” Pressure on incomes will build over the coming months after the Bank of England increased interest rates from 0.25% to 0.5%, in a development designed to tackle soaring inflationary pressures but that will probably drive up household costs in the short-term. The Bank’s economists are forecasting inflation will peak at 7.25% in April, up from 5.4% at present. Along with the rising cost of a weekly shop, British households will also face higher borrowing costs on mortgages and credit cards. The government also plans an increase in national insurance contributions in April – the same month as the energy price rise. Tony Syme, a macroeconomics expert at the University of Salford Business School, said: “The increase in interest rates will have minimal effect on inflation and will only exacerbate the cost of living crisis. Higher housing costs will be passed on to homeowners through increased mortgage rates and on to renters as landlords pass on their increased costs of borrowing.” “These energy crisis measures are woefully inadequate and will leave those on the lowest incomes and in the least efficient homes in deep peril,” said Adam Scorer, the chief executive of charity National Energy Action. “We needed deep, targeted support for the most vulnerable. We have shallow, broad measures for all. That simply does not work.” Although the chancellor announced a £150m hardship grant for English councils to help struggling families, critics said the dismantling of the local welfare system over the past decade meant many authorities lacked the resources and expertise to deliver meaningful crisis support. “Budget cuts mean 32 English councils have closed their crisis schemes leaving 13 million people in England without this support. These local authorities no longer have the infrastructure or processes in place to direct additional government funding to those most in need of help,” said Claire Donovan, of End Furniture Poverty.The mighty United States women’s hockey team launched their first Olympic title defense in two decades with an air of menace on Thursday night, roaring to a 5-2 win in the opening game of pool play against a Finland team expected to contend for a medal. But the Americans’ hopes of becoming the first US team to win back-to-back Olympic gold medals were dealt a devastating blow early on when assistant captain Brianna Decker suffered a leg injury that will sideline her for the duration of the tournament. Decker, a three-time Olympian and steady veteran presence who has scored 170 points in 146 appearances with the national team, became trapped beneath Finland defender Ronja Savolainen midway through the opening period and the game still scoreless. The 31-year-old forward’s screams resounded through the nearly empty arena in a horrifying scene until she was stretchered off the ice by medical staff. “It was sickening,” USA forward Amanda Kessel said afterward. “She is one of the toughest players I have ever played with. She is not staying down on the ice and not crying if it was not bad.” She added: “We want to win for her.” Kessel wasted no time after play resumed, tucking in the opening goal for Team USA less than two minutes later on an assist from Savannah Harmon. The Americans doubled the margin shortly after when Alex Carpenter beat the goaltender upstairs on a power play, making Finland pay for a Petra Nieminen hooking penalty. The US took the game by the scruff after the first intermission, firing shots on goal with greater frequency until USA captain Kendall Coyne Schofield broke through twice in a 64-second span to bust things open. The Americans outshot their opponents 19-2 in the middle period and 52-12 overall. Finland pulled one back on a power play early in the third, but Carpenter responded with her second goal of the night moments later, tapping the puck across the line off a pass from Abby Roque, who moved up into Decker’s spot on the second line. Susanna Tapani’s cosmetic goal for the Finns off the post in the dying minutes made for a scoreline that didn’t quite reflect the one-way traffic of the affair. The fewer than 200 spectators invited by organizers to attend, all masked and distanced on one side of the 15,384-seat Wukesong Sports Centre, politely clapped and waved flags for all seven goals. Cheering was prohibited as a precaution against spreading the coronavirus. “It was good to get that first one under our belt,” said Carpenter, a 2014 Olympic silver medalist who is back in the national team after she was surprisingly dropped ahead of the gold medal run four years ago. “That was a really good game for us to start. Finland always gives us a great game, so I think for us to come out and put up those goals, it’s a good confidence boost for our team moving forward.” The women’s ice hockey tournament, which kicked off Thursday with four preliminary round games, is once again expected to come down to the USA and Canada, who delivered their own statement of intent earlier Thursday with a 12-1 win over Switzerland. The two countries have met in the final at the last three Winter Olympics and have dominated the world championship since its inception in 1990. Four years ago in South Korea, the Americans saw off Canada in a penalty shootout in the final to deny their northern neighbors a fifth straight Olympic gold. But Canada hit back at the most recent world championships in August when Marie-Philip Poulin scored an overtime winner to end Team USA’s bid for a sixth straight title. Finland, who captured the bronze medal in Pyeongchang, have been widely tipped as the likeliest outsider to upset the sport’s North American hegemony. Led by captain Jenni Hiirikoski, who was named the best defenseman at the past two Olympics, they are a well organized, defensively minded side with depth at every position. But their ninth loss from nine all-time meetings with Team USA in Olympic play, none closer than two goals, showed just how far they have to go. “USA started to skate a little more than we did and that is what showed on the scoreboard,” Finland defenseman Minnamari Tuominen said. “Obviously there’s room for improvement but I think that we worked hard and tried to execute what we talked about.” • This article was amended on 4 February 2022 to clarify that the US team would be the first team from that country to win back-to-back Olympic ice hockey gold medals, not the first country overall; Canada won four titles in a row from 2002 to 2014.The government has been reported as saying that, after the police inquiry, there will be publication of the full report by Sue Gray. In fact, an “update” has been promised in the light of the police inquiry (Report, 31 January). An update may or may not be the “full” report. But the scope of publication of the Scott inquiry report is a precedent which may help Sue Gray. The Scott inquiry report in 1996 (re whether licensing by the UK government of defence exports to Iraq was in contravention of the government’s policy) examined the conduct of two prime ministers, several cabinet and junior ministers, and civil servants. The report was published in full, save for exclusion of a small segment concerning a sensitive intelligence matter. There were also limited redactions for overriding national security reasons. Such transparency was the only way in which the public could have confidence in Sir Richard Scott’s conclusions, not least in view of criticisms that ministers had deliberately withheld relevant information about Iraq-related defence exports in answer to questions from parliamentarians and had wrongfully withheld information in court proceedings at the Old Bailey. Specifically, what did full publication entail? The judge published (a) the extensive written questionnaires sent to witnesses and their responses; (b) the source documents to which express reference was made in the report; and (c) the documents and submissions made by government departments and the intelligence agencies in response to the inquiry’s general questions. The oral hearings had largely been in open session and so transcripts had already been published. The question of full publication must, of course, be treated on its own merits. For example, if civil service staff were involved in misconduct short of criminality which might result in disciplinary proceedings against them, fairness might require a degree of anonymisation pending the outcome of such proceedings. This approach has been previously adopted in Whitehall. Subject to that, full publication in line with the Scott inquiry precedent is the right thing to do in the national interest. Christopher Muttukumaru Bromley, LondonNorthern Ireland’s first minister, the Democratic Unionist party’s Paul Givan, has resigned. What does it mean and will Stormont collapse? What has happened? Givan, who was only appointed first minister eight months ago, announced his departure on Thursday citing the threat the continued Brexit arrangements posed to Northern Ireland institutions that depend on consent between nationalist and unionist communities. DUP leader Sir Jeffrey Donaldson says he hopes the action may provide the leverage that the UK needs to break the impasse in ongoing negotiations between the UK and the EU. But why now? The DUP has been threatening to quit Stormont since 9 September last year but at each self-imposed deadline has stepped back from the brink. These repeated warnings, without subsequent action, had led some critics to portray Donaldson as the boy who cried wolf. Givan’s resignation is being seen as part of a two-step move to finally deliver on the threat. On Wednesday night, the DUP agriculture minister, Edwin Poots, made the first move, ordering a halt from midnight to post-Brexit checks on food and farm products that were brought as part of the Northern Ireland protocol between the UK and EU. It emerged early on Thursday that the checks were continuing. Poots claimed they would be gone in a few days once the senior civil servant in charge had cleared up some unidentified financial issues. What about the Northern Ireland protocol? Checks on food and farm products as well as customs paperwork are mandated by the Northern Ireland protocol, a subsection of the wider Brexit withdrawal agreement brokered personally by Boris Johnson to get the Brexit deal over the line in January 2020. The DUP campaigned for Brexit in the 2016 referendum but has objected from the outset to the arrangements made in the protocol designed to avoid a border on the island of Ireland. The foreign secretary, Liz Truss, who has taken over Brexit negotiations in Brussels from Lord Frost, is in the middle of negotiations with Brussels, with both sides declaring they want a deal before March. The UK is pursuing an interim deal with an elimination of most of the checks on food and farm products followed by a wider solution on government after the May elections. Can the DUP take the law into its own hands? The Irish European commissioner, Mairead McGuinness, has said Poots’s order is a breach of international law. And it seems that the legal risk was also an issue for Donaldson. Only last week the DUP gave Brussels and London until 21 February to come up with a new deal eliminating the checks on goods crossing the Irish sea. What has changed? The DUP is under mounting political pressure at home. Polls show it will lose its position to Sinn Féin as Northern Ireland’s largest party in the May elections with a rival, the Ulster Unionist party, snapping at its heels. Its electoral gamble is that walking out of Stormont will pay off at the polls. Will this trigger a snap Stormont election? If first and deputy first ministers are not renominated within a week, the UK government assumes a legal responsibility to call an assembly election within a “reasonable” timeframe. Legislation that has almost completed its passage through Westminster would significantly extend this “cooling off” period to up to nine months. Most of this is largely academic in the current situation, as Northern Ireland already has a scheduled assembly election in May. At most, Givan’s resignation could see the date for that poll brought forward by several weeks. Does this mean Stormont would collapse? No, but it means its decision-making powers would be severely weakened. The executive or cabinet could not officially meet as its chair and deputy chair would be absent. The most significant item of unfinished business for the current executive is the draft three-year budget. Sinn Féin finance minister Conor Murphy’s spending plan envisages a significant reconfiguration of executive spending priorities to boost investment in the region’s under-pressure health service. A failure to agree a final executive budget would derail those plans to prioritise health spending.Universities and accommodation providers need to tackle the racism experienced by Black students in halls of residence, according to a report that found claims of “racially segregated” accommodation and widespread abuse from other students. More than half of Black students surveyed in the report said they had been victims of racism while living in UK student accommodation, and nearly two-thirds had witnessed racism. “These experiences ranged from insensitivity around things like hair or food, to the use of racial slurs, to spitting, shouting and physical violence,” found the report, Living Black at University. More than 1,000 students were surveyed and interviews were carried out for the research, commissioned by the student accommodation provider Unite Students, which is the first to deal with the experience of racism in higher education in a non-academic context. Several students interviewed said they suspected there was an intentional policy by their universities to segregate students by race or nationality, with one saying: “My block was known as the block for Black people from London. I think it was probably intentional because there was also a block with mainly white students.” Three-quarters of Black students reported an impact on their mental health due to racism, compounded by a lack of support and difficulties in finding Black counsellors who had the experience to understand the impact. The report concludes that universities and accommodation providers should act together “to eliminate racism from all areas of the student experience, including student accommodation”, including training for staff, and by ensuring that staff reflect the diversity of the students. The report also calls for accommodation providers to “build a relationship of trust with Black students” and to collect and publish data and outcomes of complaints involving racism. Prof Iyiola Solanke, the dean for equality, diversity and inclusion at the University of Leeds, told a seminar on the report hosted by the Higher Education Policy Institute that she was surprised that many of the instances of racism hadn’t changed from when she was an undergraduate, when other students expected her to be a drug dealer or to like hip-hop. Solanke said there was a “direct pipeline” between tackling racism in university housing and increasing the number of Black professors. “I think Black students have shown that they are adventurous, they’re willing to go to campuses that are not well integrated … but universities need to reciprocate and really need to do what they can to encourage students to stay, because that’s also a way to diversify faculty and diversify professional services,” Solanke said. Hillary Gyebi-Ababio, the vice-president for higher education at the National Union of Students, said: “For a long time, the experiences of students in student accommodation have been overlooked and disconnected from the broader university experience. This is particularly true for Black students, who often speak of high levels of racism in and at university, including in their accommodation.” The study did reveal some positive findings in terms of students and staff members tackling instances of racism: 40% of Black respondents said they had seen staff “positively confront racist attitudes”, while 57% said they had witnessed other students confronting racist attitudes. David Richardson, the vice-chancellor of the University of East Anglia and chair of the Universities UK advisory group on racial harassment, said: “It is deeply worrying to see the proportion of students who report being a victim of racism in their accommodation. It’s another reminder that we must keep collectively working on tackling racism throughout higher education.”The government has admitted it is spending £4.7m a day on accommodating refugees from Afghanistan and other asylum seekers in hotels, a figure four times the amount previously stated. Refugee organisations criticised the Home Office for the slow progress it has made towards finding permanent homes for refugees brought to the UK from Afghanistan last year. Campaigners have consistently warned that, aside from the cost, hotels are inappropriate places to house families long-term. The Home Office was forced to clarify the cost of the policy, after the deputy permanent secretary, Tricia Hayes, told the home affairs select committee on Wednesday that a total of £1.2m was being spent every day on hotel accommodation. The department said on Thursday that this figure actually only covered the 12,000 people being resettled after being airlifted out of Kabul. Another £3.5m a day is spent on housing 25,000 more asylum seekers. The home secretary, Priti Patel, admitted this week that the government was “absolutely struggling” to find accommodation for 12,000 people from Afghanistan who remain in hotels almost six months after being evacuated last August. About 4,000 have been found permanent homes but the home secretary said officials were “desperately trying” to find alternative housing for the rest. “We do not have the infrastructure … in terms of housing and accommodation,” she said. “We do not want people in hotels,” she added. “We should not be housing people in hotels.” The clarification of the figures by the Home Office is likely to focus attention on its failure to procure longer-term homes for refugees. Ministers argue that local authorities have failed to provide the housing, while some local authorities say homes have been offered but the Home Office system to allocate them is very inefficient, leading to houses being left empty unnecessarily. Enver Solomon, chief executive officer of the Refugee Council, described the use of hotels as “an incredibly costly and failed strategy that could be easily fixed by using public money more effectively to house people in our communities and allow them the right to work”. He said being housed in hotels caused “real harm to men, women and children who have come to our shores in search of safety”. A Home Office spokesperson said: “The use of hotels is unacceptable. It is a short-term solution to the global migration crisis and we are working hard to find appropriate dispersed accommodation for migrants, asylum seekers and Afghan refugees as soon as possible. We would urge local authorities to do all they can to help house people permanently.”Time to wrap up... UK households are facing their most painful squeeze in decades, after a day in which the cost of living crisis escalated. The Bank of England warned that disposable incomes will fall in 2022 and 2023, as rising inflation and tax increases hit families. In its latest forecasts, the BoE predicted that real post-tax labour income will shrink by 2% this year, and another 0.5% in 2023 - the worst squeeze in at least 30 years. The Bank raised UK interest rates from 0.25% to 0.5%, the first back-to-back rate rise since 2004, as it tried to rein in the cost of living. Four of its nine policymakers pushed for a larger increase, to 0.75%, in an effort to dampen inflationary pressures. The Bank now expects inflation will hit 7.25% in April - even higher than previously thought, and more than three times its target of 2%. Governor Andrew Bailey defended the move, saying that “If we don’t take this action, it will be even worse.” Bailey also warned that any military conflict over Ukraine would drive energy prices higher. And tonight, he’s told the BBC that some “moderation of wage rises” is needed to prevent prices rising out of control: Energy bills are set to surge by almost £700 in April, after energy regulator Ofgem lifted the cap on bills by 54%. The record increase is even more than analysts had feared, taking average bills to around £2,000 per year, and plunging many more families into fuel poverty. The move prompted the government to step in with a package of measures to try to cushion the immediate blow. Households will see £200 knocked off their bills in October, however this loan will be repaid with a £40 added to bills over the following five years. Chancellor Rishu Sunak also announced a £150 discount to council tax for those in the A-D bands (the less-expensive properties). Despite these measures, the Resolution Foundation thinktank said cases of fuel stress – where energy bills in a household exceed 10% of disposable income – would double to 5 million in April. Sunak’s support package will not come close to providing enough help for struggling families, our columnist Polly Toynbee writes: Everything about this energy policy is wrongheaded. The Social Market Foundation and the Joseph Rowntree Foundation want any subsidy delivered as cash directly into people’s pockets – £500 to all on low incomes on universal credit, which was an efficient way during the pandemic of paying out that £20 uplift (and then snatching it back). It’s greener and more dignified to give people money to spend as they choose, not forcing it on to their energy bills: with out-of-work benefits their lowest for 30 years, hard-pressed families may need to choose to spend less on energy and more on other necessities. Energy producers faced fresh calls for a windfall tax, after Shell reported that its profits had quadrupled in the last year to $19.3bn. In other news today: Shares in Meta, the parent company of Facebook, have plunged by 25% today after it reported Facebook’s first-ever drop in daily users. The slump has wiped around $220bn off Meta’s value, putting the social network giant on track for the worst slump in stock-market history. Lorry drivers struck in long queues at Dover have warned that Brexit customs checks are causing delays. Battery technology startup Britishvolt and its backer, the FTSE 100 metals and mining firm Glencore, have announced plans to build a plant capable of recycling lithium-ion batteries used in cars and electronic devices. Future, the UK’s biggest magazine publisher that is home to titles from Country Life to Metal Hammer, has been forced into an embarrassing sit-down with investors after a bruising shareholder revolt. Some 60% failed to support its annual pay report – including a controversial bonus scheme in which its chief executive could be awarded £40m. BT has entered exclusive talks with the US pay-TV firm Discovery to create a joint venture business that will include BT Sport, which has rights to sports including the Premier League and Champions League. A cyber-attack targeting KP Snacks could lead to a shortage of some of Britain’s most popular snacks including Hula Hoops, McCoy’s and Tyrrells crisps, Butterkist, Skips, Nik Naks and KP Nuts. Waitrose is ditching free newspapers for loyalty card-holders from 22 February in the latest example of supermarkets cutting costs amid surging inflation. Goodnight. GW Rupert Harrison of BlackRock, who was George Osborne’s chief of staff during the 2010-2015 coalition, warns that central bankers are making a collective mistake by tightening monetary policy just as economies slow: Workers must not ask for big pay rises to try and stop prices rising out of control, the Bank of England governor has told the BBC. Andrew Bailey said the Bank raised rates to 0.5% from 0.25% to prevent rising prices becoming “ingrained”. Asked if the Bank was also implicitly asking workers not to demand big pay rises, he said: “Broadly, yes”, the BBC reports. Mr Bailey said that while it would be “painful” for workers to accept that prices would rise faster than their wages, he added that some “moderation of wage rises” was needed to prevent inflation becoming entrenched. “In the sense of saying, we do need to see a moderation of wage rises, now that’s painful. I don’t want to in any sense sugar that, it is painful. But we need to see that in order to get through this problem more quickly.” Here’s the full story. But...workers facing record energy bills, and rising prices in the shops, are understandably going to want their pay packets to reflect the cost of living squeeze. The Unite union, for example, warned last month that significant wage rises are needed to combat the ‘cost of living catastrophe’, pointing out that the RPI inflation measure of retail price increases has hit 7.5%. Here’s a chart showing how the energy price cap is calculated, as many households prepare for bills to surge in April: And here’s a full explanation: Rishi Sunak is outlining the government’s plan to help with the cost of living crisis, at a press conference, my colleague Tom Ambrose reports. The chancellor has been asked if high energy prices are here to stay and whether he would rule out having to help out with rebate schemes again further down the line. He says: “The factors that are driving gas prices higher are global in their nature ... I don’t have a crystal ball as to what the future holds but I want to be honest with people. “Higher energy prices are something we will have to adjust to, in common with other countries around the world and it would be wrong to pretend otherwise but what we can do is slow that adjustment to make it more manageable for people’s household budgets.” He admits energy bills could rise again in October [when the price cap is next adjusted] but says the rebate announced today will kick in then and help with that. Our Politics Live blog has all the details: Back in the City, the blue-chip FTSE 100 index has closed 54 points lower, down 0.7% at 7529 points. Gambling firm Flutter (-5.3%) led the fallers, followed by BT Group (-4.8%) after it warned of a drop in full-year revenues due to a delayed Covid-19 recovery and ongoing supply chain issues. Bank shares rose, while Shell jumped 1.4% after lifting its dividend and share buybacks following a jump in profits (prompting new calls for a windfall tax on North Sea producers). But Meta’s slump hit Europe’s technology stocks, with the sector sliding by 3.5% today. The head of the European Central Bank has said that Britain’s inflation problem is partly due to the departure of EU workers after Brexit. Christine Lagarde told a press conference, after the ECB left interest rates on hold, that the shortage of workers in the UK is pushing up pay. “The UK has a history of much higher inflation than we have in the euro area. “The critical difference now has to do with the labour market, where clearly there is a lot of pressure on wages where there is scarcity of workers for jobs that are available. “I don’t want to take a political stand but there was a lot of non-UK labour force that eventually had to leave the UK (after Brexit) that has not been totally replaced and the shortage of workers is actually having a bearing on ... the labour market in the UK. “So that’s really what is causing the significant difference between the two.” [thanks to Reuters for the quotes] Eurozone inflation hit 5.1% in January, not far behind the UK’s 5.4% recorded in December, so there’s not very much difference in the headline inflation rates. Plus, UK earnings growth has dropped back in recent months, after the pandemic and furlough scheme distorted the data. But vacancies did hit record levels towards the end of 2021, indicating the labour market is tight, and some industry bosses warned that last year’s supply chain crisis was in part due to the loss of EU workers: UK households should brace for interest rates to continue rising this year. Dean Turner, Chief Eurozone and UK Economist at UBS Global Wealth Management’s Chief Investment Office, predicts the Bank will raise interest rates twice more this year, doubling them to 1%. “In our view, it is reasonable to assume that UK rates will continue to rise, with the next hike possibly coming as early as March. But we think that the peak will be around 1% this year (i.e. two more hikes), after which we expect a pause. Any moves beyond this will be ‘data dependent’ to use central bank jargon.” Ed Smith, co-chief investment Officer at Rathbone Investment Management, points out that interest rate derivates market shows traders are betting on UK interest rates rising to 1.5% by the end of 2022. “The 0.25% rise was fully anticipated, but the four dissenting voices voting for a 0.5% increase at today’s meeting has caught investors off-guard. This extra hawkishness has seen forward rates price for 1.5% Bank Rate by December, and 10-year gilt yields rise 10bps. Smith adds that interest rates could well rise less sharply, given wage growth is slowing, supply chain problems are easing, and the UK faces an “unprecedented fiscal tightening this year”: But we will need to wait until the third quarter before we observe the pace at which inflation is likely to fall back, by which point Bank Rate is already likely to have hit 1% given what has been set out today.” Scotland’s energy secretary, Michael Matheson, has denounced the chancellor’s measures on electricity costs as inadequate, and called on the Treasury to waive VAT on domestic energy bills and produce additional targeted measures for low income households, my colleague Severin Carrell reports. The UK’s three devolved governments in Edinburgh, Cardiff and Belfast are getting a share of £565m from the Treasury to cut council tax bills and are mulling over how to apply the money. The Northern Irish government, which also oversees energy pricing, will receive £150m to cut power bills. The Scottish government said the £290m it is expected to receive was too little to cope with energy poverty in Scotland, but Scottish Labour said ministers in Edinburgh had so far failed to use their existing powers and resources to reduce poverty. Matheson said: “I am concerned that the majority of these measures are not sufficiently targeted to provide support to those who need it most, and that the proposed £200 rebate is too little too late, applying 6 months after the coming price rise in April. This serves only to delay, rather than solve, the very real and growing cost of living crisis.” Anas Sarwar, the Scottish Labour leader, accused the Scottish National party government of siding with the Tories. He said: “The SNP have refused to use the powers of [the Holyrood] parliament to top up winter fuel payments. They have refused to back Labour’s windfall tax on energy companies. And they have refused to stop rises to rail fares and water charges.” The number of families in England living in ‘fuel stress’ is going to double, despite the assistance announced by Rishi Sunak this morning, the Resolution Foundation says. The Foundation’s analysis shows that – in the absence of Government action – the 54% price cap rise on 1 April would have trebled the number of families in England living in ‘fuel stress’ (spending at least 10% cent of their family budget on energy bills) to over six million families in total. However, the Energy Rebate Plan – which includes a £200 rebate on energy bills this year across Britain, a £150 Council Tax rebate for those living in A-D band properties across England (with funding for Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland), and extending the Warm Homes Discount (WHD) to an additional 780,000 families across England and Wales – is set to reduce the coming rise in fuel stress. But, it is still set to rise by 2.5 million to five million families in total. Adam Corlett, Principal Economist at the Resolution Foundation, also warns that the Chancellor’s strategy of funding a reduction in energy bills this year through higher bills over the following five years is risky - especially if the cost of gas doesn’t fall soon and sharply. High energy bills could be a feature of the 2020s – emphasising the need to wean Britain off fossil fuels.” Resolution have also calculated that households are facing the worst incomes squeeze in decades: World stock markets are in the red this afternoon, after Facebook owner Meta spooked investors with unimpressive results last night. Meta’s shares have slumped by 24%, wiping more than $200bn off its value. Shareholders are alarmed by Facebook’s first-ever drop in daily users. The company also predicted slowing revenue growth in the coming quarter, as users spent more time on rivals like TikTok and privacy changes made by Apple hit its advertising business. Rachel Jones, associate analyst in the Thematic Team at GlobalData, warns that Meta is sacrificing its core business model for its fascination with the metaverse. Betting big on the metaverse isn’t a bad thing—the technology is set to be huge and provide a multitude of opportunities—but it will take at least another decade to really get going. Tech companies will need to tackle this new horizon from a position of strength. “Meta’s Q4 earning results show the cost of its obsession to investors, who will be increasingly concerned. Its hope that the re-focus would save the company’s reputation has not paid off, its metaverse development research division Reality Labs has seen disappointing results so far, growth has plunged—even Meta’s typically strong advertising business has taken a hit as the company failed to navigate Apple’s privacy changes. Other tech stocks are also weaker, with Twitter falling 5%, Etsy losing 5.8% and Amazon down almost 6% ahead of its results tonight. The tech-focused Nasdaq Composite index is down 1.7%, wiping out some of its recent recovery after a bad start to the year, while the broad S&amp;P 500 index is down 1.2%. In the City, the FTSE 100 index has slipped by 0.4%, while the pan-European Stoxx 600 index has dropped 1.3%. Today’s interest rate rise has sharpened fears that the spring of 2022 will represent a “perfect storm” for the cost of living, our economics editor Larry Elliott writes: It wasn’t simply that Threadneedle Street’s monetary policy committee voted to raise borrowing costs, it was that four of the nine members considered a quarter-point rise to 0.5% insufficient to head off inflationary pressures and wanted a half-point increase instead. Chancellor Rishi Sunak began his statement to MPs by boasting about how well the economy was doing, citing falling unemployment and the reduction in government borrowing. An altogether gloomier picture was painted by the Bank, which expects the annual inflation rate to peak at more than 7% in April, and for the bounce-back from the plan-B Covid restrictions to be followed by a marked slowdown in the economy. The UK faces a triple whammy over the coming months: businesses and mortgage payers paying higher interest rates; prices rising faster than wages; and more expensive energy costs. Sunak’s package will ease the squeeze – but not by much. Here’s Larry’s full analysis: The BoE isn’t the only central bank facing sharply rising prices. Although the European Central Bank left interest rates on hold at record lows today, president Christine Lagarde has acknowledged that euro zone inflation was running hotter than expected. Lagarde added that inflationary risks are tilted to the upside, after eurozone inflation hit a record high of 5.1% in January. Lagarde told a news conference that policymakers would not rush into new moves, but also chose not to repeat her past comment that a rate hike this year was very unlikely. “Inflation is likely to remain elevated for longer than previously expected but to decline in the course of this year... Compared with our expectations in December, risks to the inflation outlook are tilted to the upside, particularly in the near term.” “The situation has indeed changed.” The Financial Times says the Bank of England has intensified the squeeze on household finances with its first back-to-back interest rate rise since 2004: The four votes for a half-point rate rise were “a hawkish turn markets did not expect”, said Anna Stupnytska, an economist at Fidelity International. The rise in official interest rates, alongside the highest rate of inflation for more than 30 years, would squeeze disposable household incomes by 2 per cent this year, with a further 0.5 per cent hit in 2023. That would be the biggest annual reduction in spending power since at least 1990, said BoE officials. This would depress spending and reduce the UK growth rate to a crawl of about 1 per cent a year. However, the pain for households would help bring inflation down towards the bank’s 2 per cent target within two years, the MPC said. Sky’s Ed Conway outlines that households face higher borrowing costs, and higher taxes, energy, goods and services prices, with the Bank now seeing inflation surging over 7% this spring: The Telegraph warns the UK is facing a “generational cost of living crisis”: Families face the biggest squeeze since the Bank’s records began in 1990 as prices outstrip wage rises and April’s National Insurance raid saps pay packets, sending real incomes after tax tumbling by 2pc this year and 0.5pc in 2023. It means this year will be more severe for earnings than the financial crisis, when real post-tax wages fell by 1.4pc in 2008 and 1.3pc in 2011. Officials warned it will undermine the economic recovery and push up unemployment. Better-off households will be able to prop up spending by using lockdown savings, but those without surplus cash are left more vulnerable to price increases. ITV’s Joel Hills points out that pay rises are being completely outpaced by price rises. Real post-tax labour income is forecast to fall by an extraordinary 2% this year. If true, this would prove to be the biggest hit to household spending power since records began in 1990 and a bigger hit than the 1.3% fall experienced in the aftermath of the financial crisis in 2011. It’s worth noting that the Bank’s forecast does not incorporate the action the government has announced on Thursday morning, which is designed to cushion the impact of a surge in energy bills - which are set to increase by £693 a year from April. The rebates households receive should leave them with more money to spend than they would have otherwise had but is therefore also slightly inflationary, which in turn implies higher interest rates. The Treasury’s actions will change the calculation but not the outlook, which for many households is really grim. Boris Glass, senior UK Economist at S&amp;P Global Ratings, warns that today’s interest rate hike will dampen the UK recovery, as the Bank tries urgently to curb inflation expectations: Today’s hike demonstrates the Bank of England’s urgency to further curb inflation expectations, so soon after the December hike. That some members of the committee wanted to go even higher than the 0.25% hike we saw shows the unity in that assessment. The move comes as the economy is naturally slowing down, after the biggest chunk of Covid-related recovery growth is already behind us. It will likely dampen the remaining recovery momentum and growth overall. The tight labour market was a key element in the Bank’s assessment. Current wage negotiation rounds are likely to yield better than usual results for workers across many sectors and regions. If this trend continues and much higher wages become widely embedded in contracts, employers may have to raise prices further, translating into ongoing higher inflation. It’s that risk of unhealthy wage-price-inflation dynamics in the future that the Bank is worried about. There is not much a central bank can do about the large portion of inflation that is still being driven by higher imported costs and one-off effects, such as from the reopening of the economy after lockdown. Higher rates will translate into higher costs for borrowers, but if the Bank is right - and the “if” is important - the hike should be beneficial in the medium term and pre-empt a squeeze of household incomes from the portion of inflation it can control. But this trade-off will be far from painless. The Bank’s action can do little to prevent what some have called the cost-of-living crisis, because most of it remains driven by higher cost of goods and energy imports. What the Bank is trying to do is to prevent things getting even worse by allowing higher domestic inflation on top what’s already there. Jeremy Batstone-Carr, of the European strategy team at investment bank Raymond James, warns that the Bank of England risks hurting the UK’s recovery: “The Bank of England’s Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) has sent a strong signal that it is serious about getting on top of prevailing inflationary pressures by voting to raise the UK’s base lending rate by 0.25% to 0.50%, the second rate hike in less than three months and the first back-to-back rate hike since 2004. Four members of the 9-person Committee voted to raise the base rate by an even greater 0.50% to 0.75%, which would have been the single biggest increase since The Bank achieved its independence in 1997, while all members agreed that a further tightening of the monetary policy spigot would likely be necessary in coming months. The risk of this hawkish action, as the Bank’s own forecasts demonstrate, is that it could halt the UK’s economic recovery in its tracks. Utilising monetary policy to address what is fundamentally a supply-side problem could crush demand, while the elevated energy prices and proposed tax increases scheduled to start in April will only exacerbate already tough conditions for hard-pressed households. The Bank’s Monetary Policy Report warns that household incomes will be squeezed by energy bills and tax increases this year, as inflation hits living standards: A sharp slowdown in real income growth, driven by the rise in global energy and tradable goods prices, is weighing on consumer spending, and this effect is expected to intensify. The sharp rise in global energy and tradable goods prices, the latter in part reflecting global bottlenecks, has squeezed household real incomes and is weighing on consumer spending. Four-quarter real income growth turned negative in Q3 last year and is projected to contract even more sharply in the middle of 2022. Another rise in retail energy prices in April is expected to increase inflation further. Incomes will also be affected by the planned increase in National Insurance contributions in April. Q: Did the Bank of England miss an opportunity in the second half of last year by not starting to raise interest rates, and preventing inflation surging over 7% in the coming months? Andrew Bailey defends the Bank’s decision to leave rates on hold for most of 2021 (before lifting them to 0.25% in December). He argues that the Bank had to wait and see the impact of ending the furlough scheme last autumn. That’s why the MPC didn’t raise interest rates in November. With the benefit of hindsight, you can barely see the impact of ending furlough in the labour market data, he adds. Q: Are households prepared for the impact of the squeeze in real incomes, and high inflation? Governor Bailey says it’s a good question, and difficult to answer. But he suggests today’s news of surging energy bills, and the Bank’s interest rate increase, would lead households to adapt their expectations. Q: Why do you need to raise interest rates, given the squeeze on real incomes? And why won’t people seek higher wage increases to compensate for higher borrowing costs? BoE governor Andrew Bailey replies that the Bank’s forecasts show that inflation will not come back to the 2% target without raising interest rates. Deputy governor Ben Broadbent says economic evidence is that raising interest rates will lead to lower inflation. Q: Is the Bank of England behind the curve, given four of the nine MPC members wanted a 50-basis point hike? Bailey denies being behind the curve, saying that today’s vote was a close call - but that’s not surprising given the situation we are in. Q: How serious is the cocktail of effects hitting the UK? With omicron hitting growth, energy bills and taxes rising, and interest rates now going up -- is this a Black Thursday moment? Bailey says there is some good news: Omicron has caused less severe disruption to the economy than first feared. But... the surge in the prices of goods has persisted longer than the Bank expected [because supply chain disruption has continued]. There are signs that supply chain disruption is easing, but the Bank needs to see a lot more. On energy prices - there are risks both ways, Bailey continued. They could come down over time, but there is a risk they won’t -- and he singles out the rising tensions between Russia and the West over Ukraine: If there is any form of military action around Ukraine, there would be a risk of prices rising, Bailey points out. Explanation: Russia typically supplies about a third of Europe’s gas via a complex network of pipelines that run through Ukraine, Belarus and Poland to Germany. And if the European market is disrupted, UK prices would inevitably rise too, as this article outlines: Q: What impact will today’s interest rate rise have on the economy? Deputy governor Sir Dave Ramsden says the Bank’s data shows wage settlements running at 4.8% this year. So, the Bank tightened policy to manage upside risks around inflation, adds Ramsden (reminder: he was one of four policymakers who wanted a steeper hike, to 0.75%). Governor Andrew Bailey warns that the UK’s households face a lot of pressure, including those who are less able to afford rising costs. “Unfortunately, we’ve got a squeeze from energy prices, and you see the Ofgem announcement this morning, and in order to counter the threat, and the risk that we see of further pressure coming from the labour market, I’m afraid we do have to raise bank rates. “This is a lot of pressure on households, and we have to be very clear, a lot of pressure on those households who are less able to afford it.” Q: By raising interest rates, isn’t the Bank making the cost of living squeeze worse for real people? The reason we have to do this, is that if we don’t take this action, it would be even worse, Bailey replies. He knows it’s a hard message, though. Deputy governor Ben Broadbent adds that monetary policy cannot undue the impact of the shocks hitting real incomes. Its best contribution is to bring inflation down to target. People should not assume that UK interest rates are inevitably on a ‘long march upwards’, Andrew Bailey explained, saying: “The MPC judges that if the economy develops broadly in line with the February report’s central protection, some further modest tightening of monetary policy is likely to be appropriate in the coming months. “But it would be a mistake to extrapolate simplistically from what we have done today and assume that rates are now on an inevitable long march upwards The Bank’s goal is to stabilise inflation, and bring it back to target, Andrew Bailey continues. But there is an “awful lot of uncertainty” at the moment, the BoE governor adds, pointing to the energy market. Governor Andrew Bailey is taking questions. Q: Can you see the beginnings of a wage-price spiral? And how can you explain to households that their mortgage bills might go up, because their energy bills are going up? Bailey says we are not in the territory of a wage-price spiral, but the Bank is seeing upward movements in firms’ expected wage settlements. Underlying wage growth is higher than the Bank would expect at this stage in the economic cycle. It’s a difficult situation, Bailey says. Hopefully we are emerging from the pandemic, with the economy back at its pre-covid levels in November. But the “hard message” is that “we are facing a squeeze on real incomes”. (see earlier post) So the Bank believes it’s necessary to raise interest rates, otherwise the effects will be worse, with more domestic price pressures. Bank of England governor Andrew Bailey is explaining today’s interest rate increase. Bailey tells reporters that that the Bank has raised borrowing costs because inflation is unlikely to return to the UK’s 2% target without it. We have not raised interest rates because the economy is roaring away, Bailey says. Instead, there is a risk that inflation will become engrained, leading to a longer period of higher inflation. The Bank of England fears that UK families are about to suffer the biggest fall in living standards since comparable records began three decades ago. Its new forecasts now show that disposable incomes (post-tax labour income, after inflation) will shrink by 2% this year, and by another 0.5% in 2023. That would be the biggest annual reduction in spending power since at least 1990. Sky News’s Ed Conway explains: The fall - largely a consequence of higher energy bills but also the rising tax burden and comparatively weak earnings - is considerably bigger than 1.3% fall in 2011, up until now the biggest squeeze since the statistical series begin. The Bank of England warns that the Omicron variant has hit economic activity in December and January, but UK GDP is expected to recover in February and March. However, beyond the near term, UK economic growth is “expected to slow to subdued rates”, the BoE warns. That’s because rising inflation will hit household incomes and spending, and push up unemployment, it says: The main reason for that is the adverse impact of higher global energy and tradable goods prices on UK real aggregate income and spending. As a result, the unemployment rate is expected to rise to 5% and excess supply builds to around 1% by the end of the forecast period. Unemployment fell to 4.1% in the three months to November - the Bank forecasts it will fall further in the near term, then rise again, hitting 5% by the start of 2025. The Bank of England’s monetary policy committee has also voted to start the process of unwinding its £895bn stimulus package introduced when the pandemic hit the UK economy. The Committee voted unanimously for the Bank of England to begin to reduce its £875bn stock of UK government bonds, by not buying new gilts when they mature. The Committee also voted unanimously to reduce its £20bn stock of corporate bonds on its balance sheet, by not reinvesting maturing assets and by selling bonds. Today’s 5-4 interest rate vote was extremely close. Governor Andrew Bailey, deputy governors Ben Broadbent and Jon Cunliffe, chief economists Huw Pill and external member Silvana Tenreyro voted to raise Bank Rate from 0.25% to 0.5%. But concerns over inflation prompted deputy governor Dave Ramsden, and external members Catherine Mann, Jonathan Haskel and Michael Saunders to all vote for a steeper increase, to 0.75%. Those four members argued that monetary policy should tighten faster, to “reduce the risk that recent trends in pay growth and inflation expectations became more firmly embedded”, to help bring inflation down to target. The Bank of England has lifted its inflation forecast - and now estimates inflation will peak at around 7.25% in April. That’s up from 5.4% in December, and over three times higher than its 2% target, and shows just how painful the cost of living squeeze is going to be. Announcing today’s interest rate rise, the Bank says that energy bills will surge in April due to today’s price cap increase. Goods prices will continue to rise too: Inflation is expected to increase further in coming months, to close to 6% in February and March, before peaking at around 7¼% in April. This projected peak is around 2 percentage points higher than expected in the November Report. The projected overshoot of inflation relative to the 2% target mainly reflects global energy and tradable goods prices. The further rise in energy futures prices meant that Ofgem’s utility price caps were expected to be substantially higher at the reset in April 2022. Core goods CPI inflation is also expected to rise further, due to the impact of global bottlenecks on tradable goods prices Newsflash: The Bank of England has voted to raise UK interest rates to 0.5%, as it responds to inflation hitting its highest level in almost 30 years. The Monetary Policy Committee voted by a majority of 5-4 to increase Bank Rate to 0.5%, with four members voting to raise rates to 0.75%. Chancellor Rishi Sunak is announcing the government’s response to the spike in energy bills. He says all domestic electricity customers will receive a £200 discount on their bills, in October, which will be repaid at £40 per year over the next five years. That will reduce the £693 increase in bills announced by Ofgem this morning, spreading some of the impact over a longer period There is also a £150 council tax rebate in April, for households in bands A-D, which won’t need to be repaid. Sunak also explains that eligibility for the warm homes discount will be expanded. And a £150m “discretionary fund” for local authorities will help lower income households. Sunak also told MPs that 80% of the increase in the price cap has been driven by the rise in wholesale energy prices. Gas prices are going up for global reasons, he says. Cold weather has depleted stocks, and disruption to energy sources like nuclear and wind has led to a surge in demand. And he argues: For me to stand here and pretend we don’t have to adjust to paying higher prices would be wrong and dishonest. But what we can do is take the sting out of a significant price shock for millions of families by making sure that increase in prices is smaller initially and spread over a longer period. Our Politics Live blog has more details: These chart from Ofgem show how wholesale energy prices have risen, forcing it to lift the price cap from April. The 54% increase in the energy cap is even larger than analysts had expected, and a severe blow to struggling households across Great Britain. Even with government action to cushion the blow, it will drive the cost of living painfully higher this spring, as Samuel Tombs, chief UK economist at Pantheon Macroeconomic, shows here: Here’s our news story on the record increase in UK energy bills just announced by Ofgem: The energy cap rise is a cost-of-living ‘catastrophe’ for ordinary workers, warns the Unite union. General secretary Sharon Graham says: “The energy price cap rise will turn the cost-of-living crisis into a catastrophe for millions of people. This will plunge at least one in four families in Britain into fuel poverty. “The policy announced today to provide loans to energy companies to reduce bills, in the short term, is yet another knee-jerk reaction. It fails to address the calamitous increases coming in customer bills and ultimately means ordinary families will foot the bill for an energy crisis not of their making. Unite also wants energy companies who benefit from the government’s support package to guarantee not to cut jobs: “Given that taxpayers’ money is paying for the bail-out, these loans must come with substantial strings attached, including guarantees that jobs will not be lost. Otherwise, they will just vanish into big corporate energy balance sheets. This 54% hike in the price cap will make energy unaffordable to millions of households, warns Dale Vince of green energy supplier Ecotricity. He argues for a windfall tax on the North Sea energy firms whose profits have surged in the last year (as Shell’s results highlighted this morning) (Ecotricity is exempt from the price cap, as it supplies renewable energy, so has able to adjust bills as wholesale costs rose) Jonathan Brearley, chief executive of Ofgem, says: “We know this rise will be extremely worrying for many people, especially those who are struggling to make ends meet, and Ofgem will ensure energy companies support their customers in any way they can. “The energy market has faced a huge challenge due to the unprecedented increase in global gas prices, a once in a 30-year event, and Ofgem’s role as energy regulator is to ensure that, under the price cap, energy companies can only charge a fair price based on the true cost of supplying electricity and gas. “Ofgem is working to stabilise the market and over the longer term to diversify our sources of energy which will help protect customers from similar price shocks in the future.” Newsflash: The energy price cap will increase by £693 from April, meaning households are facing a record increase in bills of over 50%. Energy regulator Ofgem has announced that the energy price cap, which restricts how much suppliers can charge in Great Britain, will increase from 1 April for approximately 22 million customers. Those on default tariffs paying by direct debit will see an increase of £693 from £1,277 to £1,971 per year, on average. Prepayment customers will see an increase of £708 from £1,309 to £2,017. This is the second major increase in energy bills in six months, and the largest on record, and will intensify the UK’s cost of living crisis, pushing millions more households into fuel poverty for the first time. Ofgem says the record increase in global gas prices means the energy price cap will rise by 54%. This will affect default tariff customers who haven’t switched to a fixed deal and those who remain with their new supplier after their previous supplier exited the market. The price cap increase was calculated by Ofgem based on the costs faced by suppliers, who have seen surging wholesale costs in recent months, and levies for maintaining energy network infrastructure and renewable energy projects. We now wait to see what action Rishi Sunak will take to cushion this blow. Steven Swinford, The Times political editor, reports that chancellor Rishi Sunak will announce a £9bn package of loans &amp; council tax rebates today, to address the surge in energy bills Sunak is due to make a statement on his response to rising energy bills around 11.30am. Andrew Sparrow’s Politics Live blog is tracking the political developments here: Shell’s CEO has pushed back against calls for a windfall tax, arguing it won’t fix the crisis in the energy market. Reuters has the details: A windfall tax on North Sea oil and gas producers will do little to alleviate a recent surge in energy prices in Britain, Shell chief executive Ben van Beurden said on Thursday. “I’m not convinced that windfall taxes, popular though as they seem, will help us with supply, nor is it going to help us with demand,” van Beurden told reporters after the company announced its highest quarterly profits in eight years on the back of surging oil and gas prices. Shell was in dialogue with the British government to find ways to alleviate the energy crisis, van Beurden said. Van Beurden also pledged that Shell will step in to help supply Europe with natural gas in case of disruptions due to tensions between Russia and the West over Ukraine. He said: “If indeed there would be disruptions, possibly due to sanctions or otherwise, of course we will step in and do whatever we can to give Europe supply.” Dale Vince, founder of green energy company Ecotricity, is highly critical of the government’s approach to the crisis. He told Sky News that the idea of underwriting loans to energy companies, so they can lower bills by £200 this year, was a ‘joke’: “It’s been a challenging five or six months really. The energy crisis began in August and, so far, the Government have done nothing except hold to the retail price cap while letting wholesale prices go through the roof and then bankrupted 50% of the suppliers in the market. “What we’ll see today is far too little and far too late and for not long enough. “This crisis will continue for three years. £200 is one third of the price rise that will be announced today, for one third of the time that the problem will endure, it’s one tenth of the problem. “It’s a sticking plaster, and to lend the money to energy companies, to lend the money to customers, honestly, it’s a joke”. [thanks to PA Media for the quotes] Vince also told Radio 5’s Wake Up To Money programme that the loans plan was an ‘abdication of responsibility’. If the government thinks energy bills are too high, they should take action to lower then by cutting energy taxes, he argued. Vince also fears the government would be taking on a massive credit risk, given the number of suppliers who have failed in the energy crisis. UK services companies are hiked their prices at the fastest rate in at least 25 years, as the cost of living squeeze bites. A survey of service sector firms from IHS Markit and CIPS, just released, has found that cost pressures intensified at the start of this year. With energy bills, transport costs and staff salaries rising, companies passed on costs to their consumers by raising prices in January at the fastest rate since the survey began in July 1996. Tim Moore, economics director at IHS Markit, explains: Record price increases in the service economy are set to add to the cost of living crisis for UK households. Input cost inflation accelerated again in January and service providers responded by increasing their prices charged at the fastest rate since the index began in July 1996. Nearly one-in-three survey respondents reported higher average prices charged than in December, with rising salary payments, energy bills and logistics costs the most commonly cited reasons.” In better news, activity picked up in January, after growth hit a 10-month low in December. Services companies predicted only a temporary slowdown from cancelled bookings and staff absences at the turn of the year. But in the eurozone, growth slowed last month: As well as higher energy costs, the UK economy is also facing trade frictions at Dover. My colleague Joanna Partridge has visited the long queues of lorries building up at the port, and reports: His lorry loaded with British Airways aircraft parts, Ivo Hradilik was expecting to drive onto a ferry headed to Calais, before delivering his cargo to the outskirts of Paris. But there’s a problem with the customs paperwork, and the 26-year-old HGV driver from the Czech Republic will have to park up near the Port of Dover while the haulage company sorts everything out. “From the new year it has got worse with the paperwork,” Hradilik said, clutching a handful of documents. He usually visits Dover five times a month bringing goods between Britain and the EU. Hradilik expects to wait for hours before setting sail. On Wednesday, long queues of lorries built up once again on the approach roads to Dover, with as many as 100 vehicles waiting on the A20. The sheer volume of HGVs meant the town’s emergency traffic management system was activated twice on Wednesday, once at 5am and again at midday. Known as TAP – Operation Travel Access Protocol – it can be triggered by a request from the port authority or the police to the National Highways agency. The Port of Dover says the main cause is a spike in freight traffic, rather than Brexit. The drivers see things differently: Many blame the introduction on 1 January of the first controls on imports from the EU, and a new UK government IT system for goods entering and leaving the country. “Since 1 January, I have queued every time in Dover,” Hradilik said. “From Calais it is better – there is only about two hours waiting.” Here’s the full story: Shell’s surge in earnings last year shows the need for a windfall tax on energy producers, the Labour party says. Shadow Treasury chief secretary Pat McFadden told Sky News that Shell’s bumper profits showed why a windfall tax was the best way to fund a support package. “They are planning share buybacks and increased dividends but they are not being asked to pay a penny towards the package” McFadden also criticised Chancellor Rishi Sunak’s approach to the crisis: “He is not asking the oil and gas companies - who are making the most out of this - to pay a single penny towards this. “Instead he is doing it on a buy now, pay later way.” Susannah Streeter, senior investment and markets analyst, Hargreaves Lansdown, says Shell’s oil and gas fields have been “churning out cash” as prices of the commodities rise amid higher demand and shorter supply. The big upswing in full year profit and the lifting of the dividend to 4% has been greeted with some cheer by shareholders [shares are up 2%]. However, there will be plenty of stony faces around, given the results come just hours before families find out just how much their energy bills will rise by. This is likely to add to the clamour for a temporary windfall levy on North Sea producers with the region considered to be one of the most profitable areas in the world for extraction after the government cut taxes to encourage production. The fiscal changes brought in were designed to boost production in the UK continental shelf but with such a rapid recovery, and a surge in revenues expected, the tax break looks increasingly outdated. The energy giants argue that the higher earnings will be ploughed back into investment into greener, cleaner forms of energy. But that argument is harder to wash given this announcement of higher dividends and the $8.5 billion share buyback scheme, which will take place in the first half of 2022.’’ Here’s more reaction, from tax expert Richard Murphy, visiting professor of accounting at the Sheffield University management school. Ed Miliband, Labour’s shadow Secretary of State for Climate Change, also argues for a windfall tax on North Sea profits: Oil giant Shell has reported a surge in earnings, underlining just how profitable the energy crunch has been for producers. Shell made annual profits of $17bn (£12.5bn) in 2021, up from a loss of almost $20bn in 2020 when energy prices slumped in the pandemic. On an adjusted basis, profits quadrupled last year - hitting $19.3bn, up from $4.8bn a year, as it profited from the surge in oil and gas prices In the last quarter of the year alone, Shell made adjusted earnings of $6.4bn, compared with just $393m in Q4 2020, and up from $4.13bn in July-September. Brent crude oil hit $86 per barrel last autumn, for the first time in three years, driving petrol prices to record highs. Shell plc Chief Executive Officer, Ben van Beurden, says: “2021 was a momentous year for Shell. We launched our Powering Progress strategy and simplified our share structure and organisation. Progress made in 2021 will enable us to be bolder and move faster. We have a compelling strategy, with customers at its core. We have ambitious plans to generate shareholder value, to decarbonise our products and to provide energy to our customers while respecting nature. Shareholders will benefit, with Shell raising its dividend by 4% this quarter, just as millions of households brace for their bills to surge. Van Beurden said the company is ‘stepping up’ its distributions to investors -- with an $8.5bn (£6.2bn) share buyback programme (which includes $5.5bn from the sale of its Permian reserves to ConocoPhillips last year). Energy UK CEO Emma Pinchbeck also told BBC Breakfast that the government needs to help the industry through a “once-in-a-generation international gas price crisis”. Pinchbeck said the industry has been trying to get the government to take steps, as other governments across Europe have done to support customers and businesses. “Of course it’s right that the industry looks after its customers, it’s a really shocking price rise for many people. Our point is, I don’t think that the industry can do this alone and particularly not with the state of our retail sector in the UK”. The current energy price cap has protected customers from the jump in wholesale energy costs, which led to 27 suppliers collapsing since the start of last year. Emma Pinchbeck, the boss of trade body Energy UK, said the retail sector is on average seeing negative margins as it subsidises customers amid soaring wholesale gas prices. She told BBC Breakfast: “At the moment, because of the gas price, most energy suppliers are losing 300 to 400 per customer. “So at the moment, the energy companies are subsidising energy for our customers and that’s one of the reasons that we think it’s important, just as other governments have done, to act now so that we can make sure that we have a stable industry, but also that customers get the kind of help that they need”. As this chart shows, gas prices soared during 2021, so companies who weren’t hedged against the increase found that supplying energy was unprofitable. The new price cap, announced at 11am, will reflect the increase in wholesale costs, which is why analysts forecast an increase of around 50%. Pinchbeck explains: “The overall profit margin for the energy retail sector over the last two years has been -1%. “On average most companies are losing money and that’s a really bad thing, we’ve seen the retail market failures, we’ve had, to date, 20-odd suppliers exiting the market. “There are then costs to that for customers that are also rolled into your bills.” Our energy correspondent Jillian Ambrose has looked at the options available to the government to lower the rise in energy bills. Options includes underwriting loans to energy suppliers to reduce energy bills this year (at the cost of higher bills in future), doubling the payments offered by the warm home discount, a temporary VAT holiday (not favoured by Boris Johnson), cutting green levies, or a windfall tax on energy producers (as the Labour party have proposed). Here’s a flavour: A government-backed £200 off bills Industry sources believe the Treasury may be poised to help cut £200 from energy bills by offering suppliers government-backed loans that could be repaid over several years. The £5.4bn plan would protect household budgets from a breakneck increase in their average energy bill from 1 April when the new price cap takes effect. But it could mean energy bills remain higher for longer as suppliers charge more to pay back their loans in the years ahead. The plan, first reported in the Times, was described as “entirely plausible” by one industry source, who asked not to be named, and is seen as one of the most likely measures. More support for vulnerable households In addition to the Treasury’s broad-brush plans it is likely to also take a targeted approach to helping the most vulnerable households by doubling the payments offered by the warm home discount. The scheme provides a one-off annual payment of £140 towards electricity bills for households on low income or receive certain pension benefits between October and March. Currently 2.2 million households qualify for the support, but the government is expected to extend the scheme by making more households eligible and doubling the payment to help cover surging energy costs. It is usually paid for via a levy on standard energy bills, but industry bosses have warned the government against using better-off households to fund the expanded scheme. The top-up should instead come from the government’s coffers, they say. And here’s the full piece: Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. The UK’s cost of living crisis is centre stage today as the Bank of England sets interest rates, energy regulator Ofgem reveals probably the biggest ever rise in energy bills in Great Britain, and the government announces support to cushion the blow. With UK inflation at a 30-year high of 5.4%, the BoE is expected to lift interest rates to 0.5% at noon, following December’s rise to 0.25%. By hiking rates again, the central bank hopes to cool price rises, at a time when energy, food and goods prices have all risen, eating into family budgets. A rate rise would push up the cost of credit, hitting borrowers and pushing up the cost of tracker mortgages, for example. The Bank is also expected to revise its inflation forecasts higher, recognising that the cost of living squeeze is more intense. It could also signal how it will unwind its pandemic stimulus, including a gradual reversal of its huge bond-buying plan. The Bank faces a balancing act, with inflation overtaking wage growth in November, and tax rises coming in April. As analysts at Nomura explains: The combination of rising inflation, more limited increases in wages, higher taxes and expectations of rising interest rates are creating a perfect storm for UK households, who are experiencing what’s been widely termed a “cost of living crisis”. The bad news is that real pay could fall by around 2% this year (and real disposable incomes, taking into consideration the aforementioned costs, by more – possibly around the -3% mark), a similar decline to the worst annual falls we saw in the aftermath of the global financial crisis. The cost of living crisis will intensify in April, when the cap on energy bills on millions of homes in Great Britian increases to reflect the surge in wholesale gas and electricity costs. Ofgem has brought forward its announcement on the cap to 11am this morning, to coordinate with the government as it scrambles to put together a package of support. Analysts expecting the average bill will surge by as much as 50% -- to nearly £2,000 a year, up from an average of £1,277 this winter. That will put a painful squeeze on struggling households, pushing more into energy poverty. The number of households suffering from “fuel stress” – those spending at least 10% of their family budgets on energy bills – will rise to 6.3m overnight once the cap rises, the Resolution Foundation warned last month. The Treasury will try to soften the blow; The Guardian understands it is considering “broad-brush financial support” as well as extra payments for vulnerable customers who will be hit hardest by the price cap increase. That could include multi-billion loans to energy companies, which they could then use to cut energy bills by around £200 per year. However, that would only take the edge off the likely surge in energy bills. And it would mean bills were higher in future years, as the money would need to be paid back. According to the Times, chancellor Rishi Sunak will commit to giving households in council tax bands A to C rebates funded by Government grants under targeted measures for poorer households. Sunak is due to outline the Treasury’s plans at a press conference this afternoon. The stakes are very high; Citizens Advice warned yesterday that the number of people seeking one-to-one crisis support, such as referral to food banks and advice on emergency one-off grants, reached its highest level on record last month. Meanwhile in the financial markets, tech stocks will be under pressure after Facebook’s earnings disappointed investors last night. Shares in Meta slumped by over 20% after it reported higher costs and slowing growth, with users spending more time on rivals such as TikTok instead: The agenda 9am GMT: Eurozone services PMI for January 9.30am GMT: UK services PMI for January 11am GMT: Ofgem announces changes to energy price cap Noon GMT: Bank of England sets interest rates 12.45pm GMT: European Central Bank sets interest ratesPrince Charles has urged the world to live and work in harmony with nature and the planet, as you report in your print edition (Charles’s call to make 2022 a ‘year of action’, 31 January). I wonder if this will be reflected in the raising and shooting of game birds on royal estates. Not much harmony being shown there. Ann Newell Thame, Oxfordshire • Dominic Cummings has called the prime minister a “duffer … unfit for the job” (Report, 30 January). A handwritten poster seen in a student’s window in Oxford last Saturday: “If even Boris received a 2:1 there is hope for us all.” Clare Addison Oxford • If “one bad apple spoils the whole barrel”, what will be the effect of “a few” of them (Met officer was promoted despite misconduct over sexist and racist messages, 2 February)? Carole Coleman Copley, West Yorkshire • When speaking of something she hoped to do, my God-fearing great aunt would often say, “if spared” (Letters, 2 February). Visiting a churchyard on one occasion, she said that she would like to be buried there, “if spared”. Andrew Bradstock St Helens, Isle of Wight • Has no one else noticed the strong similarities between Wordle (Editorial, 2 January) and a tweaked revival of the 1988 game Lingo, now on ITV on weekdays? Rev Robin Blount Low Moor, Lancashire • Good to see that manifesting is bang on trend (3 February). I’ve been doing it successfully for years, but I call it daydreaming. Sam White Lewes, East SussexEmma Howard Boyd’s letter (30 January) fails to address the allegations you reported by serving Environment Agency officers that frontline pollution response services have been cut and staff gagged. I retired from the EA in 2014, having worked there since its inception in 1996, initially leading a team of dedicated officers in exactly this work. Over that 18 years, there was an inexorable shift in resources from frontline pollution and crime prevention work to higher-paid jobs managing policy and legislation. The old adage to “follow the money” saw the lion’s share of the EA’s resources spent on flood risk management. When I recently reported a pollution incident, I was shocked to discover that the system being used to record my information was the same one that I helped to develop 20 years ago. After the coalition government came to power in 2010, the EA’s statutory mission to promote sustainable development was quietly amended to promote sustainable economic growth. Ms Howard Boyd’s letter reads as though it has been lifted from the introduction to any EA corporate report in the last 10 years and is an inadequate response to serious and substantive allegations. Peter Foulston Clayton West, West Yorkshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.The head of the official statistics watchdog has reprimanded Boris Johnson and the Home Office for incorrectly saying crime has fallen by 14%, when this excludes the fastest-rising category of crime. Sir David Norgrove, the head of the UK Statistics Authority, said he would be writing to the offices of Johnson and Priti Patel, the home secretary, to highlight what he called a “misleading” use of statistics. Replying to a letter about the claims from Alistair Carmichael, the Liberal Democrat home affairs spokesperson, Norgrove said Johnson and Patel had been incorrect to claim that crime was falling. A Home Office press release from last week twice “presented the statistics to give a positive picture of trends in crime in England and Wales” between June 2019 and September 2021, but did so by not including fraud and computer misuse, he wrote. “The exclusion was stated. However, in the title and in two other places the release refers to a fall in crime, without making clear that this is true only if fraud and computer misuse are excluded,” the letter said, Speaking in the Commons on Monday, Johnson said the government was “cutting crime by 14%”, a reference to statistics between September 2019 and September 2021. This also excluded fraud and computer misuse “though the prime minister did not make that clear”, Norgrove wrote. He said: “If fraud and computer misuse are counted in total crime as they should be, total crime in fact increased by 14% between the year ending September 2019 and the year ending September 2021. The ONS bulletin quite properly includes fraud and computer misuse in total crime.” Fraud and computer misuse offences have climbed significantly during lockdown and other Covid restrictions, while other offences such as theft have dropped. Carmichael called it “a damning verdict from the official watchdog”. He said: “When the government’s record on crime is so bad that both the prime minister and home secretary feel the need to fiddle the figures, it is clear we need a new approach. “The prime minister must come before parliament to apologise for his latest lie and set the record straight.” The government has been approached for comment.Raising the rate of national insurance contributions (NICs) by 1.25 percentage points across the board is an unnecessary way to fund health and social care spending (Boris Johnson ‘fully committed’ to national insurance rise, 28 January). Instead, billions of pounds could be raised by levelling up the current rate of 2% paid on employee annual earnings above £50,000 to 12%, ie the rate currently paid on earnings between around £9,500 and £50,000. Employee NICs are no different to income tax. We know this because HMRC’s annual tax summaries, sent to every taxpayer, combine income tax and NICs in calculating how our taxes have contributed to government spending. So there is no reason why the poorest in the land should be paying 12% on a major proportion of their income, while the richest are paying only 2% on a major proportion of theirs. Neil Hornsby Inverness • Boris Johnson is right: it is “absolutely vital to find the money” to invest in the NHS and social care, but not through an unfair increase in national insurance – a regressive tax levied on workers, employers and the self-employed. Instead, raising income tax and capital gains tax would ensure that taxpayers receiving income from wealth and pensions would also be required to contribute, spreading the burden more widely and fairly. Kim Loader Goathland, North Yorkshire • While the government is going to tax income more through higher NICs, a couple in their 70s who own their home can inherit a house from a widowed parent, sell it for £300,000 and have no tax to pay. Taxing inheritance more would fund social care for the elderly. It would reduce the iniquity whereby heirs who inherit from parents whose wealth went on care fees are left with depleted inheritances, while those whose parents live autonomously until they die do so much better. Alan Fairs Bewdley, Worcestershire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Aditya Chakrabortty (A tale of two towns – one in the north, one in the south – exposes the lie of ‘levelling up’, 2 February) is quite right to point to the dishonesty that is at the centre of the Tory “levelling up” slogan. First, because the money available is nowhere near what is needed for the task – much is bluster and spin. Second, because it deliberately creates a false division between working-class communities in the north of England and in London, when the government dumps on both equally. In the 1960s, Edmonton, which Chakrabortty’s article refers to, was part of the significant Lea Valley industrial area, as was Tottenham, where I live. The Tottenham sound of the Dave Clark Five rivalled that of another industrial working-class area, the Merseyside of the Beatles. In the 1980s, both areas were laid waste by the Thatcher government as part of a deliberate strategy. The neo-Thatcherites in the present government are not about to sort out the industrial mess and the destruction of working-class lives that their predecessors managed 40 years ago. Keith Flett Tottenham, London • The levelling up that’s needed is not just regional – it’s about building a fairer society in the whole of this wealthy country. It means children from state schools having the same opportunities as those from private schools, and families from Cornwall to Norfolk, Newcastle to Bristol and Stoke being able to afford decent homes. It means no one having to choose between heating and eating, while for others the choice is which of their houses shall they spend this weekend in and in which car shall they travel to it. It means taxing the rich, closing tax loopholes, giving contracts to the best rather than the best friends, and using a proper proportion of the nation’s wealth for those whose needs are greatest. It will never happen under a Conservative government. Joy Webb Penistone, South Yorkshire • The government must have spent more time developing the front cover of the levelling-up white paper than its contents, because after a decade of Tory-driven austerity and the deindustrialisation of the 1980s, the government’s proposals are woefully inadequate. The proposals are merely a reshuffling of the deck chairs on the Titanic. As a 15-year-old student, I have seen firsthand the devastating impact of austerity cuts in schools. The secretary of state for levelling up oversaw these brutal cuts when he served as education secretary. He decimated the education service, thus levelling down the performance of students, so how on earth can he be considered the right man to level up Britain? Harry Aldridge Plymouth • The disproportionality of allocation between rich constituencies such as Bromsgrove and poor local authorities such as Knowsley (Report, 2 February), suggests that Michael Gove and his colleagues are great fans of Billie Holiday, and of one song in particular. God Bless the Child starts with the words “Them that’s got shall get, Them that’s not shall lose”, an apt strapline for the mockery that is levelling up. Andy Stelman Bishop’s Castle, Shropshire • Looking forward so much to our levelling up – to the day when every British citizen can afford to send their child to Eton. David Rintoul London • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Britain’s highest-paid university chief and another senior executive created a culture of favouritism and exclusion at Imperial College, according to damning details of a report released after she had attempted to suppress its publication. Imperial’s president, Alice Gast, last year apologised after an independent report found that she and the college’s chief financial officer had bullied members of staff. However, they have resisted calls by student and academic representatives to resign, while she attempted to block the report’s release under freedom of information. But redacted details were published on Thursday after the Information Commissioner’s Office (ICO) rejected Gast’s arguments against the release and disagreed with her attempts to downplay the findings against her as “relatively minor”. They include accounts of Gast and Muir Sanderson’s behaviour and its impact on victims who were bullied in 2019 and 2020. Jane McNeill QC, who carried out the investigation, said some witnesses had expressed a fear of retaliation. McNeill found that Gast and Sanderson had “created or contributed to a culture which involves and tolerates favouritism, exclusion, the making of disparaging comments about others and at times a lack of respect for others”. Referring to Gast and Sanderson by their initials, the report goes on to state: “In relation to both AG and MS, several witnesses described a culture of favouritism: you are ‘in or out’; ‘the favourite child’; ‘a hero or zero’; or in the ‘in gang or out gang’. One witness said that there were a lot of employees at any one time ‘in the rubbish pot’.” McNeill’s report found that Gast had bullied a colleague, which she has apologised for, but that her treatment of some others did not amount to bullying. Sanderson has apologised for bullying two colleagues. The report found he had bullied one person and said it made no finding that he had bullied others. Barry Jones, the London regional official for the University College Union, said: “It is shameful that President Alice Gast and CFO Muir Sanderson still remain in post after being found to have bullied staff and treated them with such disrespect. UCU members report an endemic culture of bullying at Imperial, a culture which hits marginalised staff the hardest.” Imperial is subject to an investigation by the universities watchdog, the Office for Students, over the bullying allegations. It was announced last year that Gast – the highest-paid university chief among the elite Russell Group – is to step down from her £554,000 role when her contract expires this year. Sanderson’s behaviour to one victim was described as “aggressive and intimidating”. She was undermined and spoken to in a condescending and offensive way, with “stark examples” such as being addresses as “young lady” and being told to “watch her tone”. “The evidence I heard also raises questions about whether MS’s character and powerful role within the College, encompassing the roles of both CFO and COO, impact on good decision-making in the College,” McNeill wrote. McNeill said there was reference to “alpha male” behaviour by Sanderson and some others – but there was insufficient evidence to lead her to conclude there was a sexist culture. However, comments such as “watch your tone, young lady” should alert the college authorities to a risk of a complaint of sex discrimination arising from similar comments or behaviours, she said. Similarly, she warned that other comments could suggest negative treatment relating to other protected characteristics. For example, one witness alleged that Sanderson had used the expression “[leaving] the plantation”. “These types of comments have no place in a modern workplace. It is troubling in this day and age that one of the most senior employees at an institution like Imperial College should think that a comment made by a senior employee referring to a ‘one-armed black lesbian’ should be treated as a joke,” the report found. Sanderson said he had no recollection of using the term. Referring to Gast’s behaviour and the impact on a victim, whose name is redacted, the report said: “AG, as president of the College, has exercised her position in such a way as to undermine [X] both personally and professionally. [X’s] self-esteem and self-confidence have been badly affected and [X] has suffered from lack of sleep and weight loss.” Other findings about the overall culture at Imperial – which echoed concerns that have been expressed consistently in confidence to the Guardian by a range of staff – included “a culture of making disparaging comments about others who are absent”. Gast said on Thursday: “It was personally devastating for me to find that my behaviour fell short of both the College’s and my own expectations and that it had affected a colleague in this way.” “I repeat my sincere apologies. I pledged to use the experience as a catalyst for positive change for both me and Imperial. In the two years since these events took place, I have worked hard to ensure that my colleagues feel fully supported as we all contribute to improvements in the College culture.” Sanderson said: “The report makes as uncomfortable reading now as it did in 2020. I have apologised for my actions and I remain sorry. I cooperated fully with the investigation and accepted the disciplinary sanctions applied.” Despite her apology, a ruling by the ICO on the release of details of the report revealed that Gast argued that it should not be released as the findings against her were “relatively minor”, a claim the ICO dismissed. It also rejected her drawing of parallels between herself and Dr Kathleen Stock, the philosophy professor who resigned from her job at the University of Sussex after a row over her views on gender identification and transgender rights.“Being honest, I wouldn’t have said it.” Rishi Sunak’s blunt remark about Boris Johnson’s comments on Keir Starmer and Jimmy Savile was the clearest indication yet that he is distancing himself from his beleaguered boss. Speaking in the flag-bedecked Downing Street conference room without Johnson alongside him, Sunak was attempting to set out in soothing tones a package of measures aimed at easing the pain of the cost of living crisis. But, as ever in recent weeks, another crisis – that facing the prime minister’s leadership – impinged on proceedings. Less than an hour earlier, Johnson’s close aide Munira Mirza had resigned, citing the prime minister’s failure to apologise for trying to smear Starmer by falsely connecting him with the failure to prosecute Savile. Pressed on whether Johnson should give a full apology for the remarks, as Mirza had asked, Sunak repeatedly replied it was a matter for Johnson himself. Sunak didn’t say much. He didn’t have to. The comments are bound to be read by some of his colleagues as the strongest signal yet he may believe it is now time to act. Certainly, the chancellor looks like being the frontrunner in any leadership race – and his handling of the cost of living squeeze is being closely watched by backbenchers as a test of his political nous. The cost of living crisis is a present danger to him. But the past is too. Many Tory MPs were already less than impressed with his insistence on increasing national insurance contributions as the quid pro quo for funding Johnson’s costly plans for the NHS and social care. They are unlikely to be reassured by the fact that inflation is likely to hit 7% in the coming months. In effect, he is now handing households a rebate, at the same time as increasing their taxes – giving with one hand and taking with the other. It was also Sunak who doggedly insisted on cutting universal credit payments, which had been increased by £20 a week to help the poorest families weather the pandemic. After a furious backlash, which was partially reversed at the autumn budget by reducing the taper rate at which it is withdrawn. Sunak’s careful approach to the public finances is praised by colleagues keen to see the Tories win back their reputation for fiscal competence. But others regard it as politically tone deaf, as the after-effects of the pandemic continue to ripple through the economy. Caution about the public finances also appeared to be behind his decision to cushion the blow of rocketing energy prices partly with loans, which will ultimately have to be repaid by consumers themselves, rather than the taxpayer footing the bill. That is effectively a bet on energy prices coming back down again in future years. If they remain high for longer than expected, the Treasury may yet have to extend the scheme. Another of Sunak’s political principles – a reluctance to interfere in business – appeared to be behind his decision to avoid taxing energy companies to pay for the measures, something Labour has been calling for since the autumn. Polls suggest that would be a popular approach, with oil companies raking in huge profits; but it cuts against Sunak’s brand of free market Conservatism. He has frequently restrained Johnson’s free-spending instincts, believing as he said in Thursday’s press conference that managing the public finances responsibly is what the public have the right to expect from his party. “As long as I have this job I’m going to do what I believe to be right in the long-term interests of the country,” he said. But there is increasing focus at Westminster on how well his sombre brand of Conservatism would fit him for another job altogether. • This article was amended on 6 February 2022 to correct a mistranscription of Sunak’s comment about Johnson’s Savile accusation. An earlier version had the quote as: “To be honest, I wouldn’t have said it.”A 63-year-old convicted murderer and former soldier known as the “Galician Rambo” because of his survival skills and history of jailbreaks has been arrested by police in north-west Spain after spending almost a year on the run. Alfredo Sánchez Chacón, who was supposed to remain behind bars until 2025 for the murder of a man in 1996 and other offences, failed to return to prison after being allowed out on a day pass last March. He was arrested in the early hours of Thursday after residents of the Galician municipality of Valdoviño noticed a man trying to force his way into a house and informed a local Guardia Civil officer. The off-duty police officer headed to the house and noticed movement nearby. “After waiting a while, he saw a person emerging from a thicket with a rucksack on his back,” the force said. “As he headed towards the road, the officer gave chase and ordered him to stop. The man dropped his rucksack to try to get away more quickly, but was caught and subdued by the officer after a brief chase.” A Guardia Civil source told El País that Sánchez Chacón was limping, adding: “He’s pretty old now and very broken.” After being taken to hospital for a check-up, he was placed in a cell in the Galician city of Ferrol while he waited to appear in court. Police investigating the 1996 murder spent seven months searching for Sánchez Chacón before he was spotted in a brothel and arrested in March 1997. He had been in jail in Vigo for just a few months before he and a fellow inmate escaped by knotting together sheets and climbing out of a window. The fugitive then evaded capture for two years by drawing on the training he had received as a member of the Spanish Legion and moving around the countryside of northern Spain. He was recaptured in a bar in November 1999, only to escape once again in 2001. That time, however, his bid for freedom lasted just 25 minutes.