More than a third of the American population is currently experiencing rapid, above-average rates of temperature increase, with 499 counties already breaching 1.5C (2.7F) of heating, a Guardian review of climate data shows. The US as a whole has heated up over the past century due to the release of planet-warming gases from burning fossil fuels, and swaths of the US west, north-east and upper midwest – representing more than 124.6 million people – have recorded soaring increases since federal government temperature records began in 1895. Though the climate crisis is convulsing the US, it is doing so unevenly. Hotspots of extreme warming have emerged in many of America’s largest cities, and places as diverse as California’s balmy coast to the previously frigid northern reaches of Minnesota, while other places, particularly in the south, have barely seen their temperatures budge. “The warming isn’t distributed evenly,” said Brian Brettschneider, an Alaska-based climate scientist who collated the county temperature data from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (Noaa). “Many places have seen dramatic changes, but there are always some places below the average who will think, ‘It didn’t seem that warm to me.’ The impacts differ depending where you are.” Ventura county in California has heated up more than any other county in the contiguous US, according to the Noaa data, experiencing a 2.6C (4.75F) increase in total warming in the period from 1895 to 2021. Meanwhile, counties that include many of America’s largest cities, including New York, Los Angeles, Miami, Philadelphia, San Francisco and Boston, have all seen their average temperatures rise far beyond the national average, which stands at about a 1C (1.8F) increase on pre-industrial times. Mark Jackson, a meteorologist at the National Weather Service based in Oxnard in Ventura county said the county’s temperature increase was “a remarkable number, it’s a scary number when you consider the pace we are looking at”. Jackson said the county had seen a large increase in heatwaves, including a spell above 37C (100F) last summer that “really stressed” the local community. Ventura county, which hugs the Californian coast north-west of Los Angeles, is known for a pleasant Mediterranean climate cooled slightly by the proximity of the ocean. But Jackson said that recent heatwaves have seen warm air flow down from mountains in the nearby Los Padres national forest to the coast, while the ocean itself is being roiled by escalating temperatures. “It’s been really remarkable to see it get that hot right up to the coast,” he said. California is in the grip of its most severe drought in 1,200 years and scientists say this is fueling the heat seen in many places in the state – Los Angeles has warmed by 2.3C (4.2F) since 1895, while Santa Barbara has jumped by 2.4C (4.38F) – by reducing moisture in soils, which then bake more quickly. Higher temperatures are also worsening the risk of wildfires in the state. “We lost everything,” said Tyler Suchman, founder of online marketing firm Tribal Core who in 2017 fled with his wife to escape a huge wildfire that razed their home in Ojai, in Ventura county. “It was harrowing. The winds were blowing like crazy and the hills lining the highway were all on fire, I had never seen anything like it.” Just 11 months later, a separate wildfire destroyed the couple’s next home, in Malibu, as their neighbor scooped up water from his hot tub in a desperate attempt to tackle the flames. “No one wants us to move next to them now,” Suchman said. “You can see how the area has changed over the 18 years since we moved to Ojai. It’s a beautiful place but regrettably we can’t live there now, the risk is too great.” Hotspots of above-average warming are found across the US. Grand county in Utah, a place of sprawling deserts, cliffs and plateaus, is the second fastest warming county in the lower 48 states, while every county in New Jersey, Massachusetts and Connecticut has warmed by more than 1.5C (2.7F) since 1895. It’s the more northern latitudes that have experienced the most extreme recent heat, however, with counties in Alaska making up all of the top six fastest warming places since 1970 (comparable temperature data for Alaska does not go back further than the 1920s). Alaska’s North slope, situated within the rapidly warming Arctic, has heated up by an enormous 3.7C (6.6F) in just the past 50 years. “There really is a climate shift under way in Alaska, everyone can see things are different than they used to be and everyone is concerned about what the future here will look like,” said Brettschneider, who added that even his teenage children had noticed the retreat of sea ice, an elongating fire season and a dearth of cold days. The warmth is also melting frozen soils, known as permafrost, causing buildings to subside and roads to buckle. “If you drive on the roads near Fairbanks you better have a strong stomach because it feels like you’re riding a rollercoaster,” said Katharine Hayhoe, a climate scientist at Texas Tech University and chief scientist at the Nature Conservancy. Other locations traditionally used to severe cold have also seen sharp temperature increases. Roseau and Kittson counties, in northern Minnesota, are both in the top five fastest warming counties in the lower 48 states, with their warming driven by winters that have heated up by around 3.8C (7F) in the state since modern record keeping began. Winters are warming more quickly than summers because more heat usually escapes the land during the colder months, but it is now being trapped by greenhouse gases. “Some might say ‘well I like warmer winters’ but people are noticing negative impacts, such as changes to the growing season and the loss of cultural practices such as cross-country skiing races,” said Heidi Roop, a climate scientist at the University of Minnesota. “Even small temperature changes have big consequences.” Globally, governments set a goal in the 2015 Paris climate agreement to avoid a temperature rise of 1.5C (2.7F) above the pre-industrial era. Beyond this point, scientists say, the world will face increasingly punishing heatwaves, storms, flooding and societal unrest. While certain areas of the US have already passed 1.5C, the important metric is still the global average, Hayhoe said. “In some places a 2C increase is fine but 2.5C is when the wheels fall off the bus, some locations are OK with 5ft of sea level rise because of their elevation while others can’t cope with 5 in because they are low-lying,” she said. “Local vulnerability is very customized. What’s relevant for communities is whether the world meets its targets or not, it’s a collective target for the world.” That global threshold is in severe peril, with some forecasts warning that 1.5C (2.7F) could be breached within a decade without drastic cuts to carbon emissions. Communities will need to brace themselves for the consequences of this, according to Roop. “The warming we are seeing is pushing at the bounds of lived human experience, of what we thought was possible,” she said. “We are paying the costs for that and we need to prepare for the changes already set in motion, as well as to prevent further warming.” • The map of US counties on this article was amended on 6 February 2022 to correct the temperature conversions.The punters very much had the upper hand at last year’s Dublin Racing Festival, with seven favourites and a second-favourite winning the eight Grade One events, and Honeysuckle (3.00) will be a short price to retain her unbeaten record in the Irish Champion Hurdle at Leopardstown on Sunday, on what promises to be another afternoon when market leaders dominate. Rachael Blackmore’s mount will set off at around 1-3 and and while this is her first meeting with Zanahiyr, one of last season’s leading juveniles, he has 6lb to find on the official ratings and Henry de Bromhead’s runner also gets a 7lb mares’ allowance. Saint Roi, meanwhile, was 21 lengths behind Honeysuckle 12 months ago and anything other than a 14th straight win for Honeysuckle will be as much a surprise as it is a disappointment. Leopardstown 1.20 Galopin Des Champs could hardly have done any more when making his chase debut at the Christmas meeting here, winning by 22 lengths with any amount in hand. Musselburgh 1.32 Inca Prince has made rapid progress since joining Ruth Jefferson in the autumn and would be a match for likely favourite Impulsive One if reproducing the form of either of his recent wins. Leopardstown 1.50 The bare form of the Tingle Creek at Sandown in December gives Chacun Pour Soi plenty to find with Greaneteen, but he is likely to be a different proposition back on home turf. Musselburgh 2.05 Little to choose here between promising novices Since Day One and Restandbethankful, but Donald McCain’s runner remains unbeaten over hurdles and may have the greater scope for improvement. Leopardstown 2.25 It is difficult to find a runner without some sort of chance in this fearsomely competitive handicap chase. Minella Times, last season’s Grand National winner, will get plenty of attention ahead of the publication of this year’s Aintree weights later this month while Samcro and The Shunter are other familiar names in the 17-strong field but Rebel Gold, a close second at Limerick in December in a race run in a useful time, may be the pick of the prices at around 16-1. Musselburgh 2.40 Brorson has taken a 13lb hike in the weights after his latest success at Southwell but he won with any amount in hand there and even his new mark may underestimate his potential at staying trips. Musselburgh 3.15 The front-running Sarasota Star has been headed in the closing stages on his last two starts but he remains on a fair mark and better ground here could make all the difference. Leopardstown 3.35 Sir Gerhard is the only Grade One favourite on Sunday’s card who might start at odds-against, and Three Stripe Life looks overpriced at around 9-2 to beat him. Gordon Elliott’s runner would have gone close to beating his stable companion, Mighty Potter, in a Grade One at the Christmas meeting but for a mistake two out and will set a high bar for Sir Gerhard, last year’s Champion Bumper winner, on just his second start over hurdles.Click here to access the print version The Chambers Dictionary (2014) is recommended. Special announcement We regret to announce that, until further notice, we are unable to offer prizes for solvers of the Azed weekly crosswords. The special monthly Azed clue writing competitions are not affected and will continue as normal. Entry rules for these will appear as usual.Click here to access the print version. Normal Sudoku rules apply, except the numbers in the cells contained within grey lines add up to the figures in the corner. No number can be repeated within each shape formed by grey lines. Buy next week’s Observer Digital Edition to see the completed puzzle.Click here to access the print version. Fill the grid using the numbers 1 to 9. Each number must appear just once in every row, column and 3x3 box. Buy next week’s Observer Digital Edition to see the completed puzzle.Millions of British homes are preparing for a cost of living crisis prompted by the global gas supply crunch, but the high market prices mean big revenues for the world’s fossil fuel giants. That includes BP, which is forecast to reveal a historic return to multibillion-dollar profits in its results this week. The oil company is expected to have raked in a profit of almost $4bn for the final quarter of last year, compared with a thin $115m in the same period the year before, in large part due to record-breaking energy market prices around the globe. The surge in global gas markets through the final months of 2021, combined with an oil price rally to seven-year highs, could catapult the company to a full-year profit of $12.6bn (£9.3bn) compared with a loss of $5.7bn in 2020. The same trend is visible in the US, where oil giants ExxonMobil and Chevron have in the past week reported net profits of $23bn and $15.6bn respectively for last year – the highest since 2014, when crude last traded above $100 a barrel. The scale of BP’s return to profit will come as little surprise to those who recall the claim in December by its chief executive, Bernard Looney, that the energy crisis had transformed the company into a “cash machine”. Some people may be tempted to use “outrage generator” as a more apt description, following last week’s news that the gas market highs will also lead to record high energy bills and drive millions of households into fuel poverty. On Thursday, Shell reported a quadrupling of profits, fuelling fresh calls for the UK Treasury to impose a windfall tax on companies that stand to benefit from the energy crisis, in order to fund extra help for hard-hit households. Shell reported better than expected profits of $6.4bn in the final quarter of last year, compared with earnings of $393m a year earlier. Its chief executive, Ben van Beurden, described the profit surge to $19.3bn in 2021, compared with $4.85bn the year before, as a “momentous year” for the company. It was pretty significant for its shareholders too: the company raised its dividends by 4% and opened an $8.5bn share buyback programme. A windfall for investors is one thing. But handouts for hard-pressed families appear to be another matter entirely. “I am not convinced that windfall taxes – popular though they may seem – is going to help us with supply, nor is it going to help us with demand,” Van Beurden said. “But, of course, we stand ready to be in dialogue with government on all the measures that we can collectively take.” For BP and Shell, the campaign to re-establish their social licences to operate amid growing climate consciousness is likely to be made more challenging by feelings of resentment from households struggling to make ends meet while the oil industry enjoys a bonanza. The challenge looks likely to last for years. The chancellor, Rishi Sunak, warned in an address on Thursday that the UK was “going to have to adjust to” greater costs, telling households to prepare for higher energy bills in the autumn. The woes facing households could stretch far further into the future than the return of cold weather. Global market experts, including the Wall Street bank Goldman Sachs, have predicted that higher energy prices could persist into 2025. Great news for the fossil fuel giants, grim for everyone else.The Peruvian prime minister Héctor Valer confirmed on Saturday that he will step down just four days after being named for the post, after allegations that he beat his daughter and late wife. On Friday, President Pedro Castillo said he would reshuffle the cabinet again, after just three days, amid widespread condemnation of his appointment of Valer as prime minister. On Saturday there was no sign of when the reshuffle may take place. Castillo must name his fourth cabinet in just six months in office, as Peru teeters on the brink of a leadership vacuum and there are calls for the former rural primary school teacher to resign. Using combative language, Valer accused the political right of forcing his resignation based on false accusations of domestic violence. “The complaints against me are based on lies,” he said, visibly angered. “I have come to leave a drop of blood to support the construction of this government.” Hours after Valer’s appointment on Tuesday, police reports emerged from 2016 in which his daughter and late wife accuse him of gender violence. One complaint filed by his 29-year-old daughter which was seen by the Guardian detailed that he “slapped, punched and kicked her in the face” as well as pulled her hair. Valer has denied the allegations and said the reports were fake. Under the Peruvian constitution, when the prime minister steps down the entire cabinet must follow suit until a replacement is nominated and a new ministerial team is chosen. Women’s rights groups protested against Valer’s appointment, and three fellow ministers also called for him to step down. The ultra-conservative Valer – who opposes sex education and has a history of sexist remarks – entered as a lawmaker with a far-right party before switching to a party that supported Castillo. Castillo, a member of a Marxist-Leninist party Perú Libre, has moved increasingly to the right since taking office last July. Though nominally leftist, he expressed socially conservative views opposing LGBTQ rights, legal abortion and sex education which differed little from those of his far-right opponents, before taking office. Suspicions about his leftist credentials were further fanned when he was photographed laughing and smiling with far-right Brazilian president Jair Bolsonaro, who at one point put on Castillo’s trademark wide-brimmed hat, at a bilateral meeting on Thursday. In a national address on Friday, Castillo accused congress and his former ministers of “feeding instability and political uncertainty” but made no mention of the accusations against Valer. However, analysts point to a crisis of leadership for the president who has never before held public office. “Pedro Castillo’s presence in the government is the main problem,” said Fernando Tuesta, a political science professor at Lima’s Pontifical Catholic University.At least four homes have been lost in bushfires that have been bearing down on the towns of Bridgetown and Denmark in Western Australia, with the state’s fire commissioner attributing the intensity of the fires to the changing climate. The WA emergency services minister, Stephen Dawson, on Sunday confirmed properties and businesses had been affected, but the scale of the damage would not be known until assessors moved through. He said “significant progress” had been made in containing the fires in the state’s south, but the danger remained. “We still have an active fire situation so we ask people to please be patient. It’s incredibly difficult time for everyone involved. For all the affected community, please know everyone in Western Australia is thinking about you.” Fires remained out of control on Sunday afternoon and had burned more than 5,000 hectares. Dawson said 210 firefighters had been battling the fires at Denmark and Bridgetown on Sunday. Western Power had restored services to thousands of homes but many remained without power. The WA fire and emergency services commissioner, Darren Klemm, said the fires had been “extremely challenging” amid hot and unpredictable conditions. But milder weather should allow progress to be made on the Denmark fire on Sunday evening. Klemm said four homes had been lost in Denmark and one had been damaged, with another four structures also lost. He said in Bridgetown there were some buildings damaged on a golf course and at the shire depot and waste facility. One resident was taken to hospital after fighting a fire on Friday afternoon on his rural property, Klemm said. Klemm said the intensity of the fires was a result of the changing climate. “The challenges we are having with these fires and floods … I feel are becoming more intense,” he said. “On Friday night the fire in Denmark doubled in size overnight. For one of the most southern parts of our state, to have a fire double in size overnight is not territory we have been in before.” In a Facebook post, the WA fire and emergency services department said it had been a “hellish night” on Saturday. “Scores of firefighters spent a hellish night under pressure from variable winds, showers of embers and oppressive heat as they fought against a firestorm bearing down on our communities,” authorities said. “Their admirable efforts have made significant progress in Bridgetown and Denmark, but we’re not out of the woods yet.” In the railway town of Hester, about 100 were warned it was too late to flee on Saturday evening and they were urged to take shelter inside. Assessment teams were working to determine property damage, and the department urged residents to be patient while firefighters still actively defended properties. A bushfire burning near the Bruce Rock shire was moving south-west quickly about 2.30pm on Sunday local time, burning out of control. About 2.45pm on Sunday Hester was no longer under direct threat, but was still in an emergency area as the uncontained but stationary fire burned out of control. An emergency warning remained for the coastal shire of Denmark, after residents were told to evacuate on Friday. Four specialists from NSW Fire and Rescue were on their way to WA on Sunday afternoon to assist local authorities, along with members of the NSW Rural Fire Service and the National Parks and Wildlife Service and Forestry Corporation, following a request from WA. An evacuation centre has been set up at the basketball stadium in Manjimup, about three hours south of Perth. People required to quarantine should make other arrangements. If this is not possible, they can still head to the centre and notify staff when they arrive. Pets are not permitted at the centre unless they are assistance animals, but those unable to make other arrangements should make their way to the centre and follow directions. The WA premier Mark McGowan thanked firefighters for their efforts over the week, and urged the public to follow advice from emergency authorities.On the 182nd anniversary of the signing of Aotearoa New Zealand’s founding document, the Waitangi Treaty grounds – usually thronging with tens of thousands of people – were quiet and cloaked in a gloss of rain, a sign, or tohu, to some that it is a Waitangi Day like no other. National events were cancelled this year, and ceremonies, speeches and reflections moved online, as the country teeters on the edge of a widespread Omicron outbreak. In previous years, the day begins with a dawn service, where Māori leaders, members of parliament, religious leaders, officials and countless others gather in darkness to join together in waiata (song) and prayer. Then follow speeches, live music, and a barbecue served up by the prime minister, Jacinda Ardern, and members of her Labour party. Roughly 40,000 people attend the celebration each year, under a blazing summer sun. Today, under drizzly, subdued, skies, just 200 people gathered on the shoreline below Ti Tii Marae, to watch waka taua – war canoes – paddle to the shore. Pita Tipene, chairman of the Waitangi National Trust Board, said the morning was surreal without the usual crowds. Tipene held his own karakia (prayer) early in the morning, with his mokopuna (grandchildren). He stood at the marae (meeting house) and looked across the empty grounds, where he would usually see people standing shoulder-to-shoulder, and likened it to a forest without birdsong or cicadas. “The interaction, and the discourse, and discussion and debate and the buzz of the people – it is very similar to being in a forest with the bird song – [without it] something’s not quite right. In this case, it’s Covid being amongst us all, and the decision that was made to ensure the safety and welfare of everybody.” Tipene commented on the rain falling across much of the North Island, and said that in his memory, he has never attended a Waitangi Day where it had poured down. “That in itself is a tohu, a sign,” he said, adding that he sees the rain on Waitangi, which translates to “weeping water”, as a positive sign for reflection and change. “It’s time to set this nation on the course that was envisioned by our tupuna [ancestors], when they signed it 182 years ago.” That includes looking towards the treaty’s bicentennial in 18 years. “I’m encouraging all leaders, including political leaders, to start having, in a very purposeful way, conversations about what nationhood means and what are some tangible symbols could be brought to Waitangi and other parts of the country for 2040.” Treaty ‘compels us to consider and respect our differences’ In a pre-recorded address, Ardern said while people cannot come together on the treaty grounds, “the day remains of great importance to us as a nation”. “In previous speeches you have heard me use the metaphor that ‘Aotearoa will always have clouds’, to represent the challenges we need to overcome today and into the future. “How we need to continue to use every opportunity to cross the bridge, te arawhiti, and join our two worlds. And how we need to work in partnership to improve outcomes for Māori, and for all New Zealanders. “While we always have more work to do – the mahi never ends – it is important to take time and reflect.” Ardern reflected on some of the year’s milestones – New Zealand’s pandemic response, which led to some of the best health outcomes in the world; a new school curriculum that will include the teaching of New Zealand history; and 2022 becoming the first year where Matariki, the Māori new year celebration, will be honoured as a public holiday. But she acknowledged the government still had a way to go in turning around poverty, housing inequality and poor health outcomes for Māori. “If we are to make progress as a nation, we have to be willing to question practices that have resulted over and over in the same or even worse outcomes,” Ardern said. “What we all want by and large for our people is the same. The same chance to fulfil our potential. To live decent lives. To make decisions for ourselves. How we get there will differ. That is partnership. That is building the bridge.” The Treaty of Waitangi, Te Tiriti o Waitangi, was signed by Māori chiefs and the British Crown in 1840, and has been commemorated as a public holiday since 1974 – for two years as “New Zealand Day” before reverting to the name of the foundational treaty. It has often been the scene of demonstrations, with Māori protesting against the lack of progress made in tackling inequality and ongoing breaches of the treaty. In Ardern’s first Waitangi Day address in 2018, she urged Māori to continue holding the government to account. Last year the Waitangi Tribunal ruled that the government had breached the treaty by giving little heed to the needs of Māori in its pandemic response. Tipene said the government had not yet been held to account on some matters, but added that it was, compared with many previous governments, more open to conversation and debate. Governor general Dame Cindy Kiro, the first Māori woman to hold the title, used her first Waitangi Day address to acknowledge the many sacrifices New Zealanders had made throughout the pandemic and to thank those who have borne the burden of keeping the country safe. “Covid-19 has again reminded us of the burdens and privileges of citizenship: the duty of care and respect we share as New Zealanders. That was also the message handed down to us by our forefathers who signed Te Tiriti o Waitangi. It is our nation’s great leveller – a moral and social contract that binds us all equally.” Kiro likened the treaty to a “sacred covenant of marriage”. “The vows made at the outset do not end there. Rather, those vows provide the foundation of a lasting commitment. “Throughout our history, we have not always done right by the commitment made by our ancestors 182 years ago. And while we cannot change our past, we can draw wisdom from it. We can see the treaty, not as a burden, but as a gift, because it compels us to consider and respect our differences, and to match virtuous ideals with courageous action.”Scott Morrison has declared politics is a “brutal business” as he seeks to downplay the leaking of a text message from the deputy prime minister, Barnaby Joyce, branding him a “hypocrite and a liar”. Speaking at the i4Give Day memorial service in Sydney, which commemorates the young victims killed in the Oatlands crash in 2020, the prime minister also spoke of his Christian faith, saying he had “easily” forgiven Joyce for the damaging text message leaked on Friday. “Politics is a brutal business,” Morrison said on Sunday. “If you can’t accept and understand each other’s frailties, and be forgiving in those circumstances, then frankly, that says a lot more about you than it does about others. “That is what my faith has always informed me to do … as it has so many others, and I’m thankful for that. “Politicians, they’re no different to anyone else. And people say things, and people feel things, people get angry, people get bitter. Of course they do. That’s all of us. And so who am I to be judging someone else?” Morrison said “no one is immune” to having unpleasant things said about them, but the more important question was how to respond. He said he hoped the lesson from the i4Give day of “understanding human frailty” was heeded. “Human frailty, it’s real. We all share it. We all live with it. And we all need to be more understanding of it.” He insisted that he and Joyce could continue to work together, saying he would not be distracted by last week’s leaked messages, which came after revelations of another text exchange between the former New South Wakes premier Gladys Berejiklian and an unnamed Liberal minister, in which Morrison was called a “horrible, horrible person”, a “complete psycho”. He insisted that none of the leaks had come from within his cabinet. “What people send around in texts I frankly could not care less about,” he said. “Australians are far more interested in their jobs and their lives than what people are sending in text messages to each other,” he said. Senior ministers also rallied around Morrison on Sunday ahead of the parliamentary sitting week, dismissing the series of text messages that questioned his trustworthiness. The environment minister Sussan Ley said that while it had been a difficult week for the government, she insisted the chance of any leadership spill against Morrison or Joyce was “absolutely none”. “The most important issue is the unity in the Morrison government,” Ley told Sky News on Sunday. “As a minister that has sat in three cabinets with three prime ministers … this is the most united cabinet table I have sat at.” When questioned on whether Morrison remained an asset for the Liberal party, the home affairs minister Karen Andrews said the prime minister was a “great campaigner” who had connected well with voters at the 2019 election, when he defied expectations of a Labor victory. “It is a different set of circumstances now, but the Scott Morrison that was there a couple of years ago back in 2019 is the same Scott Morrison that we have now,” Andrews told the ABC’s Insiders program. “We need to get him out into the community, out in Victoria, Queensland, New South Wales, all of the states across Australia. We all need to be doing that. It has been an incredibly difficult time for everyone and we all have to make sure that we are properly connecting.” When asked if she had ever known Morrison to tell a lie, Andrews said that had not been her experience, and he had only ever been “decent and respectful”. “I’ve had a couple of robust discussions with him, as you would expect, but I’ve always found him to be respectful to me, to listen to what I had to say. “He doesn’t always agree with it, but we just work our way through it.” Andrews also said that she was confident that Joyce and Morrison would be able to work together cooperatively “in the national interest”, despite the damaging leak of the message sent by Joyce as a backbencher in 2019. In the message, which was sent to a third party to be conveyed to former Liberal staffer Brittany Higgins, Joyce said he did not “get along” with Morrison. “He is a hypocrite and a liar from my observations and that is over a long time,” Joyce said in the screenshot of a message, dated 22 March last year. “I have never trusted him, and I dislike how earnestly [he] rearranges the truth to a lie.” Joyce disavowed the message on Saturday, saying it had not been based on his recent relationship with Morrison, with whom he has been in parliament since 2007, and worked with in cabinet for close to a decade. “My view from the backbench about the prime minister was based on assumption and commentary, not from a one on one working relationship,” Joyce said. “From a one on one working relationship, I found a man who has honoured every agreement that he’s made with me.” On Friday, Morrison accepted an apology from Joyce, and knocked back the offer of his resignation. “I understand Barnaby was in a different headspace last year, both professionally and personally, and so I know he genuinely no longer feels this way. Relationships change over time. Politicians are humans beings too. We all have our frailties and none of us are perfect.” The shadow treasurer, Jim Chalmers, seized on the divisions, labelling the government “a smoking ruin of division and disunity and dysfunction”. “The government seems to spend all of its time dishing out free character assessments of each other.”A five-year-old boy in Morocco who was trapped for four days in a deep well, and whose plight captivated residents of the north African kingdom, has died, the royal palace has said. The boy, Rayan Awram, fell 32 metres (100ft) down the empty shaft in his home village of Ighrane on Tuesday afternoon. Since then, every detail of the complex and dangerous mission to reach him has garnered international headlines and an outpouring of sympathy online, with the Arabic version of the hashtag #SaveRayan going viral. The shaft, just 45cm (18 inches) across, was too narrow for rescuers to reach Rayan, and widening it was considered too risky. Instead, large diggers were deployed to carve a slope in the hope of reaching the boy from the side. In the final stages, with teams estimated to be just three metres away from Rayan, authorities decided to dig by hand to avoid a landslide of the rocky, sandy earth. Large round concrete pipes were brought in to make a safer, horizontal tunnel for the final stretch. But on Saturday, Moroccan King Mohammed VI expressed his condolences to the boy’s parents after his body was pulled out by rescuers on Saturday night and taken away, wrapped in a yellow blanket. Earlier, his parents, Khaled Oram and Wassima Khersheesh had been escorted to an ambulance nearby. The palace statement said the king had been closely following the frantic rescue efforts by locals authorities, “instructing officials to use all means necessary to dig the boy out of the well and return him alive to his parents”. The king hailed the rescuers for their relentless work and the community for landing support to Rayan’s family. Hundreds of villagers and others had gathered to watch the rescue operation. Online messages of support and concern for the boy poured in from around the world as the rescue efforts dragged on for four days. On Friday, as a crowd gathered, some whistled and others cheered in support as rescuers in helmets moved equipment and rope into the narrow passage for what they hoped would be the final moments of the operation. Rescuers used a rope to send oxygen and water down to the boy as well as a camera to monitor him. By Saturday morning, the head of the rescue committee, Abdelhadi Temrani, said: “It is not possible to determine the child’s condition at all at this time. But we hope to God that the child is alive.” Rayan fell into the well located outside his home in the village of Ighran in Morocco’s mountainous northern Chefchaouen province on Tuesday evening. For three days, search crews used bulldozers to dig a parallel ditch. Then on Friday, they started excavating a horizontal tunnel to reach the trapped boy. Morocco’s MAP news agency said that experts in topographical engineering were called upon for help. Temrani, speaking to local television 2M, said on Saturday that rescuers had just two metres left to dig to reach the hole where the boy had been trapped. “The diggers encountered a hard rock on their way, and were therefore very careful to avoid any landslides or cracks,” he said. “It took about five hours to get rid of the rock because the digging was slow and was done in a careful way to avoid creating cracks in the hole from below, which could threaten the life of the child as well as the rescue workers.” The village of about 500 people is dotted with deep wells, many used for irrigating the cannabis crop that is the main source of income for many in the poor, remote and arid region of Morocco’s Rif Mountains. Most of the wells have protective covers. The exact circumstances of how the boy fell in the well are unclear. The boy’s mother told Moroccan media that Rayan had been playing nearby when he disappeared.Right, that’s it from me. I’m going to try and get a couple of hours sleep before morning. Thanks to anyone out there for tuning in, and to Ravi for his tweets! A disappointing game for England, who are yet to win a match this series, but a pleasing one for Australia, who WIN THE ASHES and can delight in seeing Perry back to her best with bat and ball. We’ll be back late on Monday night.Have a lovely day. Well, that wasn’t a box-office thriller. Australia used their innings to safely row towards the shore rather than try any fancy detours. England’s bowling was adequate, did the job , but without much ballast from the batters. A few problems for England at the top order, they’re so reliant on Heather Knight which puts a huge responsibility on her shoulders. We wait, incidentally, to hear any news on Kate Cross’s injury - who took two wickets. They’ve already rattled through the media presentations - the player of the match is Ellyse Perry; Heather Knight is disappointed in what might have been on a slow pitch; Meg Lanning would have liked to finish a little bit better with the bat but is very happy, says Perry is bowling better than she’s seen her bowl for a long time. 35.2 over: Australia 131-5 (Gardener 31, Sutherland 2) Easy does it, with a couple past the mid-off fielder then four leg byes. Australia have now not only retained but WON the Ashes, taking an unassailable 10-4 lead in the series with just one game to go. 35th over: Australia 125-5 (Gardener 29, Sutherland 2) Australia need five runs to win! Enough! says Gardener: she sends Shrubsole for six without moving a muscles in her boots, then pulls a short one for four more. 34th over: Australia 114-5 (Gardener 18, Sutherland 2)Charlie Dean gets a second and a direct hit from her last ball would have seen a run-out. 33rd over: Australia 111-5 (Gardener 16, Sutherland 2) Gardener eyes up a wide one from Shrubsoleand square drives it bounteously. Peculiarly, if/when Australia win this game - it will be the first time they’ve won the women’s Ashes at home since 2010-11. Cross, by the way, is off the field. They take DRINKS before the final act. 32nd over: Australia 106-5 (Gardener 11, Sutherland 2) At last Charlie Dean gets a bowl: not much left in the game for her to play with but she’s neat. A single a piece. 31st over: Australia 104-5 (Gardener 10, Sutherland 1) Australia crawling towards their target - but they can afford to. Just file your nails and froth up some morning milk. 30th over: Australia 102-5 (Gardener 9, Sutherland 0) Ecclestone polishes off her spell - bowled straight through. Gives away as little as usual - just a single from it - but unusually wicketless. As they pointed out on the radio - England scored so few that Australia didn’t have to take risks against her. 29th over: Australia 101-5 (Gardener 8, Sutherland 0) Knight beckons Shrubsole back into the attack, and she’s on the money straight away. Some wisdom from the oracle that is Raf: 28th over: Australia 100-5 (Gardener 7, Sutherland 0) Ecclestone rattles through her ninth over - wicketless but effective. It feels like that Perry dismissal was too little too late, but crazy things do happen. Nicely played by Perry - she didn’t zip along but sensibly pulled Australia along with her. Perry calls for a quick single, but she’s not quick enough to beat the crocked Cross’s direct hit from mid-on, even with a dive. 27th over: Australia 99-4 ( Perry 40, Gardener 6) Cross continues, despite the dodgy digit. But perhaps all isn’t quite well as the over goes for 12. Perry whoop-a-loops her for six over mid-off and a glorious four through the covers from Gardner. 26th over: Australia 87-4 ( Perry 33, Gardener 1) Perry drives Ecclestone and Cross injures herself at mid-off. It looks nasty - wrist or finger - but the plucky thing lets the physio do something revolting, and she plays on. 25th over: Australia 85-4 ( Perry 32,Gardener 0) And as the target drops below fifty with a strawberry milkshake of a straight-drive from Perry, Cross snaffles another one, keeping her nerve with a wobble ball as McGrath goes for a swing. Through the gap! McGrath misjudges one that nips in, fancies a drive and the ball removes her sticks. 24th over: Australia 80-3 ( Perry 27, McGrath 19) McGrath gets bored with all this tippy-tappy and lifts Ecclestone back over her head with a shimmy for four. Smartly done! 23rd over: Australia 75-3 ( Perry 26, McGrath 15) The end of Cross’s sixth over (1-29)- with Australia rotating the strike like speed chess players. 22nd over: Australia 71-3 ( Perry 24, McGrath 14) Perry, whose (relatively) sluggish strike-rate was the reason for her being dropped for the T20 earlier this series, is happy to play out a maiden from Ecclestone. 21st over: Australia 71-3 ( Perry 24, McGrath 14) Cross arranges and rearranges her hair in her run-up. Perry and McGrath gently farm the strike and pick up four. Mitchell Johnson has been busy bristling his moustache I see: 20th over: Australia 67-3 ( Perry 22, McGrath 12) Ecclestone rattles through another, one of great skills - amongst all the technical stuff - is an ability to scream through an over before the opposition have got their heads round it. 19th over: Australia 66-3 ( Perry 22, McGrath 11) McGrath square-drives the first ball of Sciver’s over with great aplomb four four. Lovely shot. She grabs another couple from an outside edge. This is Sciver’s sixth now - I guess there probably isn’t that much point leaving her anything to bowl at the end. This match will be decided in the next ten overs. 18th over: Australia 59-3 ( Perry 22, McGrath 4) Whenever Ecclestone has the ball, you feel potential in those fingers. Australia are patient though, with just a couple of singles from it. 17th over: Australia 57-3 ( Perry 21, McGrath 3) Sciver sprints in, arms and legs going full piston, and Australia take just a couple from the over. McGrath makes a late call to duck a bouncer and Jones gathers nicely. 16th over: Australia 55-3 ( Perry 20, McGrath 1) As the Manchester rain hammers down outside my window, they stop for DRINKS out in Melbourne. The sky is cornflower blue, with a few blobs of cotton wool cloud stuck on the collage with some sticky copydex. The city skyscrapers glimmer in the distance. Ecclestone rattles through another quick over. 15th over: Australia 54-3 ( Perry 20, McGrath 1) Perry ends the over by hooking Sciver’s bouncer for four. Healy’s wicket was an important one - she just looked to have turned the key in the motor. Winfield-Hill hangs on for dear life after leaping for the ball at mid-off, grabbing it, but then clinging on desperately as it threatened to escape her mid-drift. Healy’s lofted drive not quite lofted enough. 14th over: Australia 47-2 (Healy 21; Perry 15) England were 2-45 at the same stage - but the innings then disappointed like a popped balloon. Ecclestone whisks through her over - just a single from it. 13th over: Australia 46-2 (Healy 20; Perry 15) A two armed lbw appeal from Cross against Healy but after some chin-stroking they decide not to upstairs - wisely as it turns out. A peppering of singles, till Healy cha-chas way down tthe pitch and lofts her last ball over mid-off for six 12th over: Australia 37-2 (Healy 12; Perry 14) Knight decides it is time for spin, and Ecclestone it is, wearing sunglasses and a long plait . Perry greets her first ball with a sublime cover drive. 11th over: Australia 29-2 (Healy 11; Perry 9) Slightly distracted by a teenager making an early-morning return, but just the two for Healy, flicked off her pads. Here is Cross’s piece of gorgeousness from earlier: 10th over: Australia 29-2 (Healy 9; Perry 9) A maiden from Shrubsole, who has now bowled five miserly overs for just nine. 9th over: Australia 29-2 (Healy 9; Perry 9) Healy gets herself in a terrible muddle against Cross’s first ball, but the thick edge flies free of the fielders and she survives. Cross bowling with vibes. 8th over: Australia 27-2 (Healy 8; Perry 8) Just a penny off Shrubsole’s over: England’s bowlers giving their team a ghost of a chance here. 7th over: Australia 26-2 (Healy 7; Perry 8) Perry, who seems to have gone blonde again after a flirtation with brunette, is off the mark straight away with two consecutive fours: a cover drive and another through the off side which slips through the fielder’s legs. A beauty! Lanning has to walk off, head drooping, after her stumps are rearranged by a full seaming bomb. An attempted booming drive falls flat. 6th over: Australia 17-1 (Healy 6; Lanning 0) Nice bowling by Shrubsole who had beaten Haynes the ball before Shrubsole gets her woman - an away swinger that Haynes edges behind, well caught by a swooping Jones. 5th over: Australia 14-0 (Healy 3; Haynes 10) The first boundary of this Australian innings, as Haynes grows tall and cuts Sciver sharply, down to the rope. 4th over: Australia 8-0 (Healy 2; Haynes 5) Neat and tidy again by Shrubsole, whose face is pinking in the southern hemisphere sun. It looks a beautiful day in Melbourne - if you’re there, do send an email and tell us just how gorgeous it is. 3rd over: Australia 5-0 (Healy 2; Haynes 2) Slow and steady here by Australia - but no need to take risks I guess. Would like to see them tuck into this though, not tackle it bite by bite. A beauty from Sciver first ball, which Healy survives. Very good! 2nd over: Australia 4-0 (Healy 2; Haynes 1) Shrubsole starts with a wide, but redeems herself with five dots. Haynes off the mark with a pull to mid-on. There’s always pressure when you’re following Geoff on the OBO! Can I just give his Steve Smith’s Men another quick plug - such a good read on Sandpaper gate and Australian cricket culture - relevant again with all the chat about Langer et al. 1st over: Australia 2-0 (Healy 2; Haynes 0) Sciver opens in the absence of Katherine Brunt, who is watching from the boundary, sunglasses disguising her feelings. A largely uneventful over apart from a strangled appeal against Healy: lovely ball and Healy plays and misses. A cup of tea for all occasions ... and Nat Sciver is at the top of her run-up... let’s see England they can redeem themselves with the ball. Thanks Geoff! Well that was rather a wet lettuce of a performance by England in their penultimate innings of the tour. There isn’t much to add to Geoff’s pithy set of numbers below - but my sleep-deprived eyes can still admire the leafy gorgeousness of the Junction Oval. Just going to fill up my hot water bottle - back in five. Anyway, that’s enough from me. I’m tipping this chase will be done in about 30 overs. Your guide through that, or the thrilling batting collapse to come, is Tanya Aldred. “A refreshing thought on how time and circumstance works,” Damian writes in. “I’ve often argued the consequence thing in sport about how one thing changes all subsequent things. Or something. Everyone else usually tells me to shut up, calm down, and have another beer. But it’s important, no?” It’s important when people make judgements, incorrectly, about mistakes. Say the team loses by one run in the 50th over, and someone got called for running one short in the 29th. The response will be that the short run cost the match. But if that run was scored, everything that happened after it would have been slightly different. The target would have been different. The players would have approached the last couple of overs differently. All of that. If you miss a goal in the 40th minute, you’re a villain when it ends 0-0. But maybe if you had scored that goal, the other team would have scored three times after it. No one knows. What a profoundly limp performance from England, after at least competing in the other matches so far. Their bowlers will be left the thankless task of trying to do something with this. And yes, yes, don’t judge until both teams, blah blah. But this was a batting performance sapped of all confidence. The Australians were ruthless, they just keep bowling in the right spots consistently and giving very little away. They were good enough to keep that pressure on and let England do the rest. Wrap your head around these numbers. A run rate in a completed ODI innings in the year 2022 of 2.85. Alana King, 10 overs, 1 for 23. Ellyse Perry, 7 overs, 3 for 12. Tahlia McGrath, 3.2 overs, 3 for 4. Jess Jonassen, 9 overs, 2 for 25. Megan Schutt, 7 overs, 0 for 20. Annabel Sutherland is the only one with vaguely normal figures, 1 for 44 from 9 overs. Ash Gardner didn’t bowl. Not required. 44.2 overs: England 129-10 (Ecclestone 32) McGrath has 3 for 4 in her fourth over, and England are all out for sod-all. That’s the ballgame. Shrubsole has a little waft outside off, the edge is dying as it reaches Healy but she gets across and low and scoops it up. 44th over: England 128-9 (Ecclestone 31, Shrubsole 7) Ecclestone has finally seen enough of Jonassen to have a dip. Advances, gets to the pitch, and uses her long reach to lift it over the straight boundary for six. Great timing. She’s top-scored with that shot too. 43rd over: England 119-9 (Ecclestone 23, Shrubsole 6) Look out, McGrath has conceded two singles. That’s three runs from three overs now. 42nd over: England 117-9 (Ecclestone 22, Shrubsole 5) Seeing the previous over, McGrath denies England the leg side, bowling outside off stump and having Shrubsole prod and miss repeatedly. Now McGrath has two overs, two wickets, one run. 41st over: England 117-9 (Ecclestone 22, Shrubsole 5) A couple of boundaries for England against the current. Both down the leg side off Sutherland. Shrubsole gets a little edge on one, Ecclestone pulls the other. 40th over: England 107-9 (Ecclestone 17) I should clarify that given the way time works, if one of the earlier reviews had not been taken, then the exact delivery that dismissed Cross would not have been bowled. But another opportunity to use the review in a useful manner may have come up instead. You get the idea. Two wickets for one run in McGrath’s over. That’s purely down to burning the reviews. Cross is hit on the foot, gets fired by the umpire, but I think on replay that would have been going down the leg side. England used up their reviews on top-order players who looked very out, and now Cross is denied the chance to swing a few boundaries away and boost their total. Well, well, well. We haven’t seen Tahlia McGrath all day. She finally gets thrown the ball... and takes a wicket within three deliveries. Just fired in at the stumps from over the wicket, Jones misses a leg-side flick, and that’s out. 39th over: England 106-7 (Jones 28, Ecclestone 16) Sutherland carries on, three singles tucked away. Ecclestone tries to pull a short ball but misses. 38th over: England 103-7 (Jones 27, Ecclestone 14) Good shot from Ecclestone! Gets down and sweeps Jonassen firmly behind square, beating the two outfielders for four. She formed the biggest partnership of the Test match for England, and now she’s part of the biggest partnership in this match. Not much competition, but still. 37th over: England 97-7 (Jones 26, Ecclestone 9) Sutherland back, and England finally start turning the strike over, four singles from it. 36th over: England 93-7 (Jones 24, Ecclestone 7) Jonassen returns, Jones nearly spooning to mid-off, the batter wanting to go after a ball that wasn’t full enough, just like Sciver did. Gets off strike after that, and Ecclestone makes the same mistake. That one doesn’t carry either. Three more dots, then England’s spinner nudges a run around the corner. They still haven’t reached 100. The run rate is 2.58. 35th over: England 91-7 (Jones 23, Ecclestone 6) On 4 from 26 balls, Ecclestone finally has a dip and miscues King to the deep, but too far square of deep midwicket for Gardner to catch it. Two runs, after a Jones single, and that’s it for King: 1 for 23 from ten overs. Outlandish. 34th over: England 88-7 (Jones 22, Ecclestone 4) Nicked by Ecclestone, and survives! There is no slip for Schutt, and the keeper is standing up. So that edge goes past Healy’s bicep, no chance for a catch. Would have been a simple one standing back. Again King comes flying around from deep third to save four, she’s at least seven runs to the good today even before you get to her bowling. Schutt then gets a leg-before appeal turned down, hitting Ecclestone around off stump and maybe swinging down, but could have collected leg stump. No review. 33rd over: England 85-7 (Jones 21, Ecclestone 2) King to bowl her ninth, turning a ball past the outside edge, giving lots of flight, and Jones needs five balls to drive a run to long-on. King has conceded 20 runs from nine overs. 32nd over: England 84-7 (Jones 20, Ecclestone 2) Lanning keeps ringing the changes, bringing back Schutt for a spell through the middle. That same line starting wide and swinging into the stumps. Ecclestone can’t do a thing with it. No run. 31st over: England 84-7 (Jones 20, Ecclestone 2) Another boundary for Jones, flicking King away through the leg side with good timing. Takes another four balls to find a single. 30th over: England 78-7 (Jones 15, Ecclestone 1) Perry to Jones, having got Jones out so many times before, and the England keeper is very cautious still. One run eventually. Drinks break. 29th over: England 77-7 (Jones 14, Ecclestone 1) A boundary? For England? What dark magic is this? Sutherland bowls short and Jones pulls it with authority through square. Drives what should be a single to mid-on but Jones is not confident enough to take it. Then she stretches and nicks Sutherland fine, looks like four more but King slides perfectly and stops it, outstanding save of two runs. A single goes the same way for Jones to keep the strike. Suddenly an over worth seven. 28th over: England 70-7 (Jones 7, Ecclestone 1) Perry keeps hitting a perfect line outside off, and Ecclestone keeps fishing at it. Somehow doesn’t nick it through the whole over. No run. 27th over: England 70-7 (Jones 7, Ecclestone 1) Jones skews a single behind point, Ecclestone slaps one in the air through cover. Sutherland 1 for 20 from five. 26th over: England 68-7 (Jones 6, Ecclestone 0) A much sharper bouncer from Perry to Ecclestone, who just sways back out of the way of the line on off stump, flummoxed. The wickets just keep falling. Dean doesn’t look too composed with her cross-bat shots, as we saw in the Test match. She gets a slow bouncer from Perry, it’s sitting there waiting for her to hit it, and she tries a little nibbling pull shot to hit it fine, but only lobs it down the leg side to the keeper. Yuck. 25th over: England 67-6 (Jones 5, Dean 0) Mel Jones notes on the TV commentary, “Dean at one end, Jones at the other.” Bring back Deano. Catch of the summer! What an effort from the captain! Spin was winning, she goes the double change to seam regardless, and it produces a double wicket. Bruce Dickinson. Wyatt pushes at Sutherland, bat face towards mid-on, and it takes a thick almost leading edge that flies away wide of slip. Past slip, surely? No. Lanning takes off, flies at it, and gets one hand to the ball as it passes her, somehow keeping hold of it as she hits the turf. A genuine stunner. 24th over: England 66-5 (Jones 4, Wyatt 0) Last-chance saloon as far as genuine batting pairs go: Danni Wyatt joining Jones. They’ve got the Augean Stables to clean out though. And yes, that means that England’s batting has been... It seems a weird call to bring Perry back on after the spinners have been choking out England. But Meg Lanning is the Bruce Dickinson of this team today. Never question Bruce Dickinson. Fourth ball of the over, a bit of width at delivery, angling in, smashes Dunkley on the pad in front of middle. Gone, and England’s last review goes with it. 23rd over: England 64-4 (Jones 3, Dunkley 2) Sheesh, England are going at 2.8 runs per over. This is ugly stuff. Yes, the Australians are bowling well, but... One more run from King, who now has bowled seven overs, 1 for 13 runs. 22nd over: England 63-4 (Jones 2, Dunkley 2) The new player Dunkley is batting out as though Jonassen were Jim Laker on a doctored Manchester pitch. Six balls, six blocks. 21st over: England 63-4 (Jones 2, Dunkley 2) A single for Dunkley, a hurried two for Jones, good running to push the fielders after clipping to midwicket. Three from the King over. 20th over: England 60-4 (Jones 0, Dunkley 1) Jonassen with figures of 2 for 8 from four overs. Sophia Dunkley to the middle. What a peculiar review! Healy barely appeals. Jonassen half-turns and gives up before getting there. But it’s Lanning who says hang on, that’s close. The simple Jonassen angle at the stumps. Knight plays across the ball and misses. It hits her on the back leg, just above the pad, but there isn’t much bounce in this track and Jonassen often darts them through flat. This is one of those, and so even though the impact point makes it look like it will go over, the trajectory is carrying on flat to hit the top of middle stump. 19th over: England 59-3 (Knight 18, Jones 0) King burns through another over for a single, she’s conceded 9 from 5. Dolly Parton figures. 18th over: England 58-3 (Knight 17, Jones 0) Here comes the wicketkeeper Jones then, who has - and I’m not being unkind here - an atrocious record against Australia with the bat. Her wicket in the Test match was the one that got England panicking, to a truly awful slog, and in the white-ball stuff she averages 8 against Australia. Here’s a chance for redress. And that struggle to score brings the wicket. Sciver tries to go leg side again, big shot across the line. She’s not to the pitch though, Jonassen lands it short of the batter. Big slicing top edge that instead of going over the midwicket fence lands in the hands of cover. The scent of desperation. 17th over: England 57-2 (Knight 16, Sciver 8) King after drinks, another quiet over worth two singles, England really struggling to get things moving. 16th over: England 55-2 (Knight 15, Sciver 7) The big slog-sweep attempted by Sciver, who gets more top and toe than middle, hitting it up over mid-on for a streaky couple of runs. Attacks Jonassen’s short ball as well but doesn’t get it cleanly, only a single. 15th over: England 51-2 (Knight 14, Sciver 4) Lots of flight from King, challening them in the air. She gets worked around for four singles, a bit better from England. 14th over: England 47-2 (Knight 12, Sciver 2) Double spin now, with Jonassen’s left-arm orthodox. As she always does: around the wickets, in at the stumps, denying room to swing on a good length. Simple and it works. Two singles from the over. 13th over: England 45-2 (Knight 11, Sciver 1) Turn in that over from King, throwing the ball up more and getting it to spin past Knight’s outside edge. All the tricks coming out. A couple of singles from the over. England going at 3.46. Safe to say that won’t be enough. 12th over: England 43-2 (Knight 10, Sciver 0) Back into their shells go England, with Sutherland conceding a couple of runs and a leg bye. 11th over: England 40-2 (Knight 8, Sciver 0) No runs, one wicket. That’s the way to start for Alana King. A long wait on review, but it was given out on the field and stays that way. King is lucky that she doesn’t turn the ball much that time. She floats it down and it pitches on off stump. LWH tries to lap-sweep but plays over the top of it. The ball goes straight on, and ball-tracking shows it nailing off stump rather than turning past it. Winfield-Hill produces another useful score without going big, which is a limitation in what she tends to offer England. 10th over: England 40-1 (Winfield-Hill 24, Knight 8) With Sutherland on the runs start to come. Winfield-Hill gets a two and a one through the off side. Knight steers away through point and it takes a good save from King to keep her to two runs. Then Knight adds four, edged through an empty cordon area for four. In the air. 9th over: England 30-1 (Winfield-Hill 21, Knight 2) Schutt ties down Winfield-Hill, to the point that when the batter gets a fuller length she flings her hands at it and drives airily through cover. Gets four runs, but that could easily have been a catch. Goes just to the right of the fielder there. Pulls a single to follow, keeping this one on the ground. 8th over: England 25-1 (Winfield-Hill 16, Knight 2) Sutherland on to bowl, short and wide, Winfield-Hill leans back and carves it... and Haynes stops it at backward point. The batter groans in frustration. But focuses again, gets a straight ball next, and drives it through midwicket for four. Good shot. Gets off strike towards point, then Knight is beaten outside off. 7th over: England 20-1 (Winfield-Hill 11, Knight 2) Another very quiet over from Schutt, with Winfield-Hill driving a single but then Knight finding the field repeatedly. 6th over: England 19-1 (Winfield-Hill 10, Knight 2) Perry to Winfield-Hill, who can’t get through the field on the off side, and has to settle for a glanced single to end the over. 5th over: England 17-1 (Winfield-Hill 9, Knight 1) A couple of singles, Knight off the mark, then Winfield-Hill lays into a shot through cover from Schutt for four. 4th over: England 11-1 (Winfield-Hill 4) What a catch from Healy! The over starts good off-drive as Beaumont sees a fuller length from Perry, down the ground and beating the dive at mid off. Perry responds with a good yorker that Beaumont can only block out. The key point is a wide, giving Perry a seventh delivery. And she uses that to hit a perfect length, seam away, and given how hard Beaumont has to go at the ball defensively from that high backlift, her edge flies to Healy’s right. The keeper flies away, takes the ball just, just, in the webbing of the right glove, then she tucks that arm in so the ball can’t be jarred free, and uses her left arm to brace her fall and roll over. 3rd over: England 6-0 (Winfield-Hill 4, Beaumont 2) Big inside edge from Beaumont with her high backlift, done in by Schutt’s inward movement, but it goes past the leg stump. Then Schutt pins LWH on the front pad but it’s going down the leg side. 2nd over: England 5-0 (Winfield-Hill 4, Beaumont 1) A very tidy start from Perry, bowling a tightness of line that sees Beaumont keep finding the field either side of the wicket. The fifth ball is a full toss but Sutherland dives well at mid-on to keep the scoring to one. 1st over: England 4-0 (Winfield-Hill 4, Beaumont 0) Megan Schutt starts us off, those hovering in-swingers that are her trademark. LWH finds them hard to hit, but tries a pull shot against a slightly shorter length ball, and gets a big top edge away behind square for four. Very lucky that Perry is further around at fine leg and can’t get there for a catch. And we’re away... In other news pertinent to England, their men’s under-19 side lost the World Cup to India yesterday / earlier today, depending where you are. No Katherine Brunt for England, after her big workload in the Test and a brilliant performance in the first ODI. Vague information about a sore side muscle. Similarly for Australia, young Darcie Brown gets a rest, as does Beth Mooney, who played with a broken jaw but the medicos won’t let her play with a tight quad muscle. Charlie Dean in for England, Annabel Sutherland and Nicola Carey for Australia. If you include Alana King, who can strike the ball powerfully, that’s seven all-rounders for Australia. Looks like Cross has a deserved promotion on current form in the batting order. England Lauren Winfield-Hill Tammy Beaumont Heather Knight * Natalie Sciver Amy Ellen Jones + Sophia Dunkley Danielle Wyatt Charlie Dean Sophie Ecclestone Kate Cross Anya Shrubsole Australia Alyssa Healy + Rachael Haynes Meg Lanning * Ellyse Perry Tahlia McGrath Ash Gardner Annabel Sutherland Nicola Carey Jess Jonassen Alana King Megan Schutt The coin favours Meg Lanning this time, and as Heather Knight chose in the first match, she’ll choose to chase. No floodlights or evening dew to contend with here, just the advantage of seeing how the pitch plays and knowing how many to get. Hello, cricket friends. It is a beautiful blue and golden day in old Melbourne town, it is early in the morning in cricket terms, and we’re going to start a one-day international match at the curious time of 10am. England have lost the chance to win the Ashes, but they haven’t yet lost the series. Winning the final two matches would tie it up on eight points each, as they did in 2017. This series though has been defined by the Australians holding their nerve and the English losing theirs. The visitors should have strolled the run chase in the first ODI but somehow fell apart. They should have won the Test match with a bold start in their run chase there, but panicked as well. And they set a big target in the only T20 that wasn’t rained off, only to see Australia mow it down. So they have been competitive, but still haven’t won a game, with their four points coming from washouts and that draw. Time to see what both teams have left in the tank.Russia has assembled at least 70% of the military firepower it intends to have in place by the middle of February to give President Vladimir Putin the option of launching a full-scale invasion of Ukraine, US officials have said. On Saturday, officials warned that a full Russian invasion could lead to the quick capture of Kyiv and potentially result in as many as 50,000 civilians killed or wounded, according to the New York Times and Washington Post. A US official confirmed that estimate to the Associated Press but it is not clear how US agencies determined those numbers. The grim assessment comes after British prime minister Boris Johnson agreed with French president Emmanuel Macron that the UK and its Nato allies would be united in their fight against Russian aggression “wherever and however it might occur”. European leaders are due to travel to both Moscow and Kyiv in a bid to calm tensions. Macron is expected to visit Moscow on Monday and Kyiv on Tuesday, while the German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, will travel to Kyiv on 14 February and to Moscow the next day. UK foreign secretary Liz Truss had been due to travel to Ukraine with the prime minister on Tuesday but had to drop out of the trip after testing positive for coronavirus. Truss will reportedly travel to Moscow soon. US officials said that, as of Friday, the Russian army had put in place near Ukraine a total of 83 “battalion tactical groups”, each of which is roughly equivalent in size to an American battalion of between 750 and 1,000 soldiers. That is an increase from 60 battalion tactical groups in position just two weeks ago, they said. Another 14 battalion tactical groups are on their way to the border area from other parts of Russia, the officials said. Two officials said the US assesses that Russia would want a total of between 110 and 130 battalion tactical groups for use in a full-scale invasion, but Putin could decide on a more limited incursion. Including support units, Russia might be aiming to have 150,000 troops in place for a full-scale invasion, one official said, adding that the ongoing buildup could reach that level in the next couple of weeks. On Thursday, US officials claimed to have evidence of an elaborate plot by the Kremlin to make a “very graphic” fake video of a Ukrainian attack as a pretext for a military invasion. Downing Street said on Friday it has “high confidence” Russia is planning to fabricate a reason for attacking Ukraine. The US officials, who discussed internal assessments of the Russian buildup on condition they not be identified, sketched out a series of indicators suggesting Putin intends an invasion in coming weeks, although the size and scale are unclear. They stressed that a diplomatic solution appears to remain possible. Among those military indicators: an exercise of Russia’s strategic nuclear forces that usually is held in autumn was rescheduled for mid-February to March. That coincides with what US officials see as the most likely window for invasion. The officials made no suggestion that a prospective conflict would involve the use of nuclear weapons, but the Russian exercise – likely involving the test-launching of unarmed long-range missiles on Russian territory – could be used as a message aimed at deterring the west from intervening in Ukraine. US officials have said in recent weeks that a Russian invasion could overwhelm Ukraine’s military relatively quickly, although Moscow might find it difficult to sustain an occupation and cope with a potential insurgency. The ongoing Russian buildup comes as the Biden administration has been disclosing intelligence in hopes of pre-emptively countering Russian disinformation and blocking Putin’s plans to create a pretext for an invasion. But it has come under criticism for not providing evidence to back up many of its claims. Army officials on Saturday announced that Major General Christopher Donahue, the commanding general of the 82nd Airborne Division, arrived in Poland. About other 1,700 soldiers from the 82nd Airborne are deploying to Poland from Fort Bragg, North Carolina, and 300 soldiers are deploying from Bragg to Germany. In addition, 1,000 Germany-based soldiers are shifting to Romania. Captain Matt Visser, spokesman for the 18th Airborne Corps, which includes the 82nd division, said: “Our corps’ presence serves to bolster existing US forces in Europe and demonstrates our commitment to our Nato allies and partners.” The corps was made up of “combat capable forces who stand ready to enhance the alliance’s ability to deter and defeat Russian aggression”, the US statement added. Washington said last week it would send about 3,000 additional troops to eastern Europe to defend Nato members against any “aggression”. With growing nervousness in Eastern Europe over Russia’s buildup, much attention is focused on its placement of thousands of troops in Belarus, which shares a border not only with Ukraine but also with three Nato nations: Poland, Lithuania and Latvia. The Biden administration may soon shift some more troops within Europe to allied nations on Nato’s eastern flank, a US official said on Saturday without specifying which nations. Defence secretary Lloyd Austin said last week that Putin could use any portion of the force he has assembled along Ukraine’s borders to seize Ukrainian cities and “significant territories” or to carry out “coercive acts or provocative political acts” such as the recognition of breakaway territories inside Ukraine. Depending on Putin’s ultimate objective, the Russian forces could attack Kyiv directly by moving south from current positions in southern Belarus. He might also send forces across the Russian border into eastern and southern Ukraine if his intent is to fracture and destroy a large portion of the Ukrainian army, the officials said. On the lower end of the scale of military action, Putin might order sabotage, cyberattacks and other destabilising actions inside Ukraine with the goal of removing the current government in Kyiv, officials have said. With Associated PressAustralia strolled to victory in the second one-day international of the women’s Ashes, winning the overall series with a game to spare having retained the trophy in the previous outing. Until this point England had provided a good contest, but at Melbourne’s Junction Oval they were rolled for a paltry 129 after being sent in to bat and bowled out in 42.5 overs. Australia chased the score five wickets down in with nearly 15 overs to spare. This was Australia’s first Ashes win at home in the multi-format style that combines 50-over, 20-over and Test cricket. Charlotte Edwards led England to a win in 2013-14, and Heather Knight’s 2017 team tied: the Australians went large on celebrations after retaining the trophy, only for England to win the final two matches. The same scenario was possible this time, England trailing 4-8 on points with two games to play, but none of the Australian players or staff from last time had forgotten that frustration. History never looked a chance to repeat. England began well enough, scoring at four runs an over through the first 10 and only losing Tammy Beaumont after edging Ellyse Perry. That wicket fell to a blinder, too – the keeper Alyssa Healy diving to her right to have the ball nestle in the very tip of her glove webbing, turning mid-air to land on her left arm and protect the right, and stopping the catch jarring free. But the new leg-spinner Alana King again had influence belying her experience, taking her first ODI wicket when trapping Lauren Winfield-Hill for 28 with a straight ball in the 11th over. Through King and left-arm spinner Jess Jonassen, the scoring dried up, 17 runs in seven overs before Nat Sciver lost patience and tried to launch Jonassen. Not to the pitch, she aimed at midwicket but delivered a top edge to cover. England’s most damaging striker had made eight from 25 balls. Heather Knight followed two overs later, leg before to Jonassen for 18, and as the innings went on England players remained mired at the crease. On a slower pitch that made the ball stick and grip, big shots were rarely viable, and nobody made the adjustment to drop the ball into gaps and run as required. Australia’s bowlers relentlessly hit a good length, preying on a lack of confidence from their targets. Out of 272 deliveries, England scored runs off the bat from 80 of them. Three wickets fell in successive overs from the 24th to the 26th: Perry hit Sophia Dunkley in front of middle stump and had Charlie Dean glove a short ball behind, while Danni Wyatt’s flying edge from Annabel Sutherland allowed Meg Lanning at slip to take a diving one-hander that may have been better than Healy’s. Four balls past the halfway mark, England had laboured to 68 for seven. The England keeper Amy Jones made 28 and spinner Sophie Ecclestone top-scored with 32, starting very slowly but gradually expanding their range, Jones most notably with the pull shot and Ecclestone running at Jonassen to loft a six. The pair put on 39 to at least take the innings from the abyss up to perhaps the middle bathypelagic zone. But Australia’s all-rounder Tahlia McGrath has the golden bat and the golden arm this season, and having been held back with the ball until the 40th over, she made up for the delay. She had Jones lbw third ball, Kate Cross the same sixth ball, albeit missing leg stump with England having used both their reviews, and Anya Shrubsole edging behind: McGrath had three wickets for four runs in 3.2 overs. King’s 10 overs returned one for 23, Perry took three for 12 from seven, and Jonassen two for 25 from nine. Perry with the bat is made for games like this, anchoring the innings with a fluent 40. One positive for England was the work of Cross, who bowled Lanning after beating her with seam movement for the second match running, and who used a similar ball to dismiss McGrath. Cross also bent her right wrist horribly while diving in the field, but eventually carried on bowling and produced a direct hit to run out Perry. But even though five Australian wickets fell, so modest was the chase that this was never a concern. Again, England are left to wonder what their bowlers might have achieved had their batters come to the party. This time around, the Australians can celebrate without reservation.The Australian soap Neighbours, which launched the international careers of countless local stars including Kylie Minogue, Jason Donovan, Margot Robbie and Guy Pearce, has been axed in the UK in a move likely to sound the death knell for the iconic show. The UK’s Channel 5 announced it would no longer air the program and unless it is picked up by another broadcaster the show will end its record-breaking 36-year run in August. Australian broadcaster Network Ten says it is determined to save the show but it needs a new backer. Since 2008 the sun-soaked drama about the residents of the fictional cul-de-sac of Ramsay Street has been largely paid for by the UK broadcaster after it was no longer commercially viable for Ten to fund the Fremantle production alone. After a speculative story ran in UK tabloid The Sun over the weekend, Channel 5 said “Neighbours will no longer air on Channel 5 beyond this summer”. “It’s been a much-loved part of our schedule for more than a decade, and we’d like to thank the cast, Fremantle and all of the production team for their fantastic work on this iconic series,” a spokesperson said. “We’d also of course like to thank the fans for their loyal support of Neighbours across the years. “We recognise that there will be disappointment about this decision, however our current focus is on increasing our investment in original UK drama, which has strong appeal for our viewers.” Network Ten told the show’s cast and crew on Sunday that filming will be paused on Monday for a meeting and that they were looking for another broadcast partner. “As outlined in the email to Neighbours cast and crew, it is our intention to continue our association with Neighbours if another broadcast partner comes forward,” a Ten spokesperson said. “Network 10 has an ongoing commitment to the show, the cast and crew and is hopeful that Fremantle will find a new production partner. We will provide further updates as they become available.” The decision came as a surprise as the lives of the Ramsay Street characters still attracts 1.5 million UK viewers a day. Neighbours was first broadcast on the Seven Network on 18 March 1985 but the network famously axed it before it went on to be a worldwide hit for Ten, which picked it up the following year. It is the longest-running drama series on Australian television and in 2005 it was inducted into the Logie Hall of Fame. Production company Fremantle has been approached for comment.The January jobs report from the US labor department is heightening fears that a so-called “tight” labor market is fueling inflation, and therefore the Fed must put on the brakes by raising interest rates. This line of reasoning is totally wrong. Among the biggest job gains in January were workers who are normally temporary and paid low wages: leisure and hospitality, retail, transport and warehousing. In January, employers cut fewer of these workers than in most years because of rising customer demand combined with Omicron’s negative effect on the supply of workers. Due to the Bureau of Labor Statistics’ “seasonal adjustment”, cutting fewer workers than usual for this time of year appears as “adding lots of jobs”. Fed policymakers are poised to raise interest rates at their March meeting and then continue raising them, in order to slow the economy. They fear that a labor shortage is pushing up wages, which in turn are pushing up prices – and that this wage-price spiral could get out of control. It’s a huge mistake. Higher interest rates will harm millions of workers who will be involuntarily drafted into the inflation fight by losing jobs or long-overdue pay raises. There’s no “labor shortage” pushing up wages. There’s a shortage of good jobs paying adequate wages to support working families. Raising interest rates will worsen this shortage. There’s no “wage-price spiral” either, even though Fed chief Jerome Powell has expressed concern about wage hikes pushing up prices. To the contrary, workers’ real wages have dropped because of inflation. Even though overall wages have climbed, they’ve failed to keep up with price increases – making most workers worse off in terms of the purchasing power of their dollars. Wage-price spirals used to be a problem. Remember when John F Kennedy “jawboned” steel executives and the United Steel Workers to keep a lid on wages and prices? But such spirals are no longer a problem. That’s because the typical worker today has little or no bargaining power. Only 6% of private-sector workers are unionized. A half-century ago, more than a third were. Today, corporations can increase output by outsourcing just about anything anywhere because capital is global. A half-century ago, corporations needing more output had to bargain with their own workers to get it. These changes have shifted power from labor to capital – increasing the share of the economic pie going to profits and shrinking the share going to wages. This power shift ended wage-price spirals. Slowing the economy won’t remedy either of the two real causes of today’s inflation – continuing worldwide bottlenecks in the supply of goods and the ease with which big corporations (with record profits) pass these costs to customers in higher prices. Supply bottlenecks are all around us. Just take a look at all the ships with billions of dollars of cargo idling outside the Ports of Los Angeles and Long Beach, through which 40% of all US seaborne imports flow. Big corporations have no incentive to absorb the rising costs of such supplies – even with profit margins at their highest level in 70 years. They have enough market power to pass these costs on to consumers, sometimes using inflation to justify even bigger price hikes. “A little bit of inflation is always good in our business,” the chief executive of Kroger said last June. “What we are very good at is pricing,” the chief executive of Colgate-Palmolive said in October. In fact, the Fed’s plan to slow the economy is the opposite of what’s needed now or in the foreseeable future. Covid is still with us. Even in its wake, we’ll be dealing with its damaging consequences for years: everything from long-term Covid to school children months or years behind. Friday’s jobs report shows that the economy is still 2.9m jobs below what it had in February 2020. Given the growth of the US population, it’s 4.5m short of what it would have by now had there been no pandemic. Consumers are almost tapped out. Not only are real (inflation-adjusted) incomes down but pandemic assistance has ended. Extra jobless benefits are gone. Child tax credits have expired. Rent moratoriums are over. Small wonder consumer spending fell 0.6% in December, the first decrease since last February. Many people are understandably gloomy about the future. The University of Michigan consumer sentiment survey plummeted in January to its lowest level since late 2011, back when the economy was trying to recover from the global financial crisis. The Conference Board’s index of confidence also dropped in January. Given all this, the last thing average working people need is for the Fed to raise interest rates and slow the economy further. The problem most people face isn’t inflation. It’s a lack of good jobs. Robert Reich, a former US secretary of labor, is professor of public policy at the University of California at Berkeley and the author of Saving Capitalism: For the Many, Not the Few and The Common Good. His new book, The System: Who Rigged It, How We Fix It, is out now. He is a Guardian US columnist. His newsletter is at robertreich.substack.comThe article based on an interview with Kenneth Branagh’s cousin ended with a touching remembrance of his ethnically cleansed Catholic neighbours, his final comment being “Northern Ireland can be a great place if they’d just leave us alone” (“‘I grew up with Branagh in Belfast: our childhoods haunt his new film’”, News). That is the kind of sentiment often heard from this country that sounds significant but is actually meaningless. Who is “they” and who is “us”? Was it all someone else’s fault? The “they” who put his Catholic neighbours out were his fellow Northern Irish Protestants. As the article makes clear, some of those Protestants could have in their turn been put out by Catholics. Notwithstanding the involvement of the British army, indigenous tit-for-tat violence was at the core of the Troubles and the reason it went on for so long. If “they” implies some outside influence, it was only the intervention of British, Irish and US politicians in support of home-grown peacemakers that eventually ended the Troubles in 1998. Northern Ireland can be a “great wee place” (as the saying goes) but only if we Northern Irish make it so. There is no “they”. Stephen Butcher Tullaghgarley, Ballymena, Co Antrim Unions make work better I’ve found that the worst workplaces for backstabbing and destructive forms of competitiveness are those where a trade union is weak or non-existent (“Are you a jerk at work?”, Magazine). A strong workplace union with a good union rep is still the best defence against malpractice, whether from colleagues or the boss. Working atmospheres improve dramatically where grievances are aired and taken forward collectively. People are then less likely to blame and undermine each other for things that are really the employer’s or government’s fault. If you’re being bullied or discriminated against, there’s someone who can provide advice and effective support. So join a union and get involved in the fight for a better deal. It could improve your workplace relationships no end. Lin Clark Bristol Don’t ignore Wales, Labour The interview with the shadow health secretary, Wes Streeting (New Review) was interesting, but his dismissal of “the left” as “a bunch of people who were relatively recent joiners to the Labour party who didn’t understand its history or traditions or how you win elections” reveals his woeful (or wilful?) ignorance of politics outside England. He seems unaware that the Labour party in Wales has proved very successful in winning elections while adopting leftwing policies and viewpoints. There has been a Labour government in Wales since devolution. It is disappointing yet again for a senior English Labour politician to dismiss what has happened and is happening elsewhere in the UK, one reason why Welsh Labour party members increasingly feel the UK party is out of touch with them and their country. Such views are aiding the growing calls for independence, which, if achieved, would ensure perpetual Conservative governments in England. The Labour leadership in England would do well to think on this. Melanie Lloyd Three Crosses, Swansea Call that a success? In your critical survey of Boris Johnson’s claims of success on Covid and other issues (“We got the big calls right”, News), you rather downplayed the crucial point in relation to his purported Covid “success” – the number of Covid-related deaths, which are higher than any other country in Europe. Even today, although France has many more daily Covid cases, its daily death rate is still surpassed by the UK. Yes, the UK got off the mark quickly with the vaccination programme, which should have been a way of keeping our Covid deaths low, but this lead was frittered away by all the other mistakes the government made, some of which are detailed in your article. Journalists should be hitting Johnson with this fact, and the related statistics, at every opportunity, not letting him get away with his spurious Covid “success” claims. Carl Gardner London EC1 Child-free by choice My thanks and support to Holly Williams for her clear, sensible analysis of whether or not to have children (“Why assume it’s a problem if a woman is child-free at thirty?”, Comment). I’m in my late 70s and among my friends are eight older women who, like me, have no children by choice. Only two have never been in a long partnership or marriage. We are happy with our choice, made for a range of reasons. We’re not selfish, child-haters, lonely or weird. We just have chosen not to have children. Paula Jones London SW20 Punishment without care Thank you, Nick Cohen, for your article on the disgrace that is the prison system in the UK (“How many more Charlie Todds must there be before our prison system is reformed?”, Comment). The way in which those in custody are treated, at whatever stage in their judicial process, is a stain on our society. Severe overcrowding and the self-defeating effect of short sentencing exacerbate the problem and vastly more could be done in the fields of education and training. Having volunteered for 10 years as a teaching assistant in a London prison, a role that Covid has made impossible with the abandonment of class teaching and 23-hour confinement, I have seen how dedicated, compassionate and expert educators have struggled in the wake of the pitiful lack of resources and managerial imagination to offer the teaching and personal support that can make such a difference to an inmate’s prison life and future after release. It is highly regrettable that so much prison education is provided by private companies that are more concerned with getting paid for filling seats and ticking boxes than for providing opportunities for inmates. It is high time that the public recognised the stupidity and the human and financial cost of our self-perpetuating blunt regime of punishment without care or vision. Steve St Clair Potters Bar, Hertfordshire The insightful article by Nick Cohen makes the point that the prison service is an unpopular posting for civil servants. It is, too, low in the estimation of politicians. Since the general election of 2010, there have been no fewer than eight ministers of justice. The incumbent reportedly had to be bribed with the mantle of deputy prime minister before he would take the job. In that time, there have been even more prisons ministers, some of whom have shown signs of understanding the need for major reform, but have not stayed in post long enough to do anything about it. The prison service is conspicuously lacking in stability and political leadership, and the chronic state of our prisons reflects this. Gordon Cropper Barnet Look east for the setting sun While I agree with the selection of the 10 places in the UK to make the most of a spectacular sunset (“The sky’s the limit”, Magazine), readers may be tempted to visit Hunstanton on the north Norfolk coast whose beach surprisingly faces west and therefore offers many glorious sunsets. Toby Wood PeterboroughThe question I am in my 50s with children who all left home recently. I have been in a relationship with a patient and kind man – but it hasn’t always been easy, mostly because of my insecurities. We went away and I spoilt things by starting fights and, consequently, he decided to end it. Up until this episode, I was a friendly, easy-going, non-confrontational person. The problem is that I don’t recognise myself any more. When the relationship finished, I was out of control. I had created so much drama and upset, mostly drink-fuelled. I made accusations against him at his work and he nearly lost his job. I didn’t stop there. Overwhelmed by a compulsion and driven by anger, I messaged his friends and slated him on social media so much that he threatened legal action. I am scared about my unpredictability and lack of control. How can I be so full of hatred, vengeance and spite? My mother, who is dead, was a difficult person and it is her unpredictability that I think I am playing out. I don’t want to become her. I want it to stop. I could end up in court. I let such a good thing go and I will never find that again. Philippa’s answer I have hope because you have clarity about your situation. You are not blaming your ex and want to examine your own behaviour and impulses. This is commendable. You are on the right track. We want our children to lead their own lives, but that doesn’t mean we don’t feel deserted when they leave home. This may be a contributing factor to your recent behaviour change. You say: “I don’t recognise myself any more.” First, you need to rule out anything medical. Make an appointment with your GP and tell them exactly what has happened. It could be that a sudden drop in oestrogen, which happens during the menopause, has made you debilitatingly intolerant. Or perhaps you are on medication that is affecting you badly. It’s unlikely, but you may even have suffered some sort of brain damage so that your impulse control is shot. Perhaps alcohol is also causing you to lose control. Or it could be something else, or a combination of the above… so make that appointment. They can also refer you to a psychiatrist or mental health team. You mention insecurities. I expect this means you have a deep fear you will be abandoned and might need more reassurance than most, which can be experienced by others as overly demanding and may lead to arguments. When you do not get this extra reassurance, the desperation you feel can drive you to lash out. Alcohol may be fuelling this, too. You may have felt that your ex was the sole cause of your suffering. Your behaviour seems to say: “I hate you, don’t leave me.” You cannot manipulate or bully your way into a healthy relationship and, when the red mist clears, you know that. Maybe, when you were an infant or a child, it was only through extreme tantrums that you got the attention you craved, with negative attention feeling better than none – and recent events may have triggered this regression in you. Or, triggered by insecurity, as you say, you may feel compelled to act like your mother. Parents’ habits and reactions are often the blueprint for our own. You had nowhere to go to escape conflict with your mother but, of course, another adult can withdraw, and so your mother’s blueprint for close relationships fails you. When you start therapy, and I think you must, you may get angry that the therapist is only available to you at set times. You will probably want to punish them for not being there for you whenever you want, but with them you can work through this and find better ways of self-soothing and comforting yourself when you feel as though you are in danger of being rejected. It is one thing to feel vengeful and fantasise about vengeful acts and it is quite another to carry them out, and I’m afraid you crossed that line. I am, of course, sorry for your victim – you must for his sake delete him and his friends from your contacts and leave him to live his life in peace. But I am sorry for you, too. I think this episode has possibly reignited a very old wound of yours, maybe emotional abandonment by your parents? I strongly recommend forming a good working alliance with a therapist, but first visit your doctor. I would like you to know that I know of many psychotherapy clients who had a “I-hate-you-don’t-leave-me” pattern in relationships who went on to break that pattern and form great relationships. We have more than one chance to get our lives on the right track. For trauma therapy advice, contact emdrassociation.org.uk If you have a question, send a brief email to askphilippa@observer.co.ukThe Bank of England last week published a set of grim economic forecasts that project inflation will peak at over 7% this year and real household incomes will fall by an average of £1,000 by the end of 2022. Meanwhile, the energy price cap will have risen by hundreds of pounds over the same period. Without another Covid wave, it is the cost of living crisis and particularly its impact on families already struggling to meet their rent, put food on the table and pay their heating bills that will dominate people’s lives in the next two years. Yet Boris Johnson remains mired in the depths of political crisis, debilitated in his role as prime minister, while his potential successors are more concerned with their campaigns to succeed him than addressing the challenges faced by the country. Westminster politics reached a new nadir when, in order to try to shift focus from his own woes, he falsely accused Keir Starmer of failing to prosecute the child abuser Jimmy Savile, a made-up allegation with no grounds in reality. Savile’s victims have spoken out about their distress at seeing their abuse politicised by the prime minister in this way and the unfounded slur prompted the resignation of his long-serving policy chief, Munira Mirza, who accused him of “scurrilous” behaviour. Johnson is no stranger to misinformation. He has made liberal use of it in the past – the Leave campaign he chaired made claims that the UK Statistics Authority later ruled “a clear misuse of official statistics”, while as prime minister he has repeatedly spread false information, lying about the implications of his Brexit deal for Northern Ireland. The UK Statistics Authority said his claim made in the House of Commons last Monday that crime had fallen by 14% was wrong. But for the prime minister to try to mislead the country about why the victims of a paedophile never saw justice for his own political advantage is despicable and shames the whole nation. Johnson’s behaviour has been met with a renewed sense of anger among ministers and his parliamentary party. Several senior aides resigned, to be replaced last night by hastily assembled replacements. And his relationship with the truth is now so loose that it is unclear how voters are supposed to distinguish between government announcements that are true or false statements designed to distract from the disintegration of his premiership. The government’s measures to address the rising cost of energy bills go nowhere near far enough. Low-income families have been at the sharp end of tax credit cuts and benefit freezes over the last decade, with many low-paid parents losing thousands of pounds a year as a result. The savings paid for income tax cuts that disproportionately benefited better-off households; they were a political choice made by successive Conservative chancellors, supported between 2010 and 2015 by the Liberal Democrats. The cuts have left less affluent households particularly vulnerable to this cost-of-living squeeze and are a large part of why child poverty rates have risen and growing numbers of people are using food banks. Government support to help with rising energy bills should be targeted at those who need it most, through the tax credit and benefit system. Instead, the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, has chosen to prioritise Conservative voters – and hence his own leadership prospects – by distributing it through a flat-rate, poorly targeted council tax rebate that 80% of households will benefit from; more than 40% of its value will go to households in the top half of the income distribution, while more than 600,000 low-income households will miss out. The £200 rebate for all households will be taxed back through a £40-a-year surcharge for the next five years, which will push today’s cost pressures into the future. This assumes rosier economic times are just around the corner. Yet Brexit, the great unacknowledged economic dampener, will continue to depress economic growth in the coming years, whether or not voters associate these costs with leaving the EU. Worse still, Brexit is very likely to widen the gap in economic performance between London and the south-east and the rest of the country. This will only further accentuate the impact of cuts in government grants that fund local services, which have hit the least affluent areas of the country much harder than areas that enjoy higher council tax and business rates revenues. The incremental measures in the government’s “levelling up” plan published last week will do very little to close the gap in investment and productivity; in 2021, the equivalent of just £32 per person was awarded from the Levelling Up Fund for the north of England, which pales in comparison with the £413 per person drop in council spending since 2011. This is the parlous situation in which the country now finds itself just over five years after a referendum that paved the way for Boris Johnson to become prime minister and irrevocably damage standards in public life. Whether he is forced out tomorrow or in a few months, a weakened Conservative party will remain consumed by its own internal politics while many already hard-pressed families face the worst threat to their economic wellbeing for many years. It is not what Britain deserves.Chloe 9pm, BBC One This glossy thriller sets up the delightfully complex character of Becky (Erin Doherty), a bored temp who loves a scroll on social media. The mysterious Chloe (Poppy Gilbert, last seen being truly disturbing in Netflix banger Stay Close) is her Instagram obsession. But when she dies, Becky edges closer to Chloe’s best friend, and before long she’s sipping wine and eating pavlova with her inner circle. What starts out as a scarily realistic portrayal of Insta-worship escalates very quickly. Hannah Verdier Luxury Holidays For Less 6.45pm, Channel 4 Is now the time to nab the trip of a lifetime? Sabrina Grant and Sophie Morgan share various hacks to maximise what you get for your money with the help of experts such as former BA chairman Álex Cruz. Also, a very hands-on test finds luggage that combines value with durability. Graeme Virtue The Green Planet 7pm, BBC One Scudding clouds, swaying meadows and writhing tendrils of hyperlapsed climbing plants feature in tonight’s hour of sumptuously shot natural world footage. David Attenborough looks at the evolution of farming techniques and visits the Millennium Seedbank in Kew Gardens, which safely stores seeds, lest their plants become extinct. Alexi Duggins Trigger Point 9pm, ITV The headlong bomb disposal drama crammed with conspiracies and cliffhangers continues. As the terror campaign escalates, new expo leader Lana (Vicky McClure) is at the sharp end, attempting to defuse volatile devices in stressful circumstances. McClure is as good as ever, but the breakout star might be the remote-controlled robot. Graeme Virtue Murder in the Valleys 9pm, Sky Crime In 1999, three generations of one family were murdered in a night, leading to the biggest criminal investigation in Welsh history. The first in this four-part documentary sees the police reinvestigate the case. It’s full of archive footage of police interviews, emotional testimony from those involved and tales of a divided community. AD The Curse 10pm, Channel 4 A comedy fanboy-pleasing cast list lies at the heart of this new crime caper. It teams Tom Davis – the writer/actor behind King Gary and Murder in Successville – with the majority of the People Just Do Nothing crew. It’s an impeccably stylised production that’s set amid the grotty warehouses of 80s east London, in which the leads attempt to get away with a robbery. AD Film choice Sorry We Missed You, 10pm, BBC Two Ken Loach’s most recent film was released in 2019, before the pandemic, but only seems to have gained urgency in the intervening years. One of his angriest films in decades, it depicts the dire working conditions doled out to professional delivery drivers: zero-hour contracts, heavy rental fees, no insurance. The toll all this takes on Kris Hitchen’s lead character is abominable. Can a project like this change the employment policies of a notoriously shoddy industry? Probably not. But once seen, you’ll never take a delivery driver for granted again. Stuart Heritage Live sport Six Nations Rugby: France v Italy 2.30pm, ITV The opening round continues at Stade de France.• An article referred to “the start of the millennium, when an SPD-led German government refused to join America’s war on terror”. We meant “America’s war in Iraq” (Ghosts of Germany’s past rise again as Scholz seeks a way to solve Ukraine crisis, 30 January, p24). • A picture of Ukrainian soldiers training with British supplied weapons showed an anti-tank missile, not “anti-aircraft missiles” as the caption said (UK prepared to commit extra forces to Nato allies as Russia tension mounts, 30 January, p5). • The Dunedin Country House hotel, recommended in a travel feature for those going to admire the sunset at East Yorkshire’s Spurn Point, is in Patrington, not “near Packington” as we said. The latter is about 120 miles away in Leicestershire. Meanwhile, a photograph taken from Ditchling Beacon in East Sussex showed sunrise, not sunset as implied (The sky’s the limit, 30 January, Magazine, p35). Other recently amended articles include: The big picture: Mary Ellen Mark captures teens on the streets of Seattle A groundbreaking Strictly final in step with modern Britain Juke &amp; Loe, Sheffield: ‘Bold cooking designed to satisfy’ – restaurant review Write to the Readers’ Editor, the Observer, York Way, London N1 9GU, email observer.readers@observer.co.uk, tel 020 3353 4736Classics California Zinfandel, USA 2020 (£8, Marks &amp; Spencer) A fun fact about California wine for your next quiz night: if the region were a country (as a small and somewhat ambitious independence movement in the state would like it to be), it would be the world’s fourth-largest wine producer after the big three of Italy, France and Spain. It is, therefore, easily the biggest non-European wine “country”, and is on its own responsible for 81% of the US’s total wine production, and a considerably higher proportion of its exports. And yet, for all its scale, I’ve never quite had the feeling its wines are treated with the same respect and affection afforded to the wines of Australia, Argentina, Chile, New Zealand and South Africa – let alone that shown to the big Europeans – on this side of the Pond. Much of the problem is down to the quality and style of the state’s cheaper, sickly sweet and artificial-tasting big-name brands. Indeed, sub-£10 pleasure is very thin on the ground, with M&amp;S’s juicy bramble-jam-and-tea zinfandel a rare exception. Le P’tit Paysan P’tit Pape, Central Coast, California, USA 2018 (£30.82, nekterwines.com) If the starting point, price-wise, for good California wine is higher than any other wine country, it is at least somewhat lower than it used to be – and the standard of wines once you get to that point is very much comparable with the best of the rest of the world. Tasting a range of about 70 California wines available in the UK’s independent wine merchants recently, I was struck by the quality – and diversity – of California wines in the £20 to £30 bracket. That’s nobody’s idea of cheap, I realise, but then the luminous complexity of Alma de Cattleya Chardonnay, Sonoma County 2019 (£27.95, jeroboams.co.uk); the fragrant ripe red fruits of Varner Foxglove Pinot Noir, Central Coast 2017 (£19.25, bowlandforestvintners.co.uk); the spicy-berry succulence of Qupé Syrah, Central Coast 2018 (£22, thewinesociety.com); and the meaty-peppery savouriness of Le P’tit Paysan P’tit Pape are all at least as good if not better than comparably priced wines made from the same grape varieties in Burgundy or the Rhône Valley. Chateau Montelena Calistoga Zinfandel, Napa Valley, USA 2016 (£42, grapesmith.co.uk) California’s other problem in the UK is that we tend to treat it (as, indeed, I have done here so far) as a viticultural monolith, when, as you would expect from a state of this scale, there’s at least as much geological and climatic variation as there is from region to region in France or Spain. Officially, there are now 142 American Viticultural Areas (the slightly less proscriptive US equivalent of French appellations d’origine contrôlées), in California, covering around 800miles from the deep southern San Pasqual Valley near San Diego to Willow Creek in far northern Humboldt County. Increasingly, over the past decade some of my favourite California wines have come from Pacific coastal and/or high elevation sites between those poles (see above). But my recent tastings showed there is still plenty of interest in the classic and best-known California region, the Napa Valley, where, in among some of the world’s more ludicrous overblown lifestyle products, are distinctive, complex, food-friendly wines such as Chateau Montelena’s Italian-esque zinfandel. Follow David Williams on Twitter @DaveydaibachNowadays students have been more or less neutered by being sacrificed on the altar of consumerism, but in the 60s there was a wave of campus rebellions, most famously in 1968 when the students of Paris ‘almost succeeded in detonating a social revolution’. The Observer Magazine of 8 October 1972 wondered ‘should the movement be seen as the inevitable response of white-collar apprentices to overcrowding, poor facilities and bleak prospects? Or as gross ingratitude by a pampered younger generation?’ Maureen McConville started her investigation in what was then West Germany where ‘the university system was years ago damned by a group of British academics as ‘anarchy coupled with professorial tyranny’. Part of the criticism was that students spent so long at university in Germany. One caption showing a young couple marvelled: ‘So many years are commonly spent studying that some 16% of students are married by the time they actually finish their courses.’Which was perhaps surprising given that ‘most German universities do not provide social facilities on campus’. But reforms were afoot and they were bitterly contested. ‘To the average student the draft law’s real purpose is ruthlessly to shorten their studies, turning them upon the world with half an education and restoring the university of leisure to the elite. “If that law is passed,” said one, “we’ll have to store facts and give up thinking for ourselves.”’ Eat your heart out, Gradgrind. Of course the younger generation were rebelling against more than their parents’ authority. ‘To listen to them,’ said one, ‘you’d think the Third Reich was just a big mistake! They can’t bear to think of it.’ ‘What gives an odd twist to the conflict,’ explained McConville, ‘is the fact that most students depend largely or wholly on their parents. About a quarter of them actually live at home.’ Today, that’s mostly because of the huge financial burden and that doesn’t look like changing. But we’ll always have Paris…Food House, 46 Gerrard Street, London W1D 5QH (020 7287 2818). Starters £5.80-£9.80; large dishes £9.80-£24.80; hot pot £18-£38.80; whole fish £36. Wines from £19.80 All parents will retain a deep affection for any restaurant where their once small children were happy, and the family therefore harmonious and nobody died and can we all go home now please? It’s why Pizza Express retains the love of a slab of the British middle classes, despite endless whining over the current quality of the pizzas, and the silliness of the one with the hole in the middle, and the blood-sucking endeavours of venture capital firms. They have managed to retain a culture that is welcoming to small kids, without infantilising their weary parents. It’s a neat trick. And if you still want to rant about why Pizza Express is terrible, please take it up over on Reddit. Someone there will be gagging for your hot take. I have similar warm, fuzzy feelings about the premises at number 46 Gerrard Street in London’s Chinatown, with its arched marble frontage. For many years it was an extremely reliable Cantonese place called Harbour City. My boys loved the dim sum there when they were small, and so did I. The fluffy, cloud-like char siu buns had an uncommon citrus kick. The har gow were spot on. A Sunday lunchtime at Harbour City was always a good one. Recently the website Eater London, an offshoot of the US Eater empire, published a list of 38 “essential” London restaurants. If you don’t know Eater London, think of them as the cool boys on the back seat of the school bus of the food journalism world; the ones who listen to those bands you’ve never heard of and yes, they’ve got a girlfriend, she just goes to another school. But the thing with the cool boys is, secretly you always wanted to listen to those bands to find out what was so great about them. Because maybe that would make you cool, too. Included in that essentials list alongside reliable bangers like Mangal 2, Trullo and, er, the River Café was a Sichuan restaurant called Food House, which they said was “the trendiest restaurant in central London”. In keeping with the whole back-seat-of-the-bus thing, it was so trendy, so cool, I’d never heard of it. I squinted at the address. Blow me: it occupies the location of what was once Harbour City. Naturally, I booked. Going by the carpets I’d say little has been done to the joint in years. But this is a very different type of restaurant from the one I knew. It is all the grand, jumpy, thrilling, chilli and numbing peppercorn hullabaloo that those of us addicted to the Sichuan repertoire just adore. I believe you’re meant to say that Sichuan food is not just about chilli heat, it’s about flavour. And, of course, it’s not just about chilli heat. But actually, it also is. There’s even a samovar-style decanter of bright red oil, full of chillies, on the bar so they can dispense it at the turn of a tap, like absinthe. If I had brought my boys here when they were small, they would, faced by all this, have tugged at the sleeves of strangers and asked to be taken to a place of safety. Or perhaps a plate of safety. Food House is full on, in a very good way. One of the dishes regularly talked up online is the fearsome sounding red chilli oil noodles. It’s actually one of the more soothing platefuls: broad, ragged-edged ribbons of noodle the colour of a baby’s teeth, come slicked with just enough of the crimson oil to remind you where you are. We have it topped by friable pieces of long braised lamb. It’s comfort food for when you’re caught in a winter storm, or like to imagine you might be. Before we get to that there are other thrills. There is the barbecue menu of things on skewers, roughed up with cumin, salt, chilli and the occasional dab of sugar. Often, these can be mimsy affairs, delivering seized up pebbles of hard matter. Here, the red willow twig lamb skewers are solid, chunky pieces of still smoking baby sheep. There are also skewers of lamb kidney which, arriving with a cloak of crispy fat, must be eaten while still hot. I understand that offal and its fat may not be everybody’s thing. They are my thing. We have king prawns which, under the heavy hand from the spice mix, seem to become even sweeter. Alongside this there are silky-skinned, pan-fried pork and cabbage dumplings that leak their juices down my chin. It is an attractive look. We have Yu Xiang aubergine (eggplant, on this menu) in a deep glossy gravy and, from the broad selection of offal dishes, a heaving plateful of more kidney in a hot and sour sauce. When I called to book, I was asked if I wanted the hot pot. It’s a big thing here. I’ve tried them elsewhere and never quite enjoyed them as much as I think I should. This is partly because, however varied a list of ingredients you get to drop in the boiling stock or oil, it all ends up tasting rather similar to me. It’s also down to incompetence. I usually end up sticking a chilli-dipped finger in one eye or the other. Instead, we have another of their big statement dishes: a whole seabass to share, first roasted so the skin and the flesh along the tail where it narrows, is crispy. It has then been plunged into a bath of chilli oil, bobbing with dried chillies and slices of lotus root, sprigs of coriander, halved cloves of garlic and so much more. It is magnificent to behold, as if it has its own stage lighting system, and justifies its price of £36 on those dashing looks alone. It is not, however, simple to eat. We get in there together, working our way around the bones to get at the prized flesh. But it is very much worth it: there is a sweetness to the soft fish, stained red by its vigorous liquor. It can get messy. Either wear a bib, or don’t wear a white shirt. Perhaps don’t bother with clothes at all. It’s a pretty laid-back place. Drink bottles of Yanjing beer to soften the burn. I shall have to take the word of the cool boys on the bus that this is a very trendy restaurant. I long ago mislaid the ability to recognise what is fashionable and what is not. But I can say it’s an awful lot of fun. I have a great reason at last to return to 46 Gerrard Street. Jay’s news bites In the January edition of OFM I featured six chefs worth watching in 2022, among them Helen Graham of the lovely Middle Eastern vegetarian restaurant Bubala, in London’s Spitalfields. She and her business partner Marc Summers have just announced a second Bubala, this time in Soho on the site of what was the venerable Italian Vasco &amp; Piero’s Pavilion. The 50-cover restaurant will open in April (bubala.co.uk). Per Diem is a new food and household goods delivery service which, in its own words, sets out to do the boring things ‘really very well’. It offers only the very basics – dry pasta, flour, sugar, rice, cleaning materials and so on – but only one good example of each, sourced from independent suppliers. Right now, therefore, there are just 50 items on the site. Products can be ordered as needed or on a monthly basis and they also offer a packaging-free re-fill service (getperdiem.com). Rosa’s Thai, which has branches nationwide, is attempting to tackle the hospitality industry skills shortage by launching its own chef training programme. Wok School will operate out of the ground floor of its restaurant on Warren Street in London and will offer courses of varying lengths. Participants will be paid £11.45 an hour, and their dishes will be served to customers at a 50% discount. Participants who complete the course will be offered a job at the end (jobs.rosasthai.com/wok-school). Email Jay at jay.rayner@observer.co.uk or follow him on Twitter @jayrayner1Statistician and Observer columnist Sir David Spiegelhalter has admitted he was “overly optimistic” at the start of the coronavirus pandemic. The 68-year-old Cambridge University scientist has confessed he “didn’t take it seriously enough”. Appearing on BBC Radio 4’s Desert Island Discs on Sunday, Spiegelhalter says: “I think it’s very important that we have to acknowledge that we can never take an objective view about evidence. We always bring our, I think, personalities into it, and mine is unfortunately very optimistic and that’s why I’m very glad I’m not a government adviser. I don’t think I’d be very good at it because I do tend to hope for the best and sort of expect the best as well.” But Spiegelhalter adds that his analysis has also shown that the pandemic has been a net lifesaver for younger people. “If you look at people between 15 and 30 in 2020, 300 fewer died than would normally have died, and that includes the 100 that died from Covid, sadly. “So that’s 300 fewer families mourning the death of a young person because young people were essentially locked up. They couldn’t go out driving fast, they couldn’t go out and get drunk, and they couldn’t get into fights and whatever, and so all these lives were saved. “I’m not saying this is a good thing because, on the flip side of that, you have a big increase in mental health problems and so on.” Spiegelhalter was knighted in 2014 for services to medical statistics, including his work with the public inquiry into serial killer Harold Shipman, who was jailed for life in 2000. Official predictions suggest he killed more than 200 people over a 23-year period. “We showed that Shipman could have been caught much earlier. If someone had been looking at the data and had blown the whistle, you might have been able to save 200 lives,” Spiegelhalter says. He also reveals a surprising love of Europop. Selecting his second disc, Dragostea Din Tei by Moldovan pop group O-Zone, he said: “I do quite like to have a drink and dance around to loud, raucous rock music, and I’ve got particular fondness for sort of Eurotrash and this is a prime example by a Moldovan group. I call it Numa Numa because I can’t pronounce its real name.” • The headline of this article was amended on 7 February 2022 to add the word “enough” to the phrase “didn’t take it seriously” so as to accurately reflect what Spiegelhalter said.As New Zealanders flooded social media in adoration and celebration of the country’s first ever Winter Olympic gold medallist, the history-maker herself, Zoi Sadowski-Synnott could only muster three shocked words on her Instagram: “What the fuck.” Speaking to media following her win, snowboarder Sadowski-Synnott, who was “in complete disbelief”, managed a few more. “I can’t believe it,” she said. “I knew I had to put it down and I knew I had it in me.” The 20-year-old made history on Sunday by winning New Zealand’s first ever gold medal at a Winter Olympics, capturing the women’s slopestyle title on Sunday morning in smash-and-grab fashion with a dramatic final run that ended the United States’ run of dominance in the discipline. Her family, watching from her home town of Wānaka, in New Zealand’s South Island, erupted into tearful jubilation when the results were announced. Her father, Sean, told Sky Sports, the win was “pretty frickin exciting, and the team of 5 million behind her has just been amazing”. “Thank you all for your support in the run-through into these games, the coverage from press and everything has been fantastic.” “I’m just ecstatic,” he added. “She pulled it out of the bag. She’s competitive obviously, and was under so much stress I guess after that fall, but she pulled it through.” Deputy prime minister Grant Robertson, who holds the portfolio for sport and recreation, said he was “so proud of this awesome woman”. “I had the honour to be there four years ago to see Zoi win bronze. Ever since, she has continually lifted her game to be one of the best snowboarders in the world. Our first ever Winter Olympic gold medal!” The New Zealand Olympic Team’s twitter page also congratulated Sadowski-Synnott and said it was a moment “to cherish forever”. “Could not be more proud right now,” it said. Sadowski-Synnott said it was an indescribable feeling to take home gold. Any of the snowboarders could have walked away with the gold, she said, but she was thrilled to have done it for New Zealand. On being mobbed by her rivals in the finish area following her win, the 20-year-old said: “That was a crazy moment and shows how special snowboarding is. You cheer more when your friends do well than yourself – it’s why I love it.” The 20-year-old, who became Olympic champion on Waitangi Day, put down the run of her life in the biggest competition of her career to overtake the American Julia Marino, who had taken the lead with her second of three attempts. The gold medal brings New Zealand’s total Winter Olympics medal tally to four, since it first competed in 1952 in Oslo. Sadowski-Synnott can claim half of those, after she and Nico Porteous won bronze medals in PyeongChang. Skier Annelise Coberger nabbed New Zealand’s first ever medal (silver) in 1992. Sadowski Synnott will attempt her third medal, and possibly another gold, in the women’s snowboard big air, which starts with qualifying a week on Monday. The final, which Sadowski-Synnott won bronze in four years ago, is on 15 February.First, the good gardening news: UK sunrise should be 50 minutes earlier by the end of the month. Sunset almost an hour later, days nudging two hours longer by 28 February. Now, though, the weather. Temperatures can be fierce. They’re often lower than January with severe frosts, sometimes snow. So don’t rush to sow outside even on a bright sunny day. In contrast to TS Eliot, I find February to be the cruellest month. Less so April. That said, there are a few things ready to go into the ground, unless your soil is soaked or frozen. If it is, stick to sowing in indoor pots for planting out later. Rhubarb sets, shallot sets, garlic and broad beans can all go in. As can bare-root fruit bushes and trees. Remember, too, to finish winter pruning fruit bushes while they’re dormant. They’ll be starting to stir around now. Seed potatoes can still be chitted in trays or egg boxes in a light cool room. Keep feeding birds if you can and think about nesting boxes, so they can familiarise themselves before breeding begins. Please, too, keep an eye on ponds. Take measures to stop them freezing over. Gently break through any ice. Warm water works well. There’s a long list of plants if you have propagators or a cool inside space. Tomatoes and aubergines can be sown in propagators, but aubergine needs more warmth. Radish, hardy salad, spinach, lettuce and leek seeds are good to go in indoor pots. Start early peas in guttering for transplanting to trenches later. If in doubt how best to do it, there are many instructional films online. We’re still in limbo at the allotments. We don’t know if the council will be gone by the end of the month as planned. So I’m practising patience – not with great success in truth, though I’m trying hard to be more Howard. Allan Jenkins’s Plot 29 (4th Estate, £9.99) is out now. Order it for £8.49 from guardianbookshop.comIt’s a contentious issue. The Hollywood age gap romance – the habitual casting of an older male actor and a much younger female actor, for so long accepted as the norm – is now meeting with increasing scrutiny and criticism from audiences. Some filmmakers, identifying a hot-button topic, have started to respond. At the Sundance film festival last month, age gaps in relationships were a recurring theme. But rather than the traditional approach, of hoping that people wouldn’t notice an age difference which could practically be measured on a geological time frame, filmmakers are instead emphasising and examining the issue. Approaches include flipping the gender roles, as with Good Luck to You, Leo Grande, which starred Emma Thompson, who is 62, opposite 29-year-old Daryl McCormack, or the audience prize-winner Cha Cha Real Smooth, which explored the attraction between a young male college leaver and a thirty-something divorcee (played by Dakota Johnson). Other films, like the potent but gruelling Palm Trees and Power Lines and Lena Dunham’s Sharp Stick, delved into the realities of the power imbalance between a young woman and a much older man. One thing is certain: the debate about onscreen age differences is not about to die down. On the contrary, if the polarised reactions to Paul Thomas Anderson’s Licorice Pizza are anything to go by, the conversation, amplified perhaps by the fact that it frequently plays out on social media, is only set to grow more heated. Another film which flips the gender roles of the traditional age gap, Licorice Pizza is a defiantly unconventional picture. “Do you think it’s weird I hang out with Gary and his 15-year-old friends all the time?” asks Alana Haim’s 25-year-old character in Anderson’s loose-limbed, loping Californian coming of age comedy. Her sister shrugs, noncommittally. “I think it’s weird I hang out with Gary and his 15-year-old friends.” And a sizeable minority of the film’s audience would agree with her. At the heart of the film is, if not quite a romance between a 15-year-old boy and a woman at least 10 years his senior, then certainly a mutual attraction. An attraction which, depending on your reading of the fantasy vs reality question which hovers over the film’s final scenes, may or may not culminate in a kiss and a confession of love. Anderson, talking to the New York Times last year, downplayed the age gap aspect. “There’s no line that’s crossed, and there’s nothing but the right intentions. It would surprise me if there was some kind of kerfuffle about it … There isn’t a provocative bone in this film’s body.” That last statement rings a little hollow, given some of the more strident criticism that Licorice Pizza was little more than a handsomely photographed feature-length advert for paedophilia. One suspects that Anderson was being a touch disingenuous in his claims: surely the whole point of pushing the age gap to the front of the story was to create a degree of discomfort. Anderson is, after all, a filmmaker who has made a career out of getting under the skin of a series of broken screw-ups, of which Haim’s character is just the latest. That she is drawn to a 15-year-old wheeler dealer who plans to make a fortune selling waterbeds arguably says more about her mired future and lack of self esteem than it does of any great romantic impetus. Licorice Pizza is the latest of a number of films which have generated, to quote Anderson, a “kerfuffle”. Malcolm &amp; Marie, a Netflix production written and directed by Sam Levinson, about a film director, played by John David Washington, 36, and his girlfriend, played by then a 24-year-old Zendaya, sparked criticism for the 12-year age gap between the two. This is in part, as Zendaya pointed out, because audiences were accustomed to seeing her in high school-age roles in films like the Spider-Man franchise. It was also perhaps because Levinson had already dipped his toe into teen girl fetishisation with his previous movie, Assassination Nation. Even so, the fact that the comparatively modest age difference between Zendaya and Washington drew complaints might be an indication that audience tolerance for multi-decade gaps is waning. Not before time. “Men on screen have a whole life, and women only have a shelf life,” says Nicky Clark, the founder of campaign group Acting Your Age, which lobbies for age-appropriate casting and representation for older women on screen. “Since the medium began, women were expected to retire at 40 and not do anything particularly interesting if they were working after that age. And that hasn’t really changed.” According to actor and co-founder of the ERA 50:50 campaign Polly Kemp, there’s no mystery behind the tendency to cast much younger women opposite older actors. “I think it’s to do with the fact that it was predominantly white, older men who commissioned, financed and produced. They were casting their preferences… I think things are changing slowly, certainly in terms of diversity. But certainly for middle-aged women it’s still a bit of a struggle. I don’t see myself [represented] because I’m middle-aged, I’m post-menopausal. I’m no longer regarded as sexy.” A-list status offers some protection to female actors being seen as a viable romantic lead over 30, but it’s by no means a certainty. At 37, Maggie Gyllenhaal was told she was too old to play the lover of a 55-year-old man. “It was astonishing to me,” she said at the time. “It made me feel bad, and then it made me feel angry, and then it made me laugh.” Meanwhile, in films such as Entrapment, the 39-year gap between Sean Connery and Catherine Zeta Jones was barely more credible than a plot which suggested the 68-year-old Connery could parachute down a ventilation shaft to escape pursuers. Then there’s Woody Allen, a repeat offender when it comes to dubious casting decisions, who assigned himself the then 26-year-old Charlize Theron as a love interest in The Curse of the Jade Scorpion. When he shares the screen with her, he looks like a liver-spotted Galapagos tortoise trying to take a bite out of a peach. The film industry can be notoriously complacent and slow moving when it comes to enacting meaningful change. However, it does tend to respond to the threat of commercial failure. The Sundance trend for films which interrogate or disrupt the traditional age gap may be as much to do with the box office ramifications of a shift in audience appetites as to a reframing of female roles after #metoo. Still the fact that they exist at all is a step forward, surely? Kemp is cautiously positive. “I think it’s very interesting that there’s a number of films that are looking at that age gap and they’re not just producing films where there is very much a younger actress being paired up with an older man. Clearly the industry is taking some time to look at that. I suspect given what’s happened in the last few years, that there is a reluctance perhaps to have very young people in sexual relationships with older men on film.The type of films that Woody Allen did, I think people are finding that a little bit queasy.” Clark is not so sure. On Emma Thompson’s widely praised performance in Good Luck To You, Leo Grande, she says: “Depressingly, she’s being referred to as ‘brave’ for being either naked or featuring in sex scenes. We don’t hear Brad Pitt called brave when he takes his shirt off in Once Upon a Time In Hollywood. It’s making these steps forward, but with the caveat that the permission is being granted, and everybody knows that she’s older, and isn’t that quite charming and endearing, really? When no, it’s not charming and endearing. It’s an actress who’s still at the top of her game, performing brilliantly and telling a story that isn’t often told. So there are small steps, but then they’re pulled back again.”That’s where we will leave the live blog for Sunday. Here’s what made the news today: There were at least 45 Covid-related deaths reported on Sunday. Hundreds of firefighters in WA battled two blazes in Denmark and Bridgetown. The two fires had burnt close to 5,000 hectares, and remain out of control. SA will resume requiring close contacts to get PCR tests, and anyone with symptoms will also be able to get the tests amid excess testing capacity. A 3.6 magnitude earthquake was registered east of Cairns. The future of long-running Australian soap opera Neighbours is in doubt after the UK channel that provides most of its funding axed the show/ Parliament resumes on Tuesday, and we’ll be back with all the news tomorrow. Until then, stay safe. NSW has sent four fire and rescue specialists to WA to help battle the two fires gripping the south of the state, as part of a NSW contingent including rural fire service, national parks and and forestry staff. They left Sydney airport this afternoon. Services on Sydney’s inner-west light rail network will soon resume after cracks in the trams forced their suspension, but the opposition warns the “transport saga” is not over, AAP reports. The line was closed in November after cracks were discovered in the wheel arches of all 12 tram sets. The NSW transport minister, David Elliott, says from 12 February, six trams from the eastern suburbs light rail sector will begin operating on the inner-west line at 15 minute intervals. “Services will operate between Dulwich Hill and Central Station, which is the full line,” Elliott said on Sunday. “This is better than the original plan to run these returning services between Lilyfield and Central while the inner-west trams are being fixed.” Elliott said repair work on the network’s fleet was under way, with all 12 trams “on track” to be fixed by the end of 2022. Transport for NSW chief operations officer Howard Collins says the station platforms, track and speed limits have all been changed on the inner-west line. “Staff will be on hand to provide customer service on the ground as and when required,” Collins said. Opposition transport spokeswoman Jo Haylen said passengers will welcome the return of some services on the line after going without them for more than 100 days. “Make no mistake, the government has cobbled together a bandaid solution to a transport disaster completely of their making,” Haylen told reporters on Sunday. “Twelve overseas-made trams cracked and out of service and the government is no clearer on what the engineering solution is.” Haylen warns the “transport saga” is not over: Those trams still have to be fixed and the government is yet to admit its fundamental mistakes here. It is yet to admit that the failure to integrate the inner-west light rail line with the eastern suburbs light rail line is a massive mistake but most importantly that buying off-the-shelf overseas models of trams, ferries and trains is a complete failure. WA police say Strike Force Vulcan detectives have been deployed to Bridgetown to assist with the investigation into a serious bushfire in the South Western region of the state. The cause of the fire is still undetermined. Just a bit more on the earthquake in Queensland via AAP. A 3.9 magnitude earthquake has rumbled a remote part of the Great Barrier Reef off far north Queensland. The quake struck the tip of Maori Reef about 50km northeast of Russel Heads, south of Cairns, about 12.17am on Sunday It was about 10km deep, says Geoscience Australia, with 78 people reporting they felt the tremor. About 16 earthquakes have been reported off the state’s far north coast over the last two decades, the agency said. Ahead of this week’s parliamentary debate on the religious discrimination bill (read the latest from Paul Karp here), the Hindu Council of Australia has released a statement warning about the bill’s potential impact on “newly arrived and minority” religions. Surinder Jain from the Hindu Council is urging members to lobby MPs against supporting the legislation, raising concern about the ability of employers to discriminate on the basis of religion to maintain the faith based ethos of an institution: Any business that claims to be inspired by religious ethos can fire people who don’t belong to their religion. This bill adversely affects minority religions. It especially affects Hindus and other newly arrived religions who have not had time and resources to establish their own schools, hospitals etc. Jain said this could mean that Hindus who worked in schools, hospitals, aged care and other charities run by Christian faiths could be “actively discriminated against”: Australia made commendable progress when it replaced its racist Whites only immigration policy. But like a reformed drinker hitting the bottle again, it is now introducing a Bill which will give undue advantage to majority and well established religions at the cost of newly arrived and minority religions. The Buddhist Council has also raised similar concerns, with Gawaine Powell Davies from the NSW Buddhist Council telling a Senate inquiry last month that the proposed bill did not get the balance right between preventing religious discrimination while also ensuring individuals were protected: Our concern of all that there is the potential to negatively impact minority religions are minority groups through reducing access to services, particularly where these are government funded, particularly where these are in the bush, where there are not many other opportunities for employment. If you wonder why things are a bit purple this evening... Western Australia has reported 31 locally acquired cases of Covid-19, as well as 15 “other” cases comprising people in quarantine from overseas or interstate. Twenty-five of these cases are linked, with six of them classified as mystery cases. The WA premier, Mark McGowan, said an unspecified number of the local cases were in the community while infectious. That wraps up my time on the blog for today. I’m going to hand things over to my colleague, Josh Taylor, to bring you the news into the evening. WA authorities say 210 career and volunteer firefighters worked through the night in a bid to keep major bushfires under control in Bridgetown and Denmark. The fire in the coastal town of Denmark was first reported on Friday morning, and has burnt approximately 2,151 hectares. The Bridgetown fire, which is not contained and nor controlled, has burnt approximately 2,359 hectares. Authorities are still working to determine the cause of the fire. There are now 218 people in hospital across the state. Of these, 13 are in the ICU and five require ventilators. NSW is pushing to increase the rate of booster vaccinations as the health minister calls for a national definition on what it means to be “fully vaccinated”, AAP reports. While 94% of eligible NSW adults are double vaccinated against Covid, only 43.5% have received a third dose. Health minister Brad Hazzard says the booster rate should be higher. The question in my mind is: if we have almost 95% of people in NSW double dosed and we’ve got a little less than 45% of people who have had the booster, what’s happened to the other 50%? Why aren’t they out there getting their boosters?” He says the state has “a lot of people” working on finding an answer to that question. More booster shots have been administered in NSW than anywhere else in the country, but the state’s rate should be higher because more people were eligible for boosters earlier. Hazzard says Atagi should also provide advice nationally on whether a booster is required for people to be considered fully vaccinated. Until then the state will be taking a more “encouraging” approach to promoting booster uptake and will hold off on mandating boosters for healthcare workers, Hazzard says. Channel 5 in the UK has confirmed that Neighbours will be dropped from its summer scheduling, after airing for more than a decade on the network, according to a report from Digital Spy. It likely spells the end of the iconic show because it relies on funding from Channel 5. The show’s production company Fremantle and Australian broadcaster Channel 10 are yet to comment. Tasmania has recorded 471 new Covid cases and sadly one death. There are now 11 people with the virus in hospital. Only five of these patients are being treated specifically for virus symptoms. The remaining six are being treated for unrelated medical conditions. South Australian premier Steven Marshall confirmed that as of today PCR testing will be available for all people with symptoms, especially close contacts. He said there is massive excess PCR testing capacity available in SA at the moment. He acknowledged that PCR tests are “far more accurate than rapid antigen tests”. “This is the Rolls Royce, it’s highly sensitive, it works very well and you can get an accurate picture very very quickly. It’s far more accurate than rapid antigen tests,” he said. Elective surgery is resuming in the state from tomorrow. Independent senator Rex Patrick is calling out the government’s decision to prioritise its religious discrimination bill during the upcoming parliamentary sitting week. Queensland’s deputy premier Steven Miles has dismissed calls for a government integrity probe, saying “you can’t have a royal commission into a vibe”, AAP reports. Two independent watchdogs, the Liberal National Party, Katter’s Australian Party and the Greens are calling for a probe amid multiple allegations of interference in regulators and processes. Outgoing Integrity Commissioner Nikola Stepanov claims a laptop was taken from her office and wiped, and that the government tried to have her sacked. Former state archivist Mike Summerell says there was interference in his record-keeping, potentially leading to parliament being mislead. Miles says those allegations are being investigated properly so there’s no need for a wider inquiry. “If there is new evidence then it should be forwarded to the CCC (Crime and Corruption Commission), but you can’t have a royal commission into the vibe,” the deputy premier told reporters on Sunday. The CCC is itself under a cloud after the government ordered a formal commission of inquiry into the watchdog’s functions and structure after its botched probe into Logan Council. Miles said while “questions have been raised about the CCC” it was still the “appropriate forum” for any allegations of government misconduct. “If anyone has any new evidence they should forward it to the CCC,” the deputy premier said. Meanwhile, the premier’s director-general Rachel Hunter has launched a third probe into Mr Summerell’s allegations of interference in his record-keeping role. The terms of reference for Hunter’s review were released on Friday, with the findings due by 4 March. Scott Morrison has declared politics is a “brutal business” as he seeks to downplay the leaking of a text message from the deputy prime minister, Barnaby Joyce, branding him a “hypocrite and a liar”. Speaking at the i4Give Day memorial service in Sydney, which commemorates the young victims killed in the Oatlands crash in 2020, the prime minister also spoke of his Christian faith, saying he had “easily” forgiven Joyce for the damaging text message leaked on Friday. “Politics is a brutal business,” Morrison said on Sunday. Read Sarah Martin’s full write up here: A bit of an insight into the damage the floods in South Australia caused. I will now leave you in the expert hands of Justine Landis-Hanley for the next couple of hours. Perrottet says hospital presentations and ICU admissions continue to trend down in NSW. NSW chief health officer Dr Kerry Chant says 47.7% of the eligible population aged 18 an over have received a booster dose. This goes down to 43.5% when it includes 16 and 17 year olds who are eligible. Chant says the spread of Covid-19 is slowing in the community, in part due to the booster, as well as people having been infected with Covid before, mask-wearing, getting tested and isolating, she said. There are currently 2,321 people in hospital, including 147 in ICU, of whom 66 are on ventilators. Of the 28 deaths today, they included 17 men and 11 women; two were in their 40s, three were in their 60s, six were in their 70s, 10 people were in their 80s, and seven people were in their 90s. Of the three under 65 who died, Chant said one person had received three doses of the Covid vaccine, one person had received two doses, and one person was not vaccinated. She said all three had serious underlying health conditions. The NSW premier Dominic Perrottet is launching the $250 accomodation and tourism vouchers to be available from tomorrow in the Service NSW app for parents. He said: Accommodation, we know, hotels, have had a very difficult time over two years, international borders closed, tourism down across our state and across our nation. So please go out and support those businesses and enjoy the best that New South Wales has to offer, as well as our tourism providers right across the state – $250 for parents, and those vouchers will be in your Service NSW app from tomorrow. Perrottet urged people to continue to wear face masks indoors, and to socially distance. He also thanked teachers for the seamless transition for children getting back into school. I am incredibly pleased with how seamless going back to school has been. I know that is not the case for everyone, we have had positive cases, with either children and teachers, but not one school has closed. There were people right across the state, commentators who said we should not do this, we should not go down this path. I was in contact with the Victorian premier this morning to check in with relation to how the Victorian experience has been. That is very much in line with what we have seen here in New South Wales. That is that schools have remained open, disruption has been minimal, it has been incredibly important, because getting kids back at school was a strong focus of this government. Perrottet says he expects there will be “bumps along the way” in terms of schools being open but teachers are doing an outstanding job. Queensland deputy premier Steven Miles has dismissed calls for a government integrity probe, saying “you can’t have a royal commission into a vibe”, AAP reports. Two independent watchdogs, the Liberal National party, Katter’s Australian party and the Greens are calling for a probe amid multiple allegations of interference in regulators and processes. Outgoing integrity commissioner Nikola Stepanov claims a laptop was taken from her office and wiped, and that the government tried to have her sacked. Former state archivist Mike Summerell says there was interference in his record-keeping, potentially leading to parliament being mislead. Miles says those allegations are being investigated properly so there’s no need for a wider inquiry. If there is new evidence then it should be forwarded to the CCC (Crime and Corruption Commission), but you can’t have a royal commission into the vibe. The CCC is itself under a cloud after the government ordered a formal commission of inquiry into the watchdog’s functions and structure after its botched probe into Logan Council. Miles said while “questions have been raised about the CCC” it was still the “appropriate forum” for any allegations of government misconduct. “If anyone has any new evidence they should forward it to the CCC,” the deputy premier said. Meanwhile, the premier’s director general Rachel Hunter has launched a third probe into Summerell’s allegations of interference in his record-keeping role. The terms of reference for Hunter’s review were released on Friday, with the findings due by 4 March. Good afternoon, everyone. It’s pride march day here in Melbourne. And protesters have delivered a petition to Victoria police, minister for equality Martin Foley, Midsumma, and the LGBTIQ+ communities commissioner, calling for the police not to march in their uniforms in the march through St Kilda. In the petition they state: Pride should be safe and welcoming for all of us. However, police participation is a barrier for those who have had negative experiences with Victoria police. Many people in our communities experience policing and police violence, including Aboriginal people, Torres Strait Islander people, African Australians, people of colour, migrants, trans and gender diverse people, people living with HIV, sex workers, poor people, people with disabilities, people who use drugs, and people without a home. The organisers say people can march as individuals. The petition gained 1,180 signatures in six days, including 940 from LGBT Victorians. Midsumma and the communities commissioner have agreed to meet with the petition organisers but the minister and Victoria police have not responded. I’m handing over the blog to the brilliant Josh Taylor – see you on the other side of lunch. As I mentioned earlier, Queensland has recorded 5,746 new Covid-19 cases and tragically, nine more deaths. South Australia Health appears to have announced that close contacts of Covid-19 will now need to get a PCR test to confirm whether they have the virus. Queensland deputy premier Steven Miles said this morning that bringing in the defence force to evacuate aged care facilities across the state is a last resort. There have been concerns around Covid-19 outbreaks at aged care facilities, given the spread of Omicron. There is a Covid-19 outbreak at Jeta Gardens nursing home in Logan, south of Brisbane, and the aged care watchdog has said that residents there are at an “immediate and severe risk”. Miles said that evacuating aged care is a “difficult task” and knows how “disruptive it can be for those residents”. ... if you think about moving people who have mobility issues – many of whom have dementia and confusion issues, moving them from their home can be very dangerous for them. And so, that’s why it’s a last resort to do so. I understand that there was that one facility yesterday that the commonwealth was working with. Of course, in an emergency situation, the state and our ambos and our health services know what to do and can do it, but it should not come to that. Miles said he was concerned that the residents in aged care facilities have not had their third Covid-19 shot. These facilities, the staff and the residents should all be double vaccinated and boosted. Now, they’re not. We know they’re not because it’s coming through in the death figures. We can’t get data, though, to tell us how many residents have been boosted. Which aged care facilities are all boosted? Which are below targets? ... We’ve requested that data. It hasn’t been provided to us. And as you’ve seen over recent days in particular, if more people were boosted, then less people would be dying. Right now, that’s the epicentre of what’s going on. Right now, that’s where it’s happening and that’s rightly should be the focus. Back to Scott Morrison’s press conference, the prime minister rejected the idea that the latest texting scandals showed disunity within the government, saying that “my record with my party members and my party in the parliament has been the most united Liberal party and Coalition that we have seen.” We’re facing a global pandemic which we’ve fought for the last two years. We’ve fought through fires, through floods, through pestilence, cyclones and we’ve been leading this country through one of the most difficult times we have known since the second world war and the Great Depression. What people send around in texts, I, frankly, could not care less about. And frankly, Australians are far more interested in their jobs and their lives than what people are sending in text messages to each other. This brings the number of active cases to 2,623. There are 60 people in hospital with the virus, including two in intensive care with one ventilated. Morrison said that he and Joyce have “both surprised each other” since being in leadership together. We hadn’t had a close relationship in the past. But as we came together, him, as the leader of the Nationals and I as leader of the Liberals and as prime minister and deputy prime minister, we’ve continued to combat this pandemic... A prime minister and a deputy prime minister work very closely together. And his observations of me and that relationship has completely transformed his view that he had as a backbencher at a time when his head was in a very different place. Morrison opens it up to questions and, of course, discussion immediately turns to that text that Barnaby Joyce sent about the prime minister (the one that described Morrison was “a hypocrite and a liar”). Asked how he can continue to work with Joyce, Morrison puts the whole situation down to human frailty. “... politics is a brutal business. And anyone who pretends it’s not, and anybody who pretends that from time to time, people don’t get angry or bitter or don’t act like other human beings, then if you can’t accept and understand each other’s frailties and be forgiving in those circumstances, then, frankly, that says a lot more about you than it does about others. And so, that is what my faith has always informed me to do – the same as it has so many others. And I’m thankful for that. But you know, politicians are no different to anyone else. And people say things and people feel things. People get angry. People get bitter. Of course they do. That’s all of us. And so, who am I to be judging someone else? Morrison also raises the fact that parliament will be addressing the issue of opening up international borders to international visitors again during this week’s sitting week. “... we are considering the further opening of the borders to international visitors. As many of our states now move through and past their peaks, the key issue that we have been examining and I have asked for advice from our health officials now over recent weeks, is how that decision could impact on our hospitals, which has been our primary consideration. But the previous opening up of the borders has gone very well. And we are looking forward to be able to make that decision to open up our borders and welcome visitors back to Australia again as soon as we safely and possibly can. But I really do not believe that that is far away. Morrison starts by acknowledging the 70th anniversary of the Queen’s ascension to the throne. I have had the great privilege to meet Her Majesty on several occasions and I have never met anyone more impressive, more remarkable. Her wisdom, her kindness, her sense of duty, is something that I think all of us here in Australia can be very grateful for. And so, to you, Her Majesty, from Australia – thank you for all your many years of service and may God Save The Queen. Prime minister Scott Morrison is speaking live from Sydney. Home affairs minister Karen Andrews wants to open international borders as soon as possible, but says Australia is not at that point at the moment, AAP reports. News Corp newspapers reported the Morrison government’s nation security committee will meet on Monday where it’s expected to agree to reopening Australia to tourists within two or three weeks. “We don’t have all of the information that we need to be able to take the decision to open, but we are very close,” Andrews told ABC’s Insiders program on Sunday. We are going through the process of preparing to open, and we will continue to talk to the health professionals. So as soon as they say yes, we will work with the states and territories and we will reopen our international borders to tourists. Just 5% of Australians have not had a Covid-19 vaccine, making Australia one of the world’s most vaccinated countries. A total 95% of Australians aged 12 and over have had at least one dose of a vaccine, health minister Greg Hunt said on Saturday. The country’s level of protection is now “right at the front of the highest global vaccination rate”, Hunt said. This rate of vaccination for children is also one of the highest in the world, he said. Scott Morrison has issued a statement acknowledging the 70th anniversary of Queen Elizabeth’s accession. The Queen has carried out her duties with diligence and dignity, always upholding her deep faith as well as her respect for the constitutional tradition she was born into. On this anniversary, I extend the gratitude of the Australian people. Tonight, iconic buildings and monuments in many parts of Australia will be lit up in royal purple for The Queen’s Platinum Jubilee. This anniversary is a truly remarkable milestone in a remarkable life. Meanwhile, the Queen has thanked the public for their support and asked them to recognise the Duchess of Cornwell as Queen Camilla when Charles takes the throne. And when, in the fullness of time, my son Charles becomes King, I know you will give him and his wife Camilla the same support that you have given me; and it is my sincere wish that, when that time comes, Camilla will be known as Queen Consort as she continues her own loyal service. Queensland chief health officer Dr John Gerrard said that there has been a “substantial reduction in the number of in-patients in public hospitals” with Covid-19. He said that the number in public hospitals has gone down from 727 to 663. The number of people in intensive care there has gone down from 46 to 45. The number of patients with the virus in private hospitals has stayed the same, at 63. Queensland deputy premier Steven Miles is providing today’s Covid-19 case update. There are 5,746 new cases and nine deaths. This brings the total number of deaths reported in the state to 277. Environment minister Susan Ley told Sky News Sunday Agenda this morning that, while it’s been a tough week this morning, said that it’s been a tough week for the prime minister, but insisted that their cabinet is united. Our friends at AAP have the story: “The most important issue is the unity in the Morrison government,” Ley said. As a minister that has sat in three cabinets with three prime ministers ... this is the most united cabinet table I have sat at. We are absolutely determined to recover from the pandemic in a way that supports every single Australian with their jobs, their lifestyle and their aspirations.” Asked whether there was any prospect of Morrison or Joyce being rolled as leader of their respective parties, Ley said: “Not at all, absolutely none.” But shadow treasurer Jim Chalmers said there is no salvaging this government. A change in the Liberal leader or Nationals leader won’t do it. This government is a smoking ruin of division and disunity and dysfunction and ordinary Australians are paying the price of that. The government seems to spend all of its time dishing out free character assessments of each other. Finally, Speers asked about the $60m in extra funding to combat violent extremism, announced last week. He wanted to know whether any of this funding was in response to the anti-vax, anti-mandate protests gathering in Canberra and other places. Andrews said “not specifically”, but added that “our intelligence agencies and law enforcement agencies certainly keeps a very close eye on who is attending those rallies, what the activity is...” She said that the funding announced will go towards “countering violent extremism particularly in rural and regional Australia to stop it before it starts”. Speers pointed out that Andrews’ colleague, George Christensen, was among the protesters this week. He asked Andrews whether Christensen’s actions were “helpful”? Andrews: Look, I don’t agree with many of the views that George has been espousing of late. I don’t think that it’s appropriate for him to be attending those sorts of rallies, but he is a member of parliament, he can make his own decisions in relation to that. But I’m talking about quite a different cohort, if you want to call it that, and that is violent extremists, and I don’t think anyone would put George Christensen into that category. Speers asked why “those who have been found to be refugees, don’t pose as a security risk, are still stuck in that hotel?” Andrews: Well, we are working with a process with the United States in particular to resettle some of those people in the United States. So we have an agreement for about 1,250 people to be resettled in the United States. We are in the final stages of coming up with the last people who will be part of that 1,250 cohort. We have always been very clear that if you arrive illegally by boat into this country, you will never be able to settle here... Speers moved on to ask the home affairs minister when the international border is going to open. Andrews said that is a priority for the government, and that “the prime minister and I know that I have been working over the last few weeks in particular to make sure that we are ready to open to international tourists as soon as it is safe to do so.” But she stopped short of setting a date, saying that “we don’t have all the information that we need to be able to make the decision to open, but we are very close.” Speers asked whether tourists could be turned away after arriving in Australia, like Novak Djokovic. Andrews said that it is possible that tourists could be turned back. Now, at this point in time, to be able to enter Australia if you are a non-Australian, you need to have a valid visa and you need to be able to demonstrate that you are fully vaccinated or you have acceptable medical evidence to say that you cannot be vaccinated for medical reasons, and if you speak specifically about Mr Djokovic, the issue was he couldn’t prove that he had a medical reason for not being vaccinated. Andrews said that the government is “doing absolutely everything we can to bring the workforce that is needed” to aged care homes, but said she doesn’t believe it’s possible to guarantee that some aged care homes won’t have to shut down due to workforce shortages. Speers: So some will have to shut down? Andrews: I don’t believe that is the reality. That is the last thing we would want to be happening ... I know that there have been discussions in relation to the defence forces. They have been brought in to help us all deal with the pandemic at various times as well. I know that they stand ready to assist, but at this point in time, we do have the surge workforce that is going into aged care facilities and they are supporting staff who have been there, working around the clock, who are very tired, very fatigued and affected by Covid themselves. Speers turned the conversation to discuss the aged care Covid-19, noting that the Jeta Gardens home, where 15 residents have died from the virus, is not far from Andrews’ electorate. He asks what the government is doing? Andrews: It is an appalling set of circumstances at that facility. I was horrified when I was reading about what was happening at that aged care facility. Let’s be clear, these people are very vulnerable members of our community and no one wants to see them in dire situations which seems to be what’s happening at that facility now. Look, the government has stepped up, the commission has, as you’ve indicated, it issued notices last year, it has now given directions. There are a lot of questions for management there. We need to understand what the workforce issues are, the extent of what the training issues are because that’s what the commission has been talking about. But if I go more broadly ... we know that there are serious concerns about workforce availability in the aged care sector. That’s why we work very closely with the private health sector, and to date, over 78,000 additional shifts have been worked by private health sector workers, to actually step up and support the aged care sector. Speers starts listing the leaders who have accused Scott Morrison of being a liar: Barnaby Joyce, the former prime minister, French president Emmanuel Macron. He asks whether this, plus problems in managing the pandemic, will make it harder to campaign with Scott Morrison at this year’s federal election? Andrews: We always knew that we would have our work cut out for us. This is a particularly difficult time in Australia and globally. We always knew that would be the case. Can we do without distractions? Absolutely. It is predictable that the opposition leader and Labor are going to go for a personal attack on the prime minister, of course it is... Speers jumps in to point out that personal attacks are coming from within the prime minister’s own government, though, and ask whether Morrison will be as much of an asset on the campaign trial this year as he was in 2019? Andrews: Circumstances are very different now. He is a great campaigner. He was a great campaigner in 2019 and he connected very well with Australians. Andrews adds that “we need to get him out”, before quickly clarifying that she means “out into the community”. “... out in Victoria, Queensland, New South Wales, all of the states across Australia. We all need to be doing that. It has been an incredibly difficult time for everyone and we all have to make sure that we are properly connecting. Speers doesn’t let up. You can understand the interest legitimately though. Trust matters, integrity matters. You are asking the Australian voters to re-elect a prime minister who has been called a liar, not just once and not just by his now deputy prime minister who even offered to resign over this. It is a pretty big deal. Andrews: Look, integrity is absolutely important and I’m not going to dismiss or attempt to dismiss any of that. But I would also say, too, that we are coming up to a federal election in the next couple of months and what Australians will be asked to decide on is who is going to lead that country, and that includes not just the issues that we are discussing today potentially tomorrow... Speers: But it is a big part, minister, as to whether we can trust him? Andrews: Look, I would say to the people of Australia that my experience of Scott Morrison is that he has always been respectful and willing to listen to my point of view, but he has also got a very strong record, and that is as immigration minister, as treasurer and as the prime minister. Let’s put this into some context as well, that Scott Morrison has been the prime minister during a particularly difficult time in Australia... Speers asks Andrews whether she has spoken to Barnaby Joyce about why he felt Scott Morrison was a liar, referring to the deputy prime minister’s leaked text message. Andrews: No, I haven’t. My discussions recently with Barnaby Joyce have been exclusively in relation to some local airport issues that I have in my electorate. No ... I haven’t discussed that with him. To be quite honest, I probably won’t because I understand that there is interest from some people, particularly in the media, about the goings on, but for me it really is quite simple. It won’t be Barnaby’s finest hour by a long stretch. He apologised, the prime minister accepted that apology. He offered to resign, the prime minister declined that offer, and they’ve indicated that they will work together. ... Scott Morrison absolutely will work in the national interests. He has demonstrated that when he was immigration minister, he has demonstrated that when he was treasurer and he is demonstrating it now as prime minister. First question: have you ever known Scott Morrison to tell a lie? Andrews says “that’s not been my experience of him at all”. Look, I’ve had a couple of robust discussions with him, as you would expect, but I’ve always found him to be respectful to me, to listen to what I had to say. He doesn’t always agree with it, but we just work our way through it. Now, you would expect that to happen in any workplace, and parliament, cabinet, you would expect exactly the same thing. I haven’t found him to be any but decent and respectful to me. Home affairs minister Karen Andrews is on ABC Insiders and you bet the questions have immediately turned to the prime minister’s character. As I mentioned in my first post, the ABC’s Sunday morning political commentary show Insiders has announced Joyce had pulled out of a scheduled interview with the program. The home affairs minister, Karen Andrews, would take his place. The Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, said on Saturday it is “untenable” for Joyce to continue as deputy prime minister following the texting scandal, saying Joyce had been in the same cabinet as Morrison for half a decade when he sent the text. See here the full story of what happened and where we are up to in the Joyce texting scandal: Good morning! It’s Justine Landis-Hanley here to bring you the news today, Sunday 6 February 2022. Let’s dive straight in: Barnaby Joyce has cancelled his appearance on ABC Insiders this morning, following reports that he called Scott Morrison “a hypocrite and a liar” in a private text message. The leaked text was forwarded to former Liberal party staffer Brittany Higgins by a third party before Joyce returned to the leadership of the National party last year. Nine newspapers are reporting that Nationals MPs will tell the deputy prime minister to “lift his game” at a party room meeting tomorrow. Meanwhile, WA emergency services have issued an emergency warning for the 100 or so residents of Hester, urging them to seek shelter before the fire arrives. An emergency warning is also already in place for southwest WA, including Hester Brooke and Bridgetown in the Shire of Bridgetown-Greenbushes.France’s presidential election is still two months away and the most likely winner, according to opinion polls, the incumbent, Emmanuel Macron, has yet to declare his candidacy. Yet one result already appears certain: the vote will be another, perhaps terminal, disaster for the once-dominant Socialist party and, more broadly, the French left. Important lessons may be drawn from this impending failure by other European progressive, social democratic parties and also by Labour in Britain. The re-election victory in Portugal last week of António Costa’s Socialists, who improved on their 2019 performance, demonstrated it is still possible for the centre-left to win, govern and win again. One basic lesson concerns the willingness to rally loyally round a single standard-bearer, eschewing the factionalism so typical of the left in Europe (and the US). In France, voters are confronted by no fewer than seven leftwing Élysée hopefuls, including the Socialist, Anne Hidalgo, the Greens leader, Yannick Jadot, the hard-leftist Jean-Luc Mélenchon and the Communist, Fabien Roussel. Fears of an approaching train wreck intensified after an attempt to agree a “unity candidate” backfired spectacularly. A former minister, Christiane Taubira, won an informal vote, which was boycotted by the main contenders, rendering it meaningless. Of the magnificent seven, only Mélenchon is in double figures in the polls (10%). Hidalgo, heir to the former Socialist president François Hollande, who only left office in 2017, is on a risible 3%. Another key lesson for the left is the need to adapt to changing political formations. In Germany, the Social Democrats ended decades of centre-right rule last year by forming an unlikely coalition with the Greens and the neoliberal Free Democrats. In Norway, the Labour party regained power in September by allying with the agrarian Centre party. In order to win, the left (loosely defined) must also adapt to changing electorates. It is far from clear, in many countries, that a homogenous working-class vote still exists. The end of the communist era, the impact on communities and jobs of deindustrialisation, globalisation and post-2008 austerity, and fears stoked by far-right populists about immigration and identity have altered voting habits. France has its own equivalents of England’s red wall seats – decaying urban areas where well-paid manufacturing jobs have vanished and investment dried up. But instead of switching to a Tory-like party, voters there increasingly back Marine Le Pen or Éric Zemmour, the siren voices of far-right reaction and division. This is what can happen when the left fails in its responsibility to offer plausible, winning alternatives. Spain provides perhaps the best European example of how socialism in the 21st century can thrive. Pedro Sánchez’s Socialist Workers party took office in 2018, in coalition with the populist Podemos and other factions. From the start, Sánchez rejected austerity and prioritised fighting poverty and inequality. It hasn’t all gone swimmingly, by any means. But Sánchez’s supporters say that by increasing public funding for healthcare and education, boosting the minimum wage by 29%, helping small businesses and insisting that all government policies take account of environmental and climate crisis goals, he has succeeded in reconnecting with disaffected voters – the old “working class” – and in creating a progressive majority for change. It seems to be working. Recent polling by the newspaper El País suggests the Socialists would triumph afresh if an election were held today, albeit with some losses to the right and far-right. Spain offers no panaceas for the sickness of the left. But it does point to a way forward for those in Britain, France and elsewhere who wonder whether they will ever win again.From buying exactly the same groceries every week to using the same beauty products forever, we are all guilty of sticking to what we know. I see the sense in this, but it doesn’t always serve us well. It can mean missing out on discovering something new and better – like great new products from niche brands. These are not household names but worth paying attention to as they deliver. Take masks, which are so relevant now seeing as winter is one of skin’s biggest enemies: while nothing beats an incredible facial, masks are financially less painful and if you are consistent with their use – the key to all good skincare routines – your skin will thank you for it. Hydrating masks from the likes of Verso are a no-brainer right now. Youth To the People’s clever combo of science and botanicals is the ultimate exfoliating, yet moisturising boost. Votary’s is similar, its key ingredients – lactic and mandelic acid – are great for shedding dead skin cells, but the formula is impressively gentle and hydrating. As is Farmacy’s. To refine skin texture without stripping the skin, Ameliorate’s is gamechanging. For decongesting, Olivanna, Zitsticka, Strivectin and Wildsmith are brilliant because unlike most clay based masks, they draw out impurities without upsetting your skin barrier. And if you are in the market for a brightening, anti-puff, under-eye treatment that is a little more sophisticated than cucumber slices or old teabags, Equilibrium has you covered. 1. Ameliorate Resurfacing Facial Mask £22, spacenk.com 2. Farmacy Honey Potion Plus Mask £36, boots.com 3. Votary Radiance Reveal Mask £55, votary.co.uk 4. Zitsticka Pore Vac £30, zitsticka.com 5. Strivectin Multi-Action Blue Rescue Clay Renewal Mask £47, strivectin.com 6. Youth To the People, Superberry Hydrate and Glow Mask £42, cultbeauty.co.uk 7. Hourglass Equilibrium Instant Plumping Eye Mask £61, johnlewis.com 8. Verso Nourishing Mask £80, versoskincare.com 9. Wildsmith Skin Double Clay Mask £65, wildsmithskin.com 10. Olivanna Detox Oceanic Marine Mask £56, olivanna.com Follow Funmi on Twitter @FunmiFettoA top official from Sweden’s new “psychological defence” agency said the country had decided to bring back the cold war-era government body amid fears over Russian aggression against Ukraine. Magnus Hjort, deputy director of the agency, which was re-established last month to combat foreign disinformation, said concerns were especially heightened ahead of Sweden’s general election in September, against the backdrop of Europe’s “deteriorating security situation”. Tensions are mounting in the region following Russia’s troop build-up near Ukraine’s border, prompting discussion over whether Sweden and Finland, which are not members of Nato, should join the military alliance. Last month Sweden strengthened its military presence on the strategically important island of Gotland, in the Baltic Sea. While Hjort said there was no immediate threat to Sweden, he warned: “We can’t rule out that Sweden can be attacked.” The previous iteration of the agency was closed down in 2008, but much of it was dismantled years earlier after the end of the cold war. While the new agency has been in the making since 2016, Hjort said the latest Russia/Ukraine crisis has put Sweden on alert ahead of its elections. “It could mean that security and defence will be more important in the election, and that could mean it could be more interesting for a foreign power to influence the way people are voting – to make sure that Sweden takes the ‘right measures’ in the way a foreign power sees it,” he said. “So there could be a bigger interest in affecting the general election. It’s possible because of the security situation in Europe right now.” The mission of the Swedish psychological defence agency, which has around 45 staff and is expected to grow, is to “safeguard our open and democratic society, the free formation of opinion, and Sweden’s freedom and independence.” Citing the 2016 US election and attempts to interfere with the 2017 election in France – which last year set up a similar agency to combat foreign disinformation and fake news – as examples, Hjort said: “Authoritarian states have for years been trying to influence elections. The difference today is that through social media you have better opportunities to influence people. That’s why we need to have the capacity to monitor for an interference in our democracy.” The 2014 Russian annexation of Crimea prompted Sweden to start rebuilding its “total defence”, combining military, civilian and psychological security, he said. “What we have seen lately is that the security situation has deteriorated in our part of the world. It has become more tense.” Worsening relations in Europe have shown how disinformation and interference are a “vital part of the toolbox that authoritarian states use to achieve their objectives,” he said. He added: “We have to have something to analyse, to identify this and to be able to counter it and that’s why we are now establishing a psychological defence agency in Sweden.” While the election will be one of its most important tasks this year, the agency is intended to show a long-term commitment to “strengthening the resilience within the population”, including across government agencies and municipalities to identify interference by foreign states in freedom of opinion and expression. “Conflict between states will be there after this year as well,” he said. But he added: “This year could become particularly nasty and difficult.” Social media, Hjort said, has dramatically changed the nature of psychological defence, making Sweden “more vulnerable”. While he said the social media companies could “always do more” to protect from foreign intervention, psychological defence also lies in individual citizens being aware that they could be exposed to influence from foreign powers. Mats Engström, a visiting fellow at the European Council on Foreign Relations, said other Swedish agencies were already working in the field, but the creation of the psychological defence agency was “a further step in light of increased threats”. He said that Russian propaganda has been referring to Sweden negatively in recent years, including on issues such as immigration, but that fears of influence affecting the 2018 election did not appear to materialise. There were, he said, fears about how the new agency could impact free speech. “It will have to tread very carefully on controversial issues not to create the impression of the state trying to stifle critical views. Even if it is stated in the instructions that the new agency shall promote free speech, the line is not easy to draw.”Tenants in England whose rent includes council tax, or who live in homes in a council tax band above D, are among those who could miss out on the £150 grant announced by the government last week to reduce the sting of sharply rising energy bills. The chancellor, Rishi Sunak, announced measures last Thursday after the regulator, Ofgem, lifted the maximum rate suppliers can charge for an average dual-fuel energy tariff by £693 to almost £2,000 a year. Sunak said every household would get a one-off repayable £200 discount on their bills in October and a rebate on council tax. However, charities and thinktanks have raised concerns that using council tax as a means to reduce the rising cost of energy is inefficient and unfair, particularly for those who do not own their own homes. The Labour and Cooperative MP Dame Meg Hillier described the plan as policymaking “on the hoof”, saying that while using council tax to distribute money looked simple, the reality was a lot more complicated. “The housing situation isn’t as simple as Whitehall thinks it is,” said Hillier, the MP for Hackney South and Shoreditch in east London. “I have a lot of HMOs [houses in multiple occupation] in my constituency. If the landlord pays [the council tax], do they then take it off the tenants’ rent? “They’re using the council tax account as a way of getting money to people, so if you’re not paying council tax directly or don’t have an account, presumably you are not getting any money.” Hillier suggested the government package was not “going to touch the sides” for struggling households. “People will still be having to make hard choices.” They were already shopping around to save money on a pint of milk, she said: “If that is the margin you are working on, £150 off a near £700 rise in energy bills is not going to cut it.” The Resolution Foundation also criticised the plan to distribute money via the council tax system. It said 640,000 households in England in the bottom 30% based on income lived in properties rated E and above. It would also be hard to get the cash to the 25% of households who did not pay their council tax by direct debit, the thinktank suggested. About a quarter, or 4.4 million, of households in England live in private rented accommodation, according to the English Housing Survey. The figure for the UKas a whole is approximately 5 million. The Treasury says that 95% of renters are in band A to D properties. The Joseph Rowntree Foundation said energy bills were a big area of uncertainty for private renters and nearly a fifth were already in arrears. “For renters or sharers whose bills are included in their rent, the benefit of the rebate and loans won’t come to them and some landlords may still increase rents to make up any shortfall,” said Darren Baxter, the charity’s housing policy and partnerships manager. Other groups, such as students, who are exempt from paying council tax, have also complained about being ignored. Hillary Gyebi-Ababio, the NUS vice-president, said Sunak had “ghosted” students. “Students are already under extreme financial pressure,” she said, adding that thousands of them were using food banks. The government is giving local authorities £150m to make discretionary payments to poorer families, such as those who live in properties that do not qualify for the council tax rebate. It is also expanding the number of households who can apply for the warm homes discount, which is worth £150 from October. It plans to consult on how to treat renters who do not pay council tax directly.What time are you up? I’m usually awake by 6am, with my sausage dog’s nose pressed against me; we sleep arm-in-paw. I recently moved house and painted my bedroom pink with pictures of Marilyn Monroe on the walls, because I’m single so I can. I light the fire, incense and candles. Sensory satisfaction is all at this stage in life. A morning routine? After 15 mind-calming minutes of Vipassanā yogic meditation, awakening my kundalini, I feel cleansed and calmer. Things are still, if only briefly. Then I chuck on my tracksuit and take the dog to the park while it’s quiet out. Sundays growing up… Were lively. My parents separated: Mum ended up having five girls, and Dad five boys. In London, it was sisterly love and squeezing into shared bedrooms, tagging along with Mum at the market-stalls she worked on. Up north with my dad, it was all footballs and total chaos with the lads. A special Sunday? Any day spent with my four (now grown-up) children under my roof. They all pile into the bed with me: Rudy sucking his thumb, Iris chatting away, Raff doing back flips and Finlay reciting Shakespeare. I miss waking up and all of us being together. It’s so frustrating that they’re grownups, I can’t wait for grandkids to come along. Do you work? I might read a script or write; on Sunday mornings I try to focus on more creative parts of my job, then I’ll do some prep for the week ahead. Once that’s done, my next task is finding a good vegetarian pub roast. I rarely drink, but might treat myself to a glass of red. And Sunday night? I’ve been going to the Hampstead Everyman since the 1970s, there’s nothing better than settling down there for a cinema night. Or, we’ll settle at home with whatever football is on, as is life when you’re the mother of three boys. Honestly? I’ll happily watch any game with them, if it means they’re around. Quant is out to own from 21 February. Vote for your EE Bafta Rising Star at ee.co.uk/BaftaThere was a moment last Monday in the House of Commons when Keir Starmer was lost for words and then froze for a few seconds on the front bench. Unlike most of his MPs he could not even muster an angry gesticulation in Boris Johnson’s direction. Instead, Starmer sat motionless, staring and blinking at the prime minister across the dispatch box with a look of sheer contempt. What the prime minister had just said about the leader of the opposition – that when he had been director of public prosecutions he “spent most of his time prosecuting journalists and failing to prosecute Jimmy Savile” – was soon shown by fact checkers to be baseless. It was also – in the opinion of most MPs – deeply insensitive and gratuitous. Even Tory MPs were appalled. “I put my head in my hands,” said Sir Charles Walker, the Conservative member for Broxbourne, who was in the Commons at the time. “It should not have been said.” MPs on all sides of the House viewed the comment as far beyond acceptable boundaries of political knockabout and straight out of the Trump playbook. Within hours, lawyers for Savile’s victims were accusing Johnson of “weaponising their suffering” in an attempt to deflect attention from his own problems, and reported that those they represented were “angry, upset and disgusted” by the prime minister’s comments. This was supposed to be Johnson’s time for contrition. He had come to the Commons to make a statement on an initial report into the “partygate” scandal by the senior civil servant Sue Gray. She had been told to pare back her report by the Metropolitan police – who are now investigating a dozen parties in Downing Street, including several attended by Johnson. Despite this, Gray had been highly critical in her broad summary, saying there had been serious failings of leadership at No 10 that had allowed a string of events to take place and develop at the heart of power, where she suggested an unprofessional drinking culture had taken root. Many Tory MPs watched Johnson’s performance closely on Monday as they agonised over whether to send letters to Sir Graham Brady, the chairman of the 1922 committee, calling for the PM to go. So did members of their constituency associations. One Tory MP and former minister said he was feeling pressure from all directions. Conservatives in his association were very unhappy with Johnson, but he was also contacted regularly by MPs who were backing him. “They were asking if I would like 20 minutes with the prime minister. I said: ‘Well, I am not against having a meeting with him at all.’ But I told them I had asked to see him several times over the past couple of years to discuss serious policy matters, and had been ignored.” The MP decided to bide his time, watch how the prime minister handled himself in the Commons, and keep in contact with his local party. When members of his association watched Johnson’s performance last Monday they were appalled by the Savile comments. “They emailed me to say they thought he should go. They said they thought there had to be a ballot, that he could not run the country any more.” As a result, the same MP – who has not yet been named as among those wanting a vote of confidence – said he will send a letter to Brady early this week making clear he no longer has confidence in the prime minister. If it had been just a few MPs and a scattering of local Conservative associations that felt the Savile episode was a step too far, then the damage to Johnson might have been containable. But it went much further. Back in Downing Street there was also deep unhappiness. There, everyone had known that Johnson’s reaction to the Sue Gray report could well decide not only the prime minister’s fate, but their futures too. Aides to Johnson were aware that it could be make or break: that he just had to get the tone right. After several meetings, it was agreed between the PM and his key aides on Monday morning that Johnson would adopt an apologetic tone and say sorry several times, even it the mea culpas became repetitive. However, according to accounts from several government sources, Johnson indicated that he was not prepared just to eat humble pie. He had been frustrated for months by the lack of “dirt” his advisers had provided him with to throw at Starmer at moments when he was under pressure, and he told them he was keen to deploy the Savile attack line, which had been drawn to his attention after appearing on rightwing websites. It is understood that Johnson was strongly advised not to do so by at least one aide – but pressed ahead anyway. His decision backfired spectacularly. One of those most outraged by what happened in the Commons was Munira Mirza, Johnson’s head of policy inside Downing Street, who had worked with him since 2008. They had stuck together through thick and thin since he was mayor of London. But Mirza regarded the Savile slur as appallingly ill-judged and tasteless; after Johnson deployed it, she demanded her boss apologise publicly and did so to his face. But on this occasion he did not do as his most trusted aide wanted. While he backtracked a little both on Wednesday at prime minister’s questions and on Thursday in a media interview, his words fell far short of an apology. On Thursday afternoon Mirza penned a blistering resignation letter. “You are aware of the reason for my decision,” she said. “I believe it was wrong for you to imply this week that Keir Starmer was personally responsible for allowing Jimmy Savile to escape justice. There was no fair or reasonable basis for that assertion. This was not the normal cut-and-thrust of politics; it was an inappropriate and partisan reference to a horrendous case of child sex abuse. You tried to clarify your position today but, despite my urging, you did not apologise for the misleading impression you gave.” She went on: “Even now, I hope you find it in yourself to apologise for a grave error of judgment made under huge pressure. I appreciate that our political culture is not forgiving when people say sorry, but regardless, it is the right thing to do. It is not too late for you but, I’m sorry to say, it is too late for me.” That evening three more senior officials – Johnson’s chief of staff Dan Rosenfield, his principal private secretary Martin Reynolds, and director of communications, Jack Doyle, quit their posts, apparently having been told to go by Johnson as he tried to give the impression that the clearout was part of an organised restructuring of Downing Street to refresh his administration. That same evening the crisis for Johnson deepened. The chancellor, Rishi Sunak – the favourite to succeed him if he goes – deliberately distanced himself from the prime minister. Asked about the Savile slur, Sunak told a press conference: “With regard to the comments, being honest I wouldn’t have said it and I am glad the prime minister clarified what he meant.” On Friday night the health secretary Sajid Javid did the same saying Starmer had done a “good job” as DPP and “should be respected for it”. Just when Johnson needed unity most, his own choice of attack line had given his detractors and rivals at all levels a reason to desert him, that was nothing directly to do with parties. The cabinet had split, Downing Street was in turmoil with desks unoccupied, and local Tories were in revolt. But the biggest question this weekend, which only Sir Graham Brady can answer, is how many of the 54 letters he must receive from Conservative MPs before he triggers a vote of confidence have already landed on his desk or in his inbox. As ever, Brady was politely refusing to say yesterday. What is clear is that in the last few days support for Johnson has been ebbing away as the PM’s dwindling band of backers try in vain to lead his fightback. MPs who now want him to go come from all wings of the party. One Nation moderates from the Tory left like Peter Aldous and Gary Streeter have sent in their letters. As one party source said: “These are people who have spent their entire careers never saying boo to a goose. If they are on the warpath there’s a big problem.” From the pro-Brexit right, the likes of Andrew Bridgen and the former schools minister Nick Gibb have also put in letters. Even Johnson “loyalists” like Walker, a former vice chair of the 1922 executive who admires the prime minister, wants him to leave now for the sake of his legacy and because he says the public has made up its mind about the parties and wants to move on from the trauma of lockdowns. “It is in Boris’s hands at the moment,” Walker said, “but if he doesn’t act soon it will be taken out of his hands by the parliamentary party and then he is not in control of anything. It is an inevitable tragedy. He is a student of Greek and Roman tragedy. It is going to end in him going so I just want him to have some agency in that.” While Johnson’s critics say there is no co-ordinated plot to remove him there are plenty of MPs doing the sums. Some say they think the number of letters to Brady is now “in the mid-40s” while others believe it is in “the early 30s”. All agree, however, that the number will grow in the coming days and is edging towards 54. A week ago, the consensus was that nothing would happen until the final police report and Gray report into No 10 parties were out. Now there is a view that things could happen earlier than that. “I would not be entirely surprised if Sir Graham is calling a press conference on Monday or Tuesday, before the recess,” said a former minister who is wrestling with his own conscience about whether to put pen to paper. Johnson is still insisting he can go on and will make big changes to his Downing Street operation. But doing so could prove increasingly difficult as the leadership threat grows. Nick Faith, director of the political and economic consultancy WPI Strategy, who used to work at the centre-right thinktank Policy Exchange, said filling key posts would be a problem for Johnson. “The vast majority of political and communications professionals would currently think twice about working in what appears to be a highly dysfunctional workplace,” he said. Johnson’s suggestion that he was turning for advice once more to election guru Lynton Crosby in some advisory role was another problem. “The suggestion that the prime minister is taking strategic advice from external figures should serve as a warning to anyone thinking about applying for a full-time, senior role in No 10. It undermines their authority before they’ve even entered the building,” Faith added. With several key desks at No 10 unfilled after allies left, the cabinet fracturing, and more MPs moving against the prime minister by the day, there is now a broad consensus that Boris Johnson’s time is running out. “It is like all his layers of defence are being peeled away. And whatever he does makes things worse,” said a former minister. “This feels like the end of days.” Departures If Johnson is forced out of office, it will be an ironic vindication of his woozy ideas. No other modern prime minister has been expelled in similar circumstances, writes Nick Cohen In his biography of Winston Churchill, Boris Johnson makes it clear he has no time for historians who claim that economic, cultural and social tides drive events. He tells the reader to believe instead the “great man” theory of history – to accept that “one man can make all the difference”. If Johnson is forced out of office, it will be an ironic vindication of his woozy ideas. He will have been destroyed by his own lies and hypocrisies. In the fall of the Johnson administration, Boris Johnson would indeed have made all the difference. No modern prime minister has been expelled from Downing Street in similar circumstances. They have resigned when they lost an election or have been forced out by colleagues. Margaret Thatcher alienated so many Tory MPs with her attitude to Europe – and with a poll tax that provoked something close to a popular uprising – that they replaced her. Political calculation mingled with ideological argument as MPs hoped that a new leader could win the next election – as her successor, John Major, did in 1992. The same mixture applied when Theresa May resigned in 2019 after failing to get her soft Brexit through the Commons. Johnson offered the Tory right a policy – a hard break with the EU – and the promise that his charisma would carry them to victory. Tony Blair’s toxic fight with Gordon Brown coupled with the legacy of his decision to take the UK to war with Iraq ended his premiership in 2007. The only resignations vaguely comparable to Johnson’s are those of Harold Wilson in 1976 and David Cameron in 2016. But Wilson, whose physical powers were failing, decided of his own volition that it was time to retire, while Cameron could not live with the enormous blunder of having taken the UK out of the EU by mistake. Johnson is not in failing health. He has not lost a referendum or fought an unpopular war. No issue of national policy is at stake here. If he goes, it will be because the public cannot abide being governed by a phoney who forced them into lockdown while partying behind the doors of Downing Street. Johnson can rest assured that the history books will remember him: not as a great man but as a great charlatan, whose fate was a salutary warning to all who came after him.In 2016, the Senegalese photographer Omar Victor Diop began what he calls the “liberty project”, dramatising in his studio defining moments of black history. This picture, dedicated to the memory of Trayvon Martin, is the most recent of the events that he portrays. As in all of his pictures, Diop casts himself as the teenager, just as he depicts himself in the shoes of Senegalese second world war soldiers, Black Panther members or freedom marchers at Selma, exploring a common thread within struggles for racial justice separated in time and space. It is 10 years ago this month that Martin was shot and killed by neighbourhood watch volunteer George Zimmerman. Martin, 17, was on his way home to his father’s house in Sanford, Florida, from a local store where he had bought iced tea and a bag of Skittles sweets. It took six weeks before Zimmerman was arrested and charged with the killing after a petition that attracted more than 2m signatures; when Zimmerman was acquitted of second-degree murder the verdict sparked the Black Lives Matter movement. Diop pictures himself as Martin in the hooded sweatshirt that became a symbol of solidarity in that protest – Zimmerman had claimed that the hoodie suggested Martin was “a suspicious guy”. He is surrounded by a sunburst halo of Skittles, sanctifying his image. The picture is included in a recent collection of Diop’s photographs from the past decade. “These people who have been subjected to systemic violence, look at the viewer through the lens and seem to say: no liberty without justice,’’ he says. “My intention in depicting this universal chronology of black protest was to act as a reminder, not as a prompt for any particular claims or complaints, but as a means of uniting.” Omar Victor Diop is published by 5 Continents EditionsGuy Leschziner is a consultant neurologist at Guy’s and St Thomas’ hospitals. His areas of expertise are epilepsy and sleep disorders. He has presented two BBC radio series, one on sleep and another on the neurology of our sensory world. His latest book is The Man Who Tasted Words, which explores the relationship between our sensory perception and the reality it constructs. A common phrase in cognitive neuroscience is “perception is nothing more than controlled hallucination”. What exactly does that mean? What we think of as a hallucination is an experience that is devoid of reality or removed from reality. And the term “controlled hallucination” implies that our experiences are constructed by the brain. As I point out in the book, sometimes what we perceive to be reality is very different from the cold, hard reality or what we assumed to be the cold, hard reality around us. So it is essentially stressing the point that what we term reality is entirely a construct of our nervous system. There is a debate in neuroscience between the orthodox viewpoint that sees our sensory system as a kind of flawed means of perceiving reality and those who suggest it is designed to conceal reality. What are your thoughts on those debates? Intuitively as a human being, rather than as a neurologist, I find it very difficult to get my head around those views that say that our brains are designed to conceal reality. I’m fascinated by these theories. Do I, in my heart of hearts, like to accept them? No, I don’t. I’m much more comfortable with the view that there is some relationship between the world that we inhabit and what we experience rather than them being completely removed from each other. The title of your book refers to a man with synaesthesia, in which one sense triggers another. He can taste words, while someone else sees colours in music. What does this tell us about our sensory system? The most widely cited statistic regarding the prevalence of synaesthesia is that it affects about 4-5% of individuals. The thing that it really tells us is that there are people out there with essentially normal brains – these are not individuals with pathology, they’re not people with brain injury or damage – who experience reality in a very different way from most of us. It highlights that our perception of reality is so defined by how our brains work and illustrates that it’s entirely dependent upon our nervous system. One of your areas of expertise is sleep. The neuroscientist David Eagleman argues that the brain is a Darwinian battlefield between neurons and that dreaming is a means of maintaining vision when we sleep. What do you think about that? It’s true that humans have evolved to be more dependent upon their vision rather than the other senses. But there are lots of theories as to why we dream. The one that particularly appeals to me is that in order for our nervous system to function properly, for us to understand the world, we constantly need to make predictions. In order to make predictions, we need to have some sort of internal model of the world as we understand it. And dreaming may represent an integration of our experiences over the course of the day and, indeed, over the course of our lifetimes into that model. And that dreaming sleep is that stage in our lives every night where we tweak that internal model of the brain. The issue of pain features prominently in your book. One of your subjects experiences no pain at all. Why do you think pain is quite so painful? We know that pain has got many components to it. A major component is the sensory discretion that tells you where in the body that pain is. Another feature that everyone will be aware of is what is termed the affective component of pain. In addition to knowing that I’ve just hit my finger with a hammer, it’s that sort of overwhelming unpleasantness, that dread of pain. I think that that’s a very important evolutionary mechanism. Pain is a very strong driver to avoid damage to oneself. You touch on Covid-19, particularly in relation to loss of smell. Do you expect the research into long Covid will produce neurological findings? Undoubtedly, it is the case that we do see a lot of people in whom long Covid has had a significant psychological impact. For many people, it’s the first time they have been faced with their own mortality. But it’s clear that there appears also to be a physical or biological component to it. From a neurological perspective, one recent study has looked at individuals with the brain fog of long Covid. What they clearly demonstrated in this cohort of individuals is that 70% of them have abnormalities in their cerebrospinal fluid. I think that what we will find out is that there is a combination of factors that leads to long Covid. And to group it into one condition is probably erroneous. If you had a spare billion pounds to spend on medical research, where – from a neurological perspective – would you like it to go? From an entirely selfish perspective, my academic background is in epilepsy and sleep. Sleep was the subject of my first book. And I think that given that we spend a third of our lives asleep and yet we don’t fully understand the impact of what sleep does, I think that that is an area that remains very much underresearched and probably has very far-reaching implications for us all. In a sense, you ask the reader to re-evaluate the senses, particularly the overlooked senses of taste and smell. How would you rank the senses in order of importance to you? I would have said vision first, then hearing, then touch, then smell and then taste. By the end of writing the book, I’m not sure it changed significantly, but I certainly appreciated smell a lot more. It has far-reaching implications in terms of memory, in terms of emotion, in terms of lots of hidden aspects of our lives, for example, the attraction towards another individual. I think it’s much underappreciated that smell is a very important mode of communication. In the time that you’ve been practising, what is the medical breakthrough that has had the greatest impact on your patients? When I was a medical student, it was said that neurology was the speciality with 1,001 diagnoses, but only one treatment. And that treatment was steroids. Whereas our understanding of immunology, in particular, has caused an explosion in terms of treatments that are available for some very serious conditions such as multiple sclerosis or other autoimmune conditions that cause devastating neurological damage. That is a huge step forward therapeutically. • The Man Who Tasted Words by Guy Leschziner is published by Simon &amp; Schuster (£16.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyThe Royal Opera House recently emailed some well-intentioned content advice to people who’d bought tickets for its production of Handel’s oratorio, Theodora, first performed in 1750. The new staging, “by the ever-radical Katie Mitchell”, would feature, it said, “explicit presentation of scenes of sexual violence, harassment and exploitation and [the] evocation of themes of terrorism”. This thrilling information was sent to hardened opera fans probably accustomed to watching, for instance, young women being stabbed to death in sacks, or abducted, betrayed or left behind in the underworld, or, taking the initiative, killing an unwanted bridegroom in a sea of blood. Maybe it was inevitable that when Theodora opened last week some studiously unruffled spectators couldn’t help comparing the actual proceedings with its advertised potential to traumatise. “This isn’t the shocking staging we were promised,” was the headline of one review. As writers of trigger warnings will know, there is a definite art to it, starting with the seemingly arbitrary business, as above, of what to warn about. Then, since triggers within a single text might range from, say, “blood” to “classism” by way of “sexual assault”, “hateful language” and “death or dying”, the professional warner must decide how many warnings is too many. In the case of Romeo and Juliet, the Globe theatre was willing to overlook the statutory rape but mentioned “references to drug use”, along with stage blood, gun shots and suicide. Supposing it’s a good idea, as academics at Royal Holloway have reportedly decided, to warn MA students that Oliver Twist is replete with child abuse, domestic violence and racism, was it right to leave out the casual cruelty to animals, not only to Bill Sikes’s miserable dog, Bull’s-eye? “Mr Gamfield growled a fierce imprecation on the donkey, generally, but more particularly on his eyes; and, running after him, bestowed a blow on his head, which would inevitably have beaten in any skull but a donkey’s.” Challenged on the Twist warning, Royal Holloway told the Mail on Sunday that the use of content warnings is “standard and accepted practice within academia”, part of its “responsibility to support the mental health and wellbeing of our students” and exists “to educate and inform students in advance around potentially sensitive topics which could cause them anxiety or distress, perhaps as a consequence of past experience”. Or to put it another way, its Twist warning was no more absurd than those others that UK universities have recently applied to work including Jane Eyre, Nineteen Eighty-Four and a children’s book BA module featuring JK Rowling’s Harry Potter and the Philosopher’s Stone. In which, as many 10-year-olds are aware, the child hero starts at wizard school. Older students are advised to tell tutors “if anything is particularly difficult because of its personal relevance”. The presumption that students should be protected from literature-induced discomfiture has been criticised and ridiculed, to strikingly little effect, since trigger warnings began to proliferate in the US, around 2015. The wider application of a term previously used therapeutically in connection with trauma survivors was defended by academics such as the philosophy professor Kate Manne, writing in the New York Times: “It is to allow those who are sensitive to these subjects to prepare themselves for reading about them and better manage their reactions.” That such students might routinely view content ranging from Netflix’s blood, gun and drug-reference-rich offerings to news reports about real child murder, catastrophe and genocide is no reason, to such teachers, to downplay the discomfort brought on by a made-up story about a 19th-century governess. From a teacher’s point of view, perhaps such warning-heightened engagement is easier to deal with than the kind of response that Bernardine Evaristo – and many others – have had to Virginia Woolf: “I didn’t connect with her at all.” That Jacob Rees-Mogg reflexively denounces trigger warnings – “universities should just grow up a bit” – is a further reminder that excessive feeling is generally preferable to none. Plus, sometimes you can see the point. Many students must be stunned, even as they expect it, by the racism with which much of the western literary canon is infected. It’s still a shock, going back to Oliver Twist, to see Dickens interspersing passages of deep fellow feeling with those in which Fagin is repeatedly “the Jew”. Nor is this generation the first to recoil. A Jewish mother wrote to Dickens in 1863, inviting him to “atone for a great wrong”. More recently, it’s regrettable to some of us that the traumatising potential of some fiction never stopped Lord of the Flies and Of Mice and Men being considered ideal introductions, for 12-year-olds, to man’s inhumanity to man. Samuel Whiskers, too, might benefit from a content warning, not for triggering infant panic attacks, but for gifting them a lifetime’s flashbacks to a scuttling rat and a kitten shrouded in dough. In fact, the commonest objection to trigger warnings, that they will cultivate generations of fragile, censorious victims, could be less effective in reversing them than growing evidence that, regardless of the benefits claimed, they are pointless. When theatres and universities defend them as standard practice they don’t merely lack proof of efficacy, or any coherent system of application, they ignore academic findings that trigger warnings have no effect on anxiety and do not alleviate negative emotional reactions. Warnings may even, in the case of trauma survivors, make things worse. “We found,” one study reports, “substantial evidence that trigger warnings countertherapeutically reinforce survivors’ view of their trauma as central to their identity.” So long as intentionally disturbing literature is understood as a threat to student wellbeing, it looks as if academics need to find some other therapeutic approach. Of course it wouldn’t work for everyone, but after a few minutes with the snuff offerings at MailOnline they might turn to Bill Sikes with relief. • Catherine Bennett is an Observer columnistIt’s not, and never will be, clear why Cheslie Kryst took her life in Manhattan last weekend. Media speculation in the days since has focused on social media trolls, Covid isolation, external or internal pressures, each speaking more clearly to their author’s agenda than the unknowable qualities of the beauty queen’s state of mind. What is clear is that by 30, Kryst had achieved much: as a North Carolina attorney who fought for social justice and criminal justice reform, a long and triple jump competitor, as titleholder of Miss USA in a year that all four pageant winners (Universe, World, Teen) were women of color, and as creator of White Collar Glam and Emmy-nominated TV correspondent. “She embodied grace, intelligence and passion,” said Dress for Success, the organization that empowers low-income women to achieve economic independence. “This is a tragic loss for all.” “This hurts …and I can’t stop thinking about the lovely @chesliekryst,” shared Gayle King. “She was walking sunshine to me.. i knew her …cared about her …and am deeply saddened… how to explain the unexplainable?” Authorities believe Cheslie took her own life. Her final Instagram post was a portrait captioned: “May this day bring you rest and peace.” Her mother, April Simpkins, said in a statement: “Cheslie led both a public and a private life. In her private life, she was dealing with high-functioning depression which she hid from everyone – including me, her closest confidant – until very shortly before her death.” Her father, Rodney Kryst, told the New York Post he thought “it had a lot to do with family dysfunction … she was sad”. But in her time Kryst burned brightly. She was asked during her pageant appearance if she felt the #MeToo and #TimesUp movements had gone too far. She said no. The movements “are about making sure that we foster safe and inclusive workplaces. As an attorney, that’s exactly what I want to hear and that’s exactly what I want for this country.” Last week, some who knew her were able to assess her impact. “Her death is an incredible tragedy, particularly for the many women and girls of color she inspired,” Keli Goff, the writer and columnist who included the beauty queen in her play The Glorious World of Crowns, Kinks and Curls after Kryst competed with natural hair, a signature she maintained. Kryst and the other Black beauty queens from 2019, had a profound role in redefining global standards of beauty. “My hope is that her death will not be in vain, but will help end the silence, shame and stigma around mental health, particularly in the Black community,” Goff said. According to the American Foundation for Suicide Prevention (AFSP), “suicide and mental health issues do not discriminate, and so it is imperative that we take an uncompromisingly anti-racist approach to improve access to culturally informed, evidence-based quality mental health care”. Goff said she hoped Kryst’s death would not be in vain, and called on the media and those on social media who “thrive on negativity without fully realizing the potential real world harm it does …to take this conversation seriously and inspire all of us to work together to become part of the solution instead of the problem”. Stephanie Dunivan, a vice-president at Essence who met Kryst at a cover shoot for the magazine in 2019, said Kryst was “beautifully articulate” and broke the stereotype of how people think of beauty queens. “She was absolutely stunning and gorgeous having a law degree and standing up for civil rights was definitely beyond skin, deep of what the stereotype of how people even think of beauty queens,” Dunivan said. The significance of having three Black beauty queens in what had otherwise been a euro-centric sphere, and for Kryst to wear her hair naturally, was of “huge significance”, said Dunivan. California’s Crown Act (SB 188), which prohibits discrimination based on hair style and hair texture, had only recently passed, the first of a national roll-out of similar measures. “Seeing that upheld in something as mainstream as a beauty pageant was super significant because there was a thought that natural hair was not professional and not glamorous. She was breaking the ceiling on how we categorize our natural hair, a moment where we can be celebrated as our truest selves and being put in a winning position,” she added. Dunivan is cognizant that Kryst’s story is not exceptional in any grand sense – she faced many of the challenges of her gender and race, and some perhaps more acutely given the curse of hers or any public profile. “My challenge of the status quo certainly caught the attention of the trolls,” Kryst mentioned in an essay published by Allure magazine. In the piece, she reflected on the challenges of growing older and challenging thinking about women’s appearances and opinions. “A grinning, crinkly-eyed glance at my achievements thus far makes me giddy about laying the groundwork for more, but turning 30 feels like a cold reminder that I’m running out of time to matter in society’s eyes – and it’s infuriating,” she wrote. “After a year like 2020, you would think we’d learned that growing old is a treasure and maturity is a gift not everyone gets to enjoy.” Dunivan said additional pressure is placed on women of color in terms of performance professionally and in terms of beauty and presentation. “There’s this trope that we feel like we have to live up to is this strong Black woman archetype. But it leaves us being seen by the world as someone that doesn’t need to be protected, that does not need support. It often leaves us in a place where we don’t feel like we have room to break down or be weak. And I think that is actually to the detriment of our mental well-being.” The other aspect, she says, is that women of color often feel that they have to perform better than others just to be seen as adequate. “It’s an astronomical amount of pressure from both of those ends – and being the first generation to get a seat at the table and often being the only one. The pressure is not just representing yourself, being as excellent and competing with yourself, you’re also representing your whole community,” she said. Still, with so little known, it may be better to return to Kryst’s accomplishments. After she won her pageant title, she remarked to CNN: “People didn’t think, ‘Oh, that’s enough [Black winners]. It’s still possible for us to be successful on your own merit. And it doesn’t matter if you look like the last winner, [if] you look like the last three. If you’re the best, you’re the best, and you can win.” • This article was amended on 7 February 2022 to remove a quote from Miss Universe 2019, Zozibini Tunzi, which was wrongly attributed to Kryst. • In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is at 800-273-8255 and online chat is also available. You can also text HOME to 741741 to connect with a crisis text line counselor. In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.orgAs usual, he was acting the stunt. Early in the morning on the day of the 2010 election, Nigel Farage turned up at an airfield in Northamptonshire, near to the constituency he was contesting. He was wearing his typical pin-striped suit and a rosette in the plum-and-custard colours of his party. He boarded a two-seater plane, the idea being that it would trail a banner bearing the slogan “VOTE FOR YOUR COUNTRY – VOTE UKIP”. Farage wanted to fly in the passenger seat, even though no one would be able to see him from the ground and the TV companies never broadcast campaign stunts on polling day. You can’t just stick a big banner on the back of a small aircraft. The plane had to take off, gain some height and then make a deep dive in order to use a grappling hook to grab the banner from between two poles. The pilot finally managed to attach the banner at the fifth attempt only for it to become entwined in the tail and rudder. The aircraft was soon plunging towards the earth at 80mph. “Oh fuck!” cried Farage. He closed his eyes just before impact, convinced he was about to die. The plane smashed into a field, nose first and inverted. When Farage opened his eyes, he was upside down, his face was almost touching the ground and his blood was dripping on to the grass. Another few inches and he would have been dead. It is smart of Michael Crick to place this near-death experience at the beginning of a gripping and vivid biography. What better illustration that random quirks of fate can change the destiny of nations. Our recent history would have been very different had Farage died that day. Without him, it is much less likely that Ukip would have been transformed from an eccentric fringe into an insurgent force that felt so threatening to the Conservative party that David Cameron was panicked into pledging a referendum on British membership of the EU. Absent that referendum, there would have been no Brexit. Labour would not have seen its electoral coalition split and smashed at the 2019 election, moderate Tories would not have been purged from their party and the UK would not have become so bitterly divided. Absent Brexit, the premierships of Theresa May and Boris Johnson might well never have happened. No cabinet minister, and arguably no prime minister, of recent times has been so consequential as Farage, a feat the more remarkable because he has many times failed to get himself elected as a Westminster MP. Crick is a highly accomplished biographer whose previous subjects include Jeffrey Archer and Alex Ferguson. One of his missions here is to examine what fuelled “the extraordinary story of one of the most important politicians of modern British history”. The answer is that Farage’s personality is essentially driven by his lusts and the greatest of them are his cravings for fame, money and sex. The desire for the spotlight was inherited from his parents. His mother, Barbara, was a vivacious character. In her late 60s and early 70s, she would strip off and pose for fundraising calendars in the style of Calendar Girls. His stockbroker father, the flamboyantly named Guy Justus Oscar Farage, was known as a great storyteller and the best-dressed man on the Stock Exchange. He was also an absentee dad who left the family when Nigel was just five. The trauma of a missing parent is often in the background of politicians who are desperate for adulation. At the age of 10, he arrived at Dulwich College, a public school in an affluent area of south-east London, where he made a name for himself as a yob with a gob. He and many other boys would get to the school by train. One contemporary recalls being “in awe” of the young Farage’s ability to project spittle across two sets of tracks and hit travellers on the opposite platform. On journeys to the school, the Dulwich boys would take over an empty compartment, wait until the train reached a tunnel, throw the lightbulbs out of the window and “have a massive punch-up in the dark”. The Bullingdon Club would have been proud of them. Around the age of 16, he experimented with a more dandyish persona, turning up for school in a look-at-me striped blazer, walking around with an old-fashioned cane and keeping a box of snuff. There were highly academic boys at Dulwich College. Around a third of the sixth form went on to either Cambridge or Oxford. Farage was not among them. After mediocre A-level results, he eschewed university altogether. It is my thought (not the author’s) that this helps to explain his contempt for expertise, a Brexiter trait that is especially pronounced in his case. Richard North, an aide to Farage when he was an MEP, tells Crick that his boss hated policy meetings. “He was totally out of his bloody depth. Intelligent people – he was scared of them. He has an inferiority complex about education and highly qualified people.” While most of his contemporaries took degrees, he became a trader on the London Metal Exchange with the fierce ambition to make “a lot of money”. Another attraction was the many opportunities to indulge in a PFL– a “Proper Fucking Lunch” or “Proper Farage Lunch”. Though his childhood had been blighted by his father’s alcoholism, one of Farage’s conceits is that he can consume prodigious amounts of booze without wrecking himself. Many of the stories in this book, especially the more hilarious or appalling ones, are lubricated with oceans of alcohol. He had a scare when cancer attacked his left testicle and it had to be removed. His consultant warned him that it was very likely that he would have secondary tumours in his stomach and lungs. As it turned out, the cancer had not spread. When the oncologist turned up in Farage’s room to break the good news, he found him smoking, drinking and on the phone placing bets as he watched horse racing on TV. Crick, who has an acute eye for turning points, identifies this brush with mortality as an intensifier of Farage’s urge to go into politics. The United Kingdom Independence party, famously decried by Cameron as a bunch of “fruitcakes, loonies and closet racists”, had a record of abject electoral failure at this point. It was a small pond for a hungry shark. But it proved to be the perfect vehicle for Farage. In the 1990s, Ukip was populated with men wearing Bomber Command ties. As Crick writes: “Farage, the public school-educated City trader from the borders of London and Kent – a man who loved golf, cricket and fishing, and pottering about first world war battlefields – fitted that southern middle-class profile perfectly.” He soon established himself as the party’s most effective speaker and most tireless campaigner. The initial breakthrough was the 1999 elections to the European parliament, which saw Farage and two other kippers become the party’s first ever MEPs. The limelight beckoned. His debut appearance on the BBC’s Question Time came in 2000 and Crick quotes analysis that he has since been on the programme more frequently than anyone else in politics. This was not because the production team were secret Farageistes, but because the party’s other MEPs were hopeless communicators, while he could be guaranteed to spout often outrageous polemic to the delight of sympathisers and the enragement of the many who were learning to loathe him. Being an MEP proffered opportunities to satisfy his other appetites. Just because his speeches depicted the EU as a corrupt racket leeching off ordinary folk didn’t mean he wasn’t going to make the most of the salary and allowances. “I reckon this job in sterling terms is worth over a quarter of a million pounds a year,” he once declared. “That is what you’d need to earn working for Goldman Sachs or someone like that.” He and other members of the Ukip cadre drank and feasted for England. One favourite restaurant in Strasbourg was À la Tête de Lard (literally, the Pig’s Head). The drinking would go on until three in the morning and sometimes Farage never made it to bed. Colleagues who fell out with him later told stories of champagne being glugged in lapdancing clubs. Crick produces a lively chapter about Farage’s hectic sex life. “Anything in a skirt he would be after,” remarks North. “He’d shag anything that let him.” Though Ukip had banned its MEPs from using their staffing allowances to employ relatives, Farage was publicly accused in the parliament chamber of spending taxpayers’ money on salaries for both his second wife (subsequently separated) and a former mistress. This generated embarrassing headlines. So did the jailing of several Ukip MEPs for fraud. Rancorous feuds and expulsions regularly convulsed the party, often triggered by Farage’s intolerance of anyone who might compete for the spotlight. The affable pint-supper of a thousand pub-based photo opportunities ruthlessly purged internal critics and potential rivals. Yet none of this impeded the party’s momentum. Ukip voters either didn’t know or didn’t care that the party was scandal-ridden. It was an instrument, successfully weaponised by Farage’s grievance-stoking rhetoric, to express their discontent with the status quo. Brexit would not have happened without him, but it is wrong to say that it happened only because of him. The result could have been very different had the foolish Cameron not chosen exactly the wrong time to call the referendum and had not the opportunist Johnson decided to be a Leaver because it best served his leadership ambitions. Comprehensively researched, fluently written and brimming with both funny stories and jaw-dropping ones, this is the best biography of Farage that will be written. My one complaint is that Crick is so keen to be fair-minded that he is too crimped about making judgments. Take the issue of Farage and racism. The book explores his fascination with Enoch Powell, the entanglements with figures from the far right and the alliances with extremist parties in the European parliament. It chronicles the many occasions, going all the way back to his school days, when Farage has been accused either of outright racism or legitimising it. One of many examples was the notorious Breaking Point poster at the climax of the referendum campaign that Farage launched just 90 minutes before the murder of the Labour MP Jo Cox by a white supremacist. The book also rehearses Farage’s objections to being called a racist and his claims to be “extremely upset” by the accusation. It is too limp of the author not to come to his own conclusion. “Egotism, arrogance, duplicity, dishonesty, hypocrisy, all are attributes Nigel Farage has in abundance,” writes Crick, but weakens this punch by adding “so do many other successful politicians, not least our prime minister”. He is more nervous than a biographer ought to be about delivering a verdict on what his subject has done to Britain, writing: “Quite how far-reaching Farage’s legacy will be – how damaging or beneficial, or a combination thereof – it’s far too soon to judge.” No, it isn’t. He played an instrumental role in polarising Britain in the most toxic way and urging this country into its worst strategic mistake since the 1930s. And all because he wanted attention. • Andrew Rawnsley is Chief Political Commentator of the Observer • One Party After Another: The Disruptive Life of Nigel Farage by Michael Crick is published by Simon &amp; Schuster (£25). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply“I had a unique touch. Absolutely unique. They came up to me. They came up to me and said they were grateful. Champagne we had that night. The lot.” No, this was not Prime Minister Johnson speaking of the now notorious birthday party that was in breach of his own lockdown rules that we in the rest of the country were observing. This is Stanley, the character whose birthday it is in Harold Pinter’s macabre comedy The Birthday Party. During his subsequent party, Stanley has a rough time. In my view, Johnson should have been having a rough time for a series of episodes that have been well covered in the media, even if, like Stanley, the prime minister affected to be surprised by his own birthday party. Let them eat cake … Let’s face it: what the Conservative party is now tying itself in knots over is how to handle the realisation that the leader they did not trust, but who gave them a resounding election victory, has been found out as an amoral scoundrel by a largely law-abiding electorate – to say nothing of the rest of the world, in whose eyes he is a laughing stock. Our so-called leader has besmirched the reputation of this once widely admired nation. I know I am far from alone in finding the daily spectacle of this grotesque government’s antics sickening – yes, sickening. Winning that last election was not quite the Johnsonian triumph it was held out to be. Frankly – and I know this will offend many Labour voters, who saw lots in the Corbyn programme that they liked – it was to a very considerable extent an anti-Corbyn election. Indeed, one of the great ironies of recent politics is that the victorious, low-tax Johnsonian Tories have been racking up public spending, not least on account of Covid, to levels only dreamed of by Corbyn. But such spending nowhere near deals with the fundamental economic problems facing society. Not to put too fine a point on it, the leader who “got Brexit done” has, in that very act, been hoist with his own petard. This was illustrated last week in those two major announcements: first about the so-called “levelling up” agenda by Michael Gove; and, secondly, by the chancellor, with his package to alleviate energy costs. There was a slight problem with the levelling-up programme. It is called money. There are no new funds, just a relabelling of previous announcements – announcements whose contents nowhere near made up for a decade of austerity. The hit to this economy from, wait for it, “getting Brexit done” is enormous. The Office for Budget Responsibility’s estimate of a 4% annual reduction to our national income and output from Brexit has not, to my knowledge, been seriously questioned. That figure is a macro number that is the sum of the myriad hits to our productivity – the monumental rise in wasteful extra bureaucratic documentation; the Brexiters’ failure to “regain control”; the lorry queues on the Dover road. Recent studies indicate that manufacturing output has been badly hit by the barriers created by the self-harm of Brexit – barriers which are especially harmful to the small and medium-sized businesses the Tories affect to favour. But then, this is no longer the Conservative party: it is the English National party. After years of relative economic decline vis-a-vis our European neighbours, we entered what was then the European Economic Community in 1973 for good economic reasons. Our average growth rate increased. With Brexit, this benighted country has in effect voted to go back to the path of relative economic decline. For instance: why is Sunak so desperate that he has to go ahead with imposing a national insurance levy on already struggling households? Why is he so severely inhibited in the degree of relief he can offer to a nation hit by such a dramatic surge in gas prices? Why is Gove’s budget for levelling up so pitifully limited? The answer is that the Brexit those charlatans sold to a gullible public has lopped tens of billions of pounds off the Treasury’s potential tax revenues. Now, a past Conservative leader who would put Johnson, and indeed the rest of this cabinet, in the shade was Harold Macmillan. He was fond of quoting the poet Hilaire Belloc: “Always keep a-hold of Nurse/For fear of finding something worse.” I should not compare Johnson to a nurse. But the modern Conservative party is now in the hands of extremists. In the interests of common decency, Johnson has to go. But, alas, he has so soiled the party that there is no guarantee, in terms of policy, that he may not be followed by “something worse”. O tempora, O mores!The US has suffered 900,000 deaths from Covid-19, the highest figure of any nation. The death toll would be equivalent to the 15th most populous city in the country, more than San Francisco, Washington DC or Boston – a city of ghosts with its population swelling each day. It’s not just the total numbers. America also has the highest death rate of any wealthy country, with half of the deaths occurring after vaccines became available. The US has never responded to the Covid pandemic in a sustained, proactive way as a unified nation. Instead, much of the responsibility – and blame – has fallen on individuals. In a country with vast income inequality, poor health and sharp political divides, the results have been grim. “All of those factors put people at higher risk of Covid death,” said Megan Ranney, emergency physician and academic dean of public health at Brown University. Vaccinations, in particular, have lagged, especially compared with other wealthy countries. The health system was already precarious when it began to be battered by wave after wave of Covid. Other countries with similarly high death tolls earlier in the pandemic have seen fewer fatalities from the Omicron variant – yet in the US, the Omicron death toll is surpassing the Delta wave of autumn 2021. Last month was one of the deadliest of the entire pandemic. Meanwhile, American leaders are attempting to mimic other countries’ return to normal, despite a markedly different situation with hospitalizations and deaths – which, every day, nearly reach the losses from the September 11 terrorist attacks. “The first and most obvious [issue] is our vaccination and booster rate,” said Ranney. “Our rate of vaccination, period, is lower than in most other high-income countries, and our booster rate is lower as well. And as ample CDC data proves, vaccines and boosters are tremendously effective at protecting against death, even with Omicron.” Less than two-thirds – about 64% – of Americans are vaccinated, and only 48% of those are boosted, despite ample vaccine supply. “For a country which has a vaccines-only strategy, we’re not very good at vaccination,” said William Hanage, associate professor of epidemiology at the Harvard TH Chan School of Public Health and co-director of the Center on Communicable Disease Dynamics. “There are large parts of the country which are not vaccinated to higher levels … and that’s made worse by the fact that with Omicron, to get really good protection, you also need to be boosted.” Problems with access to vaccines linger, too. Better-off people have had plenty of opportunities to be vaccinated, but those in poorer households still struggle to get vaccines – and time off to recover from any side effects. Some 15% to 20% of unvaccinated Americans say they are still interested in getting their shots, Hanage said – they simply haven’t been able to yet. Meanwhile, poorer unvaccinated people also face a “double whammy” because they are also more likely to contract Covid, he said. “You have people who are more likely to be exposed to the virus, who are less likely to receive vaccines, who are less likely to be able to take steps to protect themselves even with vaccination, because they’re scared of missing a paycheck, they’re scared of taking a day off, their employer won’t let them.” The US is the most economically unequal of G7 countries, and it offers no guaranteed sick leave. “The absence of paid sick leave is an absolute scandal,” Hanage said. “If you care about working people, give them sick leave. That sick leave will enable them to avoid infecting others, it will enable them to help protect workplaces – it’s just a no-brainer.” Another reason for the disparate outcomes in the US is the fractured healthcare system. People who lack health insurance tend to wait longer to be seen by physicians, making worse outcomes more likely. They are also more likely to have pre-existing health conditions that put them at greater risk for Covid. “There are lots and lots of ways in which societal inequities are mirrored and magnified in our death rates,” Ranney said. “With Covid, there is now no longer any way to cover up all of these underlying problems, and the impact of those problems got magnified because many of the social supports which allowed us to muddle through were no longer present.” The US also has higher rates of death from opioids and gun violence, and lower rates of life expectancy, than similar countries. Hospital overcrowding is also higher in the US than other countries, Ranney said. “Overcrowding correlates with poor outcomes for multiple types of diseases and injuries,” she said. “And there’s been preliminary data that people are more likely to die of Covid when there’s a higher number of Covid patients in the hospital or when ICUs [intensive care units] are overwhelmed.” One predictor of Covid deaths by country is trust in government, according to a recent report in the Lancet: countries with lower levels of trust in government had higher rates of cases and deaths. “If you don’t trust the government, you’re less likely to follow suggestions or mandates around lockdowns, early on, or masks. And then the lack of trust also impairs governments’ ability to do important things like masking or testing or good data acquisition,” Ranney said. Only 25 US states share reliable data on cases by age, which makes it difficult to know how many children are sick, for instance. “And then that hurts our ability to put data-driven public health measures in place, and then people don’t follow the public health measures, because they don’t trust them. And it becomes this circular problem,” Ranney said. National leaders in the US are unable to mandate precautions, like masks or vaccines, for the entire country, with responsibilities largely falling instead to state and local leaders. Yet leaders have seen their ability to act during health emergencies limited even more during the pandemic, with more than half of US states introducing new limits on public health powers. “There is a constituency within the US that is beginning to look at this and see this opportunity,” Hanage said. “A lot of that comes down to: how much illness and death will people accept?” Those who are interested in limiting public health regulations “are looking at this and thinking, whoa, a significant fraction of the population is fine with 900,000 deaths”. There is still time to change course and prevent future losses, Ranney said. “I do think that there’s a chance to create a better future,” she said, noting that leaders can “use this moment to build up the infrastructure that is needed, so if and when there is another variant or some other acute epidemic, we have the system in place to address it”. But the US reaction to the pandemic is also compounded by an American sense of exceptionalism. “It’s a very American idea to suggest that reality is what you want it to be. You can be whoever you want to be. Reality is a real thing, though. The virus doesn’t care who you are,” Hanage said. “It only cares that it can infect you.”Food There may not be a significant gastronomic tradition here, but certain foods should not be missed. Buy local cheeses saint-marcellin and bleu du vercors-sassenage at Les Alpages, run by master fromager Bernard Mure-Ravaud. Grenoble is famous for walnuts – made into oil, liqueur, pastries – and local producers can be found at Le Montagnard in the covered food market, Halles Sainte-Claire. There is only one Michelin-starred restaurant in town: chef Stéphane Froidevaux offers an affordable brasserie menu at lunchtime and fine dining in the evening at his sumptuous villa, Le Fantin Latour. But young chefs working with organic, seasonal products are emerging at contemporary bistronomique addresses such as Le Rousseau. Inspiration I often go on my own to the landmark Musée de Grenoble: it’s one of France’s finest art museums, opened in 1798. Its outstanding collection includes masterpieces such as Le Boeuf Écorché by Soutine and Matisse’s Intérieur aux Aubergines. There are also works by Flemish grand masters and local painter Henri Fantin-Latour. Ten minutes’ walk from the centre, Musée Dauphinois, dedicated to our region, was created by André Malraux in an old convent. It has my favourite view over the city, and was an inspiration for me to try to do the same with our HQ, the Sainte-Cécile convent. Neighbourhood The Quartier des Antiquaires is one of Grenoble’s oldest neighbourhoods, right in the historic centre. Our publishing house and the offices of Fondation Glénat are right here in the 17th-century Couvent Sainte-Cécile. I bought and renovated this former Bernadine convent 10 years ago, when the neighbourhood was run down, and we’ve brought the Antiquaires back to life. The foundation hosts concerts, exhibitions and permanently displays a large collection of Rembrandt engravings. Visitors wandering the narrow streets will discover not just antique shops, galleries, fashion and design stores, but an artisan chocolate maker, Le Caraque Chocolatier, a wine shop, Le Zinc, stocking 1,000 wines, and my favourite bistro for hearty local cuisine, Café de France. Green space Grenoble is a pioneering ecological city, with a Green party mayor and is this year’s European Green Capital. We have very few green spaces in the city – though the Grenoblois will tell you green spaces are all around us, beginning six miles away, in the three surrounding massifs: Vercors, Chartreuse and Belledonne. Take the cable car above the city centre to the towering Bastille fort to see this natural panorama. In winter, the Chamrousse ski station is 30 minutes’ drive away, offering spectacular night skiing high above Grenoble. Back in town, I have a soft spot for our tiny Jardin des Plantes, a botanical garden with a quaint natural history museum. Nightlife This is a university city, and nightlife begins with early evening happy hours. Certain streets and squares are packed out till the early hours. Expect pubs rather than old-fashioned bistros because what is popular here is craft beer, with dozens of microbreweries, whose ales are apparently superior quality because of the quality of the water. Shady Place de Berulle boasts Shakesbeer, the Belgian bar Brugs, and one of our many Irish pubs. Brasserie Neptune makes small-batch beers, so the menu changes every month. The municipal theatre has a dynamic arts programme, and more alternative performances take place in La Belle Électrique, in the old industrial quarter of Bouchayer-Viallet. Stay The comfortable Grand Hôtel (doubles from €90) is right in the centre, with reasonably priced rooms. It’s where I put up visiting authors. Jacques Glénat has always kept the headquarters of his French publishing empire, Editions Glénat, in his native Grenoble. He has also set up a cultural institute, Fondation Glénat, in the cityThe signs are painted on every wall and hang from every lamp-post of this small Gujarat village. “Easy Canada visa, student and immigration,” states one. “Study in Canada, free application, spouse can apply,” claims another. Indeed, in Dingucha, a village in rural west India, almost every house now has a family member either in Canada or the USA. It was a fact they used to proudly shout from the rooftops; but now, the village has fallen silent. Ask people about their relatives in north America – particularly the journey they took to get there – and they shrug their shoulders and walk off nervously. It was a family of four – Jagdish Patel, 39, his wife Vaishali, 37, 11-year-old daughter Vihangi and three-year-old son Dharmik – who set off from Dingucha on 10 January, with Canada visitor visas stamped in their passports. They landed in Toronto on 12 January. Patel called his father and cousin back in India to let them know that it was cold, but they were all fine and in a hotel. Six days later, the young family arrived in Emerson, a tiny town on the Canada-US border where night-time temperatures regularly drop below -35 degrees centigrade in the winter. It appears they were dropped off at a nearby point in brand new coats and gloves, and then began making the treacherous journey to America on foot, in the pitch dark, through what one local described as a freezing, “lunar-like landscape”. The next night, the Patel family were discovered frozen to death in the snow, 12 metres away from the US border. The “mind-blowing tragedy” – as it was described by Canadian prime minister Justin Trudeau – has thrown a spotlight on the many Indians who continue to embark on often treacherous journeys to North America. Though India is developing fast, it is also plagued by sluggish economic growth, low wages and a lack of employment opportunities that have led to an ongoing jobs crisis. In January riots broke out in the Indian state of Bihar when around 10 million people applied for 40,000 jobs on the railways. Over 75% of the population is still employed in the informal sector, where people earn only a few hundred rupees a day and there is no job security or benefits. In the formal sector, the unemployment rate has recently hit 8% as increasing numbers are going into higher education but failing to find non-blue collar jobs once they leave. Though Gujarat, the state where Patel lived, has the lowest unemployment rate in the country, 95% of the jobless are educated. In Dingucha, most still make their living from farming fruit, wheat, cotton and spices. But Patel, who was the son of a farmer, was educated and before the pandemic had worked at a school in nearby Gandhinagar. However, over the last two years, after the school closed, he had moved his family back into his parent’s home in Dingucha and helped out in his brother’s garment factory and on his father’s farm. Dingucha village head Mathur Ji Thakor, 64, described Patel as a “nice quiet man, very honest, a hard worker.” “His livelihood seemed fine, but many people in our village have gone to Canada and the US and live good lives there, earning good money,” said Thakor. “So that’s probably where he got the idea from.” According to villager, Patel’s uncle and cousins lived in the US. The news of Patel’s death has been greeted by a nervousness that the booming local business of facilitating visas to the US and Canada is now under international scrutiny. Agents, who charge vast sums, help people obtain visitor visas or student visas at dubious institutions in Canada, which they then illegally overstay. For those wishing to enter the US, the usual route is to go via Mexico or Canada and illegally cross the land border. By local estimates, more than 2,000 people from Dingucha have over the decades have gone to the US and Canada, and the money they have sent back has built several temples, the water tower, a school and multi-storey residences. “The whole village is scared that because of this incident, their relatives in America and Canada will be found and deported, so everyone has been told to shut their mouths,” said one village resident. Patel’s cousin Jaswant Patel claimed to know few details. “It was only when Jagdish arrived in Canada that he called me,” he said. “He sounded happy on the phone but he did not mention plans to go on to America.” Due to the high cost of flying home the bodies, the family would be buried in Canada, he added. But locals said that the high cost of paying an agent to facilitate these journeys to north America usually meant the whole family was involved in loaning the money. According to a Dingucha resident who had previous experience with the local visa agents, the standard cost for a family of four to get to the US is 16.5m rupees (£164,000) – a staggering sum, particularly for a rural farming community. However, Patel’s father, a farmer, is said to have paid half the sum in cash for his son’s travel to the US and the other half in the form of 20 acres of land. The agents are now the focus on an investigation by India’s central Crime Investigation Department, who this week sent officers from the anti-human trafficking unit to the towns and cities around Dingucha where these agents operate. In the US and Canada, 13 agents allegedly facilitating illegal trafficking from India have been detained. Anil Pratham, assistant director general of police in Gandhinagar, Gujarat’s capital, said they were “still waiting for information from the Canadian authorities” about the identities of seven other Gujaratis, said to be from villages neighboruing Dingucha, who were rescued alive a few miles way from the Patel family. Police in Canada at first said the victims found in the blizzard included a boy in his teens and a baby, but Indian consular officials later confirmed the Patels’ identity. (The Royal Canadian Mounted Police did not respond to repeated requests for an explanation of the inaccurate initial report.) While Canadian officials have said they hope the tragedy that befell the Patels would ward off those thinking about making the illegal journey, the appetite in Dingucha for a future in Canada or the US appeared not have waned. Ashok Prajapati, 53, a local artist, said he hoped to send both his children to Canada, and that his 18-year-old son was currently waiting to hear about a student visa. “Everybody who is smart is trying to go,” he said. • This article was amended on 6 February 2022. An earlier version gave the figure of “16.5bn rupees” in relation to the cost of US visas for a family, when 16.5m rupees was meant.Adeel Akhtar was living in a van, wondering if he should move back in with his parents. It was 2010. He’d recently appeared in Four Lions, the Chris Morris satire, in which he plays a Muslim extremist who, in an uncanny set of events, blows himself up in a Yorkshire sheep field. The film had been successful. (The New York Times called it “stiletto sharp”.) But it did not immediately become the career tipping point Akhtar hoped it might. So there he was: 30 years old, not well off, suffering after the break-up of a “messy” relationship, recording audition tapes from his van. The work had dried up, but he wasn’t hustling. Even when he got a gig, he sometimes wouldn’t bother learning his lines. “What is that?” he asks now. “Why would a person not apply themselves?” He shakes his head. “I don’t know. I suppose a not-nice way of looking at my younger self is that I was lazy.” Akhtar does not seem lazy now. A few days before we meet, in a mid-market café near his south London home, he won Best Actor at the British Independent Film Awards, for his role in Ali &amp; Ava, a Clio Barnard film about forbidden love. Akhtar plays Ali, a British Asian man – irrepressible, distressed, permanently on the edge of euphoria or breakdown – who falls for an older white woman. The film is set in and around the housing estates of Bradford, and across social and racial divides. At the awards ceremony, Akhtar praised Barnard for presenting ordinary lives as extraordinary, and for “looking at people who are traditionally overlooked”. This was important, he said, particularly for him, because, “I’m one of them.” Akhtar has made a successful career out of channelling and elevating the circumstances of underrepresented people, and of capturing the grace and power in everyday actions, even when those actions are questionable. When I ask him about being normal, he says plainly, “Well, I am that.” This is partly because of how he looks: the hangdog face, the dark eyes, a twinkly smile. But also because he understands that even in the smallest lives there are things at stake – a truth he holds dear. “There’s something that makes me realise that we need to see the world we’re living in as full and beautiful,” he says. In 2017, he became the first non-white man to win a Lead Actor Bafta, for his role in Murdered By My Father, a TV drama about arranged marriage in which he is by turns tender and maniacal. (He had already been Bafta-nominated for Utopia, the Dennis Kelly drama.) He’s since appeared in a string of A-list films and television series: as a compromised doctor in Sweet Tooth, the Netflix series; as brother to Kumail Nanjiani in The Big Sick; as a kindly neighbour in Back to Life, the Daisy Haggard comedy. It is likely you recognise him even if you aren’t part of the subset that already considers him a household name. When Haggard first approached him, she assumed he would be too busy to talk. “I ended up writing him a letter,” she told me. “I thought, well, it’s worth a shot.” When he said yes, she was amazed, and she began to jump up and down. On set, Akhtar would “do all these lovely things,” Haggard recalled, “and I’d think, ‘Oh, that’s gorgeous, I definitely didn’t write that.’” When I ask Akhtar how he became all but homeless at 30, he veers off on a mazy tangent that is difficult to follow but fun to listen to – he doesn’t so much answer questions as use them as platforms for thought. After a few minutes he rolls his eyes and says, softly, “This is all to answer why I was living in a van.” “You’re getting there,” I say. “I’m getting there,” he agrees, adding, “Stories go on a bit longer than they should.” Akhtar talks so much and so intensely that, at functions, his wife, Alexis Burke, a director, will amble over to whoever he is chatting to and say, “He’s doing it again, isn’t he?” The actor Claire Rushbrook, who co-stars in Ali &amp; Ava, describes Akhtar as kind and playful as well as “cerebral” and “complex” – someone who becomes easily lost in thought. (“It’s hard to pin him down,” she told me.) Deep conversation seems necessary for Akhtar to understand the world in relation to the work he is making. When we talk in the café, and later while we stroll through a nearby park, in and out of welcome sunshine, he shifts quickly through topics – Leonard Cohen’s views on grace (“I’ve been watching YouTube”), the “well of expression” to be found in New York, Zadie Smith on empathy – trying to find connections, which seems to me like a game he enjoys playing. Barnard told me, “He’s verbose and he’s funny,” adding, “His mind just moves into very unexpected places.” Our conversation turns repeatedly to race. In Ali &amp; Ava, Akhtar’s character must confront racism that has been passed down generationally, which he does smilingly, as though it can be rebuffed through kindness. (In one scene he makes a joke out of being attacked with a sword: “It’s like fucking Zorro in here!”) In real life, Akhtar has sometimes taken a similar approach. “I’ve had some hairy experiences,” he says. “And now I look back on them and wonder how I was able to normalise it.” In 2002, he was arrested and detained at a New York airport; he had been on his way to enrol at drama school and was mistaken for a terrorist. Later, during “the van years”, he wore a long beard that was yanked by a passerby in central London, resulting in “maybe my first fight”. Once, Akhtar and his wife were travelling up an escalator and came toward a group of men, “and all that nonsense started” – expletives, slurs. “You know, just this terrible shit you hear.” These were all experiences when “someone has done or said something,” Akhtar says. Nowadays he often finds racist events to be more subtle, a kind of casual racism, including “the feeling of walking into a situation where it’s less overt” but no less horrifying. He gives the example of planning a camping holiday with his family, “and we’ll be going to a particular place, and we’ll stop off at a pub somewhere, and… I don’t know if it’s me projecting my past experiences on to that situation, but there’s an…” He pauses. “An atmosphere,” I suggest. He nods. “An atmosphere.” Then he adds, kindly: “The majority of people are doing the best they can.” Given he was once misidentified as a terrorist and held at a New York airport, it is a remarkable coincidence that Akhtar played a 9/11 hijacker in his first film role. (That film, Let’s Roll: The Story of Flight 93, came out in 2002, the same year he was detained.) But, since then, Akhtar has mostly avoided being cast as racial stereotypes. On the role of British Asian actors in current cinema, he says, “I think we’re in an exciting time, aren’t we? You see more and more Asian faces in roles you wouldn’t have seen them in before. I think it’s slowly happening. But I think maybe we have to sort of embrace the idea, or the industry has to embrace the idea, of being non-traditional in certain ways. To take a risk. We’re not used to seeing that…” “It’s not often you see a British Asian man playing a romantic lead,” I say, of Ali &amp; Ava. “No,” he says. “Sure.” Akhtar accepts he cannot deny who he is and the way he looks. Nor should he be required to. “You want people to look at you and see your differences,” he says, of appearing onscreen. “And then you want them to stop paying attention to them,” so viewers can enter a space in which they can discover the attributes they share with his characters. It is Akhtar’s job to create that space, he says, when “you’ve sort of rejected the defined terms of how somebody expects you to be” and “scooped everyone in”. In this way, Akhtar’s roles are “about being Asian” and then “not about being Asian”, he says. “This puts him at odds with other male British Asian actors, including Riz Ahmed, with whom Akhtar appeared in Four Lions, and Dev Patel, who have argued publicly that the “promised land” for brown-skinned actors is to play characters whose skin colour isn’t a factor of their casting. Akhtar thinks, Why shouldn’t that be a part of how he presents? Or, to put it another way: “There should be no denial of anything.” Akhtar believes the film industry is at a point where Asian actors “can be afforded the space to do it all.” Ahmed is performing sci-fi; Patel is performing period drama. “We’re chipping away,” he says, though he admits, “We have to work harder to make it better. Maybe I just feel hopeful. That as long as we’re striving for it, it will happen.” “Are you hopeful, generally?” I ask. “My wife would say not.” “Why?” “Why? Let’s have a think. She’s the hopeful one out of the two of us.” Akhtar’s wife is a mixed heritage, Jewish woman from south London. “Maybe it’s because of our experiences growing up, you know?” Akhtar’s mother is from Kenya. His father is from Pakistan. They met at Heathrow airport, where they both worked for a while. When Akhtar was young, the family settled in a village in Buckinghamshire, around 20 miles west of central London. “When we moved, when I was really little, I had stones thrown at me,” he says. On one occasion, his mother, who had witnessed an attack, stormed to protect him, nudging him behind her and using her body as a barrier. “I remember the look on her face,” Akhtar says, “of her trying to work out how to be herself in an environment that was essentially… I mean, who knows why they threw stones? Maybe it was because we were Asian. Maybe I’d had an altercation with one of the kids.” His mother’s response has stayed with him. “What is it like for somebody to open their door and walk out into the street and suddenly the world they’re looking out on becomes inhospitable?” At the time, he remembers thinking, OK, this is never going to end. “There will always be this idea of her working out how she can best fit in. But when the hostility of a place is so ingrained in how you live your life, if the restrictions in which you’re living your life are habituated…” “You come to expect it,” I say. “A step further even,” he says. “There’s no expectation – there’s nothing. It just is.” Akhtar thinks of his parents’ cultural assimilation as a creative act. “The creative endeavour it takes to come to a country, to have a thought about who you’re going to be, and then to endow that thought with your will – to try to do something – is like a novelist looking at a blank page,” he says. “But we never look at that as being a creative expression.” Still, he hasn’t always seen eye to eye with them. Akhtar describes his father, an immigration lawyer, as “quite a strict fella”. As a young man, it was drilled into him that, “You’ve got to be better than the white people around you. You have to work harder,” a mentality he came to reject. He later dismissed his parents’ attempts to impose an arranged marriage. For a time, Akhtar studied law, at his father’s insistence, but he soon realised it was making him unhappy. “There was a chunk of my developmental understanding that was not there because I felt I had to do this thing” – to be another kind of person – but “you break out of that, and you re-enter the world, kind of through the back door.” When he began acting, Akhtar came across the idea that you could reach viewers “who have had similar experiences and say, ‘You are in the world. You are seen’.” The characters of Ali and Ava are based on real people. To prepare for his role, Akhtar listened to audio recordings of a Bradford man whom Barnard had wanted to create a character out of. “Clio calls it ‘bio-nonfiction’,” Akhtar says of their approach to making Ali &amp; Ava. (Both parties are aware the term “sounds like a washing detergent”.) “These are real people,” he continues – with real lives. But “we’re not just fictionalising it. We’re going to elevate it to a point of beauty.” Barnard developed the film with Akhtar in mind from the outset. “It kind of began with him,” she told me. “We built Ali together.” In the film’s early stages, Barnard and Akhtar talked and talked, and then talked some more. “A lot of in-depth, really careful thinking,” Barnard said. This seems to me like the Akhtar I meet. At the end of our conversation, having spoken for hours, he frowns and worries, “Was that a slog?” Truthfully, I say, “Not at all.” “I sort of went off piste a little bit,” he says. Then he starts talking about something else. Ali &amp; Ava will be released in UK and Irish cinemas on 4 March Stylist Sabina Emrit Harper; styling assistant Sacha William; grooming by Esztier Hercsik using Maria Nila, Oil Can Grooming and Benny Hancock for Men; photographer’s assistant Jack Somerset; retouching by Vahakn at the-retouchers.com; shot at the Lemonade FactoryTrees, eagles, bears, turrets and towers: passport designs used to follow certain conventions. Not any more. From Monday, all new Belgian passports will feature Tintin, the Smurfs and other heroes of Belgian comic-strip art. With a 34-page standard passport, Belgian travellers will be accompanied by Lucky Luke, Blake and Mortimer, and Bob and Bobette. Many images are from the original strips, such as the 1954 Tintin serial, Explorers on the Moon, where the intrepid boy reporter took his first steps on the lunar surface 15 years before Neil Armstrong. Others were specially designed for the passport, such as a Smurf contemplating a globe, with its knapsack and maps spread on the ground. “We have chosen a design that represents well our country, its arts and culture, with a touch of talent, expertise, humour and humility,” Belgium’s foreign minister, Sophie Wilmès, told the Francophone national broadcaster RTBF. Comic strips, or bande dessinée, celebrated in Belgium and France as “the ninth art”’, remain wildly popular, although no longer get the same space in daily newspapers as they did during their postwar heyday. Tintin, created by Georges Remi under the penname Hergé in 1929, was the first big hit. Soon after the second world war came Blake and Mortimer, an MI5 agent and nuclear physicist, two British gentleman in a permanent quest to outsmart the dastardly Colonel Olrik. In 1958 arrived a band of little blue people living in a mushroom village, dreamed up after the artist Pierre Culliford, who used the pseudonym Peyo, couldn’t remember the word for salt during a meal with a fellow cartoonist and asked for le schtroumpf, translated into English as “smurf”. Michel Kichka, a celebrated Belgian-Israeli cartoonist, said it was a wonderful idea to put comic-book characters into the passport. “These characters, and the spirit that they represent, are close to the heart of the Belgians,” he told the Observer. “They are a part of the way I draw today.” Growing up in the city of Liège, he dreamed of being a cowboy like Lucky Luke, whose wild west adventures featured in the bestselling Spirou magazine. “At a time when TV and screens were not so strong, I spent so many hours reading comics.” The classic Belgian comics had a particular look, even when compared to the French ones, he said. “In the golden age of Belgian comics in the 1960s, all the characters were cute and friendly, they were with humour and they were drawn in a soft style, which is different to the style today.” Border guards will be treated to the full richness of the Belgian passport. While the naked eye sees a silhouette of a scene, other details, such as facial expressions and textures are revealed only under UV light, a security feature. “There is a little bit of Belgian humour here,” Wouter Poels, a foreign ministry spokesman said. “It’s always nice if you can link what is functionable to something that is enjoyable. But a passport is and remains an administrative document,” he said referring to 48 new security features, such as barcodes, laser-engraved photographs and the polycarbonate ID page. The passport scenes are inspired by travel and unsurprisingly avoid controversies, such as Tintin in the Congo, which is no longer sold in children’s sections of bookstores in the UK over its racist stereotypes. Nor does Lucky Luke smoke a cigarette. The cowboy, created in 1947 by Maurice de Bevere, also known as Morris, quit in 1988. Passport expert Tom Topol said: “Until the early 21st century passports were boring… [but] in the last 20 years passport design is becoming fancier.” Estonia’s passport features a night sky that twinkles under a UV ray; Finland’s has a moose that runs as pages flick; Japan’s latest document features the Thirty-six Views of Mount Fuji series by Katsushika Hokusai, the renowned artist of the “floating world” school. “Yes, they look prettier, but the critical factor remains security,” Topol said, adding that it’s harder to forge or doctor complex designs. “Nowadays, a passport design with monotone graphic elements is just too simple.” But it is the design that has captured imaginations. “A reason to become Belgian,” tweeted one senior EU official in Brussels.Over the years, Damien Hirst has faced more than one accusation of copying someone else’s work, with artists variously claiming to have created his diamond skull, his medicine-cabinets and his spin-paintings before he did. The one-time enfant terrible of the British art world has always denied plagiarism, although he did go as far as saying in an interview in 2018 that “all my ideas are stolen anyway”. Now he is facing fresh allegations. His cherry blossom paintings in his latest exhibition, which has just closed in Paris, have prompted outrage from the English artist and writer Joe Machine, who says they look just like his own cherry blossom paintings. “I saw Hirst’s cherry blossom paintings and, for a moment, I thought I was looking at my own paintings,” Machine told the Observer. “His [work] is so very similar to mine. But I was doing my cherry blossom paintings years before his.” While acknowledging that Hirst’s paintings are not direct copies, he argued that “the very dark branches, the powder-blue skies and the blotches of pink blossom” are too similar to be a coincidence. After three years’ work, Hirst finished his Cherry Blossom series in November 2020 and the paintings will be exhibited in Japan from next month. Hirst has said that the exhibition’s subject matter was inspired partly by a memory of his mother painting a cherry tree in blossom when he was three or four. But Charles Thomson, the artist and co-founder of the Stuckists, an international group campaigning for traditional artistry, did a double-take when he first saw Hirst’s paintings: “I thought they were Joe’s – and then I realised they were Hirst’s. If people see Joe’s work, they’re going to think he’s copied Hirst.” He added: “Joe has made and displayed cherry blossom paintings since 2006. Hirst’s, in a similar style, were started in 2017. The overall appearance is similar – a structure of brown branches, vivid pink blossoms against clear blue sky. Both their paintings are not intended to be botanical studies, but use ‘splodges’ of paint to give an impression of blossom.” Thomson has conducted extensive research into Hirst, who won the Turner prize in 1995 and made his name with creations featuring dead sharks and cows. In 2010, Thomson described him as “a plagiarist in a way that would be totally unacceptable in science or literature”, having published a list of 15 plagiarism claims by fellow artists in The Jackdaw art magazine. They included one from Lori Precious, who arranged butterfly wings into mandala patterns before Hirst. Her butterflies had sold for £6,000 against Hirst’s version for £4.7m. In 2000, Hirst paid an undisclosed sum to head off legal action for breach of copyright by the designer and makers of a £14.99 anatomical toy, which bore a resemblance to his 20ft bronze sculpture, Hymn. Machine’s paintings have been shown in the Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool, among other venues, and he wonders whether Hirst saw his blossom paintings at the now-closed Tramshed, Shoreditch, where Hirst’s pickled animals in a massive vitrine, Cock and Bull, was a centrepiece. Referring to Hirst’s admission to “stealing” other people’s ideas, Machine said: “It’s not a joke to me. He might be able to be flippant about it, but I don’t steal other people’s work. I’m incensed.” Machine began painting cherry blossom as a response to his “criminal past”. “They’re a way of bringing beauty into my life.” He spoke openly of a violent upbringing in which he was exposed to stabbings and pub fights from an early age. He abandoned a life of crime years ago after becoming a father, he said. “No one ever taught me how to paint. It was my way of dealing with my own past. My involvement with art certainly saved my life. I would have ended up in prison or dead otherwise.” Hirst’s cherry blossom paintings have reportedly sold for up to about £2.5m. Machine’s sell for up to £10,000. David Lee, editor of The Jackdaw, said: “Where plagiarism is concerned, Hirst has a very long rap sheet. He’s even admitted to it, so it’s hard to give him the benefit of the doubt on any new occasion. Hirst’s versions look as though he may well have seen Machine’s pictures and the idea lodged in his suggestible head.” Hirst’s representatives were approached but declined to comment.“This is white people doing it to white people, so y’all gonna fight amongst yourselves.” Whoopi Goldberg’s comments on ABC’s The View about the Holocaust being not “about race” but “white on white” violence that exposed “man’s inhumanity to man” has drawn a slew of condemnation. She quickly put out an apology and, quoting Jonathan Greenblatt of the Anti-Defamation League (ADL), who pointed out that “the Holocaust was about the Nazi’s systematic annihilation of the Jewish people – who they deemed to be an inferior race”, she wrote: “I stand corrected.” Goldberg was not denying the Holocaust or the gravity of the catastrophe that befell Jewish people. The discussion was about a Tennessee school board that had removed from the curriculum Maus, a graphic novel about the Shoah. Goldberg mocked the censors for being more concerned about nudity and bad language than about the reality of genocide. This is what should really trouble us about Goldberg’s views – that someone who acknowledges the depth of the tragedy and wants to educate people about the Holocaust should so misunderstand it. Goldberg’s comments tell us something about the way we look at racism (and at Jews) in the present. They also tell us something about what we’ve forgotten about racism in the past. Racism today is viewed primarily through the lens of “whiteness” and of “white privilege”. It is something that white people dish out. And something from which non-whites suffer (unless you’re an Asian-American, in which case you are deemed to be almost white). Jews today are seen as white and privileged and so incapable of being victims of racism. It’s a perspective that has led some on the left to become blind to antisemitism. It’s also led many, like Goldberg, to deny the relationship between racism and the Holocaust. So deep does the elision of racism and whiteness run that even the ADL, a leading Jewish organisation, defined racism as “the marginalization and/or oppression of people of color based on a socially constructed racial hierarchy that privileges white people”. In the wake of the Goldberg controversy, the ADL changed to an “interim” definition. In a mea culpa blog post, Greenblatt acknowledged that its own understanding of racism had been “so narrow” that it had “alienated many people who did not see their own experience encompassed in this definition, including many in the Jewish community”. Goldberg’s comments illuminate not just the contemporary view of Jews but also the amnesia that exists about the historical use of racial categories. Race has never been simply about black and white. It’s a concept that has been used to deem certain people biologically incapable or unworthy of being equal. Over the past 200 years, not just black or Jewish people, but Irish, Slavs, even the working class have, at various times, been viewed as racially distinct and inferior. Given the controversy over Jimmy Carr’s routine, it’s worth remembering that the Roma were also seen as an inferior race, fit only for extermination. Defining a group as a distinct race became a means of justifying the practice of unequal treatment – that is, of racism. And of genocide, too. Ironically, given Goldberg’s views, there was a deep relationship between the Nazis’ treatment of Jews and American treatment of black people. Before the Holocaust, the key Nazi edicts that formalised the racial distinction between Aryans and Jews were the 1935 Nuremberg laws. These established that a “citizen is exclusively a national of German blood”, that Jews were not of “German blood” and that marriages and “extramarital intercourse” were forbidden between “Jews and citizens of German or racially related blood”. In 1934, the Nazi justice minister, Franz Gürtner, convened a special meeting to work out how to formulate a legal distinction between Aryan and Jew. They found their most useful source in America, whose racial concepts both intrigued and excited them. They were intrigued because a nation built on the idea of equality nevertheless was suffused with laws and practices that denied such equality on racial grounds. And they were excited because US law had managed to circumvent a problem with which the Nazis were wrestling: how to define racial distinctions in law when in science such distinctions seemed impossible to delineate. Nazi leaders, James Q Whitman notes in his book Hitler’s American Model, “regarded America, not without reason, as the innovative world leader in the creation of racist law”. “The dominant political ideology in the USA,” Herbert Kier wrote in an article in the 1934 National Socialist Handbook for Law and Legislation, was “liberal and democratic”. “With an ideology of that kind, which starts from the fundamental proposition of the equality of everything with a human countenance,” Kier continued, “it is all the more astonishing how extensive race legislation is in the USA.” He listed 30 US states that “forbid mixed marriages between white and colored races” and seemed astounded that races were segregated “even in prisons”. Heinrich Krieger, the most important Nazi scholar of American law, observed that Americans had created racial distinctions through “artificial line-drawing”. The problem the Nazis were debating – how to deal with “mongrels” or mixed-race individuals – was not an issue in the US. The “one-drop rule” – the belief that one drop of black blood made you unwhite – allowed Americans to create “two population groups: whites and coloreds” and arbitrarily assign people to one or other. Every US state, another lawyer, Roland Freisler, pointed out, had a different definition of what constituted “coloured”. Why, he wondered, should not German law also simply distinguish between Aryans and coloureds? “Every judge,” he reasoned, “would reckon the Jews among the coloureds, even though they look outwardly white.” The American south was not Nazi Germany, and however brutal the apartheid laws and racial terror that defined the Jim Crow era, it was not the precursor to mass extermination. Nevertheless, in recognising the distinctiveness of the Jewish Holocaust, we should also acknowledge the similarities in the racial ideas that permeated Nazi Germany and other western nations. Not to do so would be as misguided as failing to recognise the racial roots of the Holocaust. ABC has temporarily suspended Goldberg. It’s difficult to know why. Her comments were ill-considered, but spoken not out of malice but from a common misunderstanding about race. Too many in authority seem more eager to be seen punishing people for saying the wrong thing than in creating the conditions for a public conversation that can provide greater clarity. • Kenan Malik is an Observer columnistA leading medical charity has warned there is “insufficient evidence” for the use of £70 airways suction devices that are promoted online for saving children’s lives when they are choking. The suction-based devices are already used in care homes across the country and there is a campaign for them to be more widely available, but emergency doctors are concerned that families may be misled by some of the promotional material. They say there is a lack of objective research demonstrating that they are effective and warn they may delay other life-saving treatment. In its latest advice, Resuscitation Council UK, a charity that develops guidelines for health and care professionals, says the recommended treatment for choking includes back blows and abdominal thrusts. It acknowledges there are a number of suction-based airway clearance devices available in the UK, but says: “There is insufficient evidence on the safety or effectiveness of these devices for us to recommend their use, and we are concerned that the use of these devices could delay established treatments for choking.” There are about 300 deaths a year in the UK from choking, with most of the deaths among elderly people. The suction devices were mainly developed in the US and their use is widely based on case reports rather than any clinical trials. They are intended for use when other efforts to remove a blockage in an airway have failed. The two main brands of device, LifeVac and Dechoker, are registered in the UK as medical devices. The Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) has advised the companies that the devices should only be used by healthcare professionals or people with advanced life support training. It also says the devices should not be marketed for use on children. LifeVac Europe, which is based in the UK and is one of the leading companies in this sector, promotes its device for saving children’s lives around the world. Its Facebook page and UK website last week included anecdotal evidence of toddlers’ lives being saved by a LifeVac, including a three-year-old who was choking on a chicken nugget. The company is on a drive to convince regulators to relax the current restrictions in the UK, which it says do not apply in other countries. It denies the devices would delay other treatments because it says they are only intended to be used when all other efforts have failed and death is imminent. The company said last week it did not market its devices for children. Its devices are available online from a number of distributors, but the company says it asks buyers to confirm they are healthcare professionals or have advanced life support training before purchase. It also pointed out that children’s masks for the device were not sold to UK buyers, and said that research in peer-reviewed medical publications had demonstrated the effectiveness of the device in real-life situations. Dechoker UK does not promote its device in the UK for use on children. It said it considered more research was required on the efficacy of the devices, but pointed out there was also almost no clinical evidence on the effectiveness of back blows or abdominal thrusts for choking. It said it only sells its devices for use by care providers. A review on the effectiveness of anti-choking suction devices published in the medical journal Resuscitation in February 2020 said there were “many weaknesses in the data” in the research examining the use of such devices and “few unbiased trials” that have tested their effectiveness. The MHRA said LifeVac and Dechoker were registered with the agency and had agreed that the medical devices should not be used on children or marketed for that use. It said it was the responsibility of a manufacturer to ensure a device was marketed in line with its intended use. A spokesperson said: “If a user or member of the public has any concerns regarding the compliance of a specific medical device available on the UK market, we would ask that they report this to the MHRA.”It feels, sometimes, as though the path to equality is not just rocky or steep but, instead, a Mario-style platform game where there are crocodiles lurking in the gaps and certain blocks are designed to explode when you step on them. An example: for all this country’s smiling efforts at inclusivity, for all its rainbows hurriedly printed on hoardings and coffee cups, the barriers preventing female same-sex couples from having a family are as high and wide as ever. For those who have avoided the haunted rollercoaster that is fertility treatment in the UK, either by luck or choice, here are the facts: the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (Nice) guidelines state that funded access to IVF in England is available to women “who have not conceived after two years of regular unprotected intercourse or 12 cycles of artificial insemination (where six or more are by intrauterine insemination)”. So, if a woman in an opposite-sex relationship tells her GP they have been “trying” for a baby for two years they can access NHS-funded IVF treatment immediately. If a woman in a same-sex relationship tells her GP they have been “trying”, through whatever turkey baster means necessary, 80% of local clinical commissioning groups (CCGs choose how to delegate NHS funding in England) still require them to have up to 12 rounds of IUI to prove they can’t get pregnant (an irony traditionally glossed over politely). IUI costs anywhere up to £1,600 per cycle at a private clinic, meaning that with fees it’s not unusual for a same-sex couple to have to spend £20,000 and a year in clinical care, monthly excuses to your boss so you can slip away mid-morning to lie dreadfully in terribly lit clinics, nurses asking you to, “Just pop your clothes on the chair,” before being eligible for NHS treatment. The money – which represents two-thirds of the average UK salary, cash that straight couples might be using to buy a flat, or a car, or a series of marvellous “babymoons” in advance of the birth of the child they conceived on the sofa after watching Normal People – is boggling and disturbing, and inhibitory for most. It’s not the same everywhere in the UK – . Throughout Scotland, which is centrally funded, all same-sex couples can have six donor insemination cycles followed by three full IVF cycles if needed. But in England, all 106 CCGs ration access to NHS-funded fertility treatment, with more than a quarter (the Fertility Network revealed) denying access to same-sex couples altogether. Just eight allow same-sex couples to have NHS-funded fertility treatment directly. Fairness is so often an unhelpful word – a plate of dry meat, picked to the gristle. Especially when it comes to childbearing and rearing, when so many of us are in danger of breaking our necks looking over a shoulder at what our peers have got, and how, and how much, and how happily, and with what ease. But it is a fact that people are restricted from fertility treatments depending on who they love and where they live, their postcode deciding whether or not a child will be born. These details, flagged by the Fertility Network and Stonewall, and couples like Megan and Whitney Bacon-Evans who plan to sue their local NHS over what they claim is “IVF discrimination”, is not just unfair, but darkly telling. Treatments that aren’t seen as life-saving are all rationed on the NHS, but the arbitrary criteria at play here inevitably shows us something, something about who is seen to matter more. The wild costs of conceiving a child, the £20,000 investment required before they’ve even stepped foot in John Lewis’s buggy department, means it’s ruled out as an option for many same-sex couples. Which means fewer queer families, more discrimination for LGBTQ+ people, and less change. IVF is an opportunity to help people who want children but are having trouble conceiving; an opportunity that has the potential to promote equality and refocus our too-narrow ideas of what a family can be. And wouldn’t that improve all of our lives? Wouldn’t it improve the lives of everybody, gay or straight, who has lived in a family, or is creating a new one of their own, or is deep in the slimy weeds of somebody else’s; a move to broaden the image and expectations of what a family looks like? Its shape, its genders, the way it got here, the home it made. Surely the traditional family unit has damaged as many people as it has supported – surely now is the time to invest in and celebrate families who are helping to show that the walls of that structure were not load bearing. That they can be knocked through and rearranged without the house falling down. Email Eva at e.wiseman@observer.co.uk or follow her on Twitter @EvaWisemanElizabeth Ann is poised to make history. The world’s first cloned black-footed ferret has just celebrated her first birthday and has reached an age when she can start to breed. And, if she is successful and produces healthy kits, the little predator will give a precious boost to attempts to save her seriously endangered species. However, scientists acknowledge that they will have to be extremely careful in screening possible mates for Elizabeth Ann, who is being kept at a conservation centre near Fort Collins, Colorado. In particular, the male they eventually select will have to display one key quality, they say: he will have to be gentle. The black-footed ferret (Mustella nigripes) is not known for its sweet temper. Elizabeth Ann snarls at keepers who get too close, for example. However, the species is desperately in need of an injection of fresh genes and Elizabeth Ann can provide those, – as long as she survives the breeding encounter, say scientists. “When it comes to black-footed ferrets, the mating scenario can get a little rough and we don’t want Elizabeth Ann to be injured. She is precious,” Oliver Ryder, director of genetics conservation at San Diego Zoo, told the Observer. “So we need an experienced male who has already produced offspring and who is therefore not going to be infertile – a problem that affects many black-footed ferret males today. In addition, we will select him for his gentleness,” added Ryder who said that the choice of a partner for Elizabeth Ann was now “imminent”. The black-footed ferret is a slender, 60cm-long, grumpy predator with black marks on its face, feet and tail. It once inhabited huge swathes of the Great Plains of the United States, living off a menu that was made up mainly of prairie dogs, which are a type of ground squirrel. However, it was wiped out as farming spread across the central United States and, by the 1970s, it was thought to be extinct. Then one night in 1981, John Hogg, a Wyoming rancher, heard strange noises on his land and he uncovered a colony of black-footed ferrets. Wildlife biologists flocked to the ranch and have since used its animals to establish a ferret-breeding programme with the aim of re-establishing colonies in the US. However, only seven of the ferrets found on Hogg Ranch were able to breed. As a result, the black-foot population is heavily inbred, with each animal having a kinship with the others that falls between that of a sibling and a first cousin. Damaging mutations are now affecting the breeding population. An injection of fresh ferret genes is badly needed, and they can be provided by Elizabeth Ann. She is the product of tissue that had been taken from a female black-footed ferret called Willa decades ago. Her cells were preserved at San Diego’s Frozen Zoo, a storage facility where genetic materials – DNA, sperm, eggs, embryos and live tissue – from endangered animals is stored in liquid nitrogen. A few years ago, it was decided to use the same technology that was employed in Scotland to create Dolly the Sheep in 1996 to produce a clone of Willa. Her cells were used to generate embryos that were implanted into three domestic female ferrets. Two of the pregnancies failed, while the third surrogate mother had one stillborn offspring … and Elizabeth Ann, who is now thriving on a diet of hamsters at her Colorado home. Crucially, her DNA contains different versions of the genes that predominate in the breeding programme’s inbred ferrets, and this has raised hope that her offspring could significantly improve the genetic viability of black-footed ferrets. As Ryder puts it: “Elizabeth Ann is a treasure trove of genetic diversity as far as we are concerned.” In addition, plans are under way to create another batch of cloned black-footed ferrets – with the same aim: to boost the genetic diversity of the species and to halt its reproductive decline. “That’s the crux of the effort here,” said Ryder. “Can Elizabeth Ann pass along her genes to descendant generations of black-footed ferrets?” The story of Elizabeth Ann has important implications for all endangered species, added Ryder. “We should be banking cells now from all sorts of endangered animals because we are losing biodiversity, and gene pools of wild animals are shrinking. At least, if we have the cells, we could, in future, do for other species what we are hoping to do for the black-footed ferret with Elizabeth Ann.”Johnny Marr calls himself “a lifer”. It’s a fair description of someone who started playing guitar in bands aged 13, founded the Smiths at 19, departed the band five years later, and went on to become an integral part of the sound of the Pretenders, Electronic, Modest Mouse and the Cribs. Latterly, Marr has contributed to soundtracks with Hans Zimmer, including the Billie Eilish song No Time to Die for last year’s Bond film, and made four solo albums. His latest is Fever Dreams Pts 1-4, a terrific, vigorous double album of 16 tracks that swoops from moody introspection to rousing anthems. So, yes, after 40 years in the business, it’s hard to deny Marr’s zeal and commitment. “When you get older, you learn that no matter whether your work is in or out of fashion, it’s all about whether you can stand behind it,” he says, “because you can’t do anything about the trends and fashions and the way you are perceived too much – that’s a really secondary load of baggage that just gets in the way. So there are definitely some advantages to the mentality of being older: you don’t really care too much about being liked, certainly not as much as how much you like the work.” At 58, Marr is, you have to say, in indecently good nick: his eyes alert, his skin clear, his hair raven black. He hasn’t always lived the most temperate life, but he became a vegetarian in the mid-1980s, and he hasn’t had a drink or smoked for more than 20 years. Since he was a kid he’s been a ball of energy, but these days his release is running, and he has completed marathons in under four hours. Marr met his wife, Angie, when they were both teenagers, and they have two grown-up children. He is careful not to preach, but perched on a stool in a photo studio in north London, sipping green tea, he’s certainly an impressive advertisement for wholesome living. “It’s worth saying that if I thought that drugs and booze would make me a more interesting musician I would do it,” says Marr. “And I don’t go around skipping through cornfields, by any means; I have my issues just like anybody else. But it’d be tougher if I was a boozer, that’s for sure. I just don’t think it’s a particularly happening drug. I don’t think Bob Marley thought that either.” On the evidence of our shout-out for questions for this feature, there is clear affection for Marr, both from former collaborators and Observer readers. Not everyone, though, feels so well disposed. After our interview took place, his former Smiths bandmate Morrissey posted an “open letter” on his website asking Marr to stop talking about him in the press. “Move on,” the singer wrote. “It’s as if you can’t uncross your own legs without mentioning me. Our period together was many lifetimes ago, and a lot of blood has streamed under the bridge since then. There comes a time when you must take responsibility for your own actions and your own career, with which I wish you good health to enjoy. Just stop using my name as click-bait.” Marr, on Twitter, responded that open letters haven’t “really been a thing since 1953” and went on: “Also, this fake news business… a bit 2021 yeah?” And in fairness to him, Marr didn’t say the name Morrissey once in our 90-minute conversation. A couple of readers asked emotional questions about the Smiths, but his responses were thoughtful and measured, as you can judge below. As for Morrissey’s complaint that Marr doesn’t discuss his own solo work, Marr would probably much rather do that, but he knows that fans are still interested in the Smiths, and he seems to feel no compulsion to erase that period of his life. He would brush off the comparison, but Marr is almost entering Paul McCartney territory. Both men were blamed by many for the break-up of their iconic British bands; both have remained mostly tight-lipped about what went down and have relentlessly worked in the intervening decades to create new material that they know will inevitably be compared to their formative output. And both McCartney and Marr seem to be now enjoying a revisionist take on their lifetime in music. Has Marr seen Get Back, the Peter Jackson documentary series about the Beatles? “Yeah, amazing,” he replies. “There were so many things to take from it, little things. And that 50 years later Paul McCartney is exonerated almost. Really, really impressive. He kept a lid on a lot of things for whatever reasons. I think that’s really impressive.” Did any of that resonate with Marr? “Maybe, yeah,” he says with a wry smile. “No, I wouldn’t want to say that. I think Paul McCartney is out on his own dealing with a whole lot of different agendas on a world scale, on a historic scale. But he definitely seems to be such an impressive person because of how he’s just stayed human. He’s an absolute beacon for everyone. And, yeah, it does cross my mind quite often: if he can do it, anyone can, know what I mean?” Questions for Johnny Marr from readers and famous fans Which song have you written that still gives you goosebumps? And which can’t you stand any more? Richard Hornby, Manchester I’ve always really liked That Joke Isn’t Funny Anymore by the Smiths. And Last Night I Dreamt That Somebody Loved Me and The Headmaster Ritual. City of Bugs by the Cribs, Dashboard by Modest Mouse and Get the Message particularly by Electronic. I think it’s one of the best things I’ve ever done; almost my favourite, really. What sounds don’t I really like very much any more? I got tired of Heaven Knows I’m Miserable Now pretty quick. As much for the music as anything else. What else? I know Reel Around the Fountain is a big, big song for some people, but I fell out of love with that fairly quick. I don’t want to ruin it for people but, yeah, those two songs I could live without. Debbie Harry, singer How has the global pandemic changed your sources of inspiration? I’ve just come out of this two-year period having made a double album. But to be honest, it was time for me to make a record anyway. I went into the pandemic with this idea for an album called Fever Dreams. I’d started a few songs already, but then broke off to do the James Bond movie. Then the pandemic started and I definitely didn’t want to make a lockdown record and be singing about the stores not being open and anti-vaxxers or any of that. But the psychology of that time and how it was affecting me and my thinking, and how that might be the same for my audience, fed into the album entirely. Jason Williamson, lead vocalist of Sleaford Mods As someone who broke into music in their 40s, how do you navigate pushing forward in an industry that mostly values youth? I’m maybe being over-idealistic here, but I think that people or fans of music recognise an artist’s agenda and possibly their motivation. You can tell a lifer when you see them. And Sleaford Mods are a really good example of that. In a way, the fact that you can be still bothered with all the bullshit involved in a modern career says quite a lot about you, I think. It’s as simple as that. What do you think about being considered a fashion icon, particularly among some groups of current teenagers? Daisy, 22, Liverpool Well, these days, you just cross your fingers and hope for the best. Me and my sister got into clothes really young, like eight or nine. Growing up on a housing estate, it’s something to share and be in competition and get noticed and obsess about. And it’s never really left me. But it all comes from an interest in style and design, I think, not vanity. So I’m glad some people are noticing. Because otherwise, I’ve wasted a lot of my time. Guy Garvey, musician I heard you were collecting art long before the Smiths took off – is that true? Yeah, it is, but it was stuff from junk shops. The most valuable stuff was some Man Ray and David Bailey photographs that I picked up on an excursion to Covent Garden in this crappy little junk shop. But the first thing I got into when the Smiths took off was collecting books, buying first editions. People like Isherwood, Huxley, Bernard Shaw, Gurdjieff. It wasn’t anything to do with an investment; I just figured if I was going to educate myself, I might as well be holding a really nice artefact. Hans Zimmer, composer Which painters have influenced your sound the most? I suppose it’s obvious, or obvious to me: Robert Rauschenberg, Jasper Johns, David Hockney, Cy Twombly, Paul Klee. With David Hockney, it’s a sense of being wide awake, his sense of inquiry and joy and curiosity. David Shrigley has got this sense of knowing about him, and he’s funny. I also think Tracey Emin is really deserving of her reputation. In some ways the noise around her persona gets in the way of the actual work sometimes. Maybe I can relate to that! Andy Burnham, mayor of Greater Manchester Did the Smiths ever fall out over football or politics? We never discussed football so that’s that. And we never fell out over politics, but we probably would now. Morrissey’s recent political views have cast a shadow over the Smiths for me – reaching back into the past and tainting something that was very important to me. I’m so disappointed in him. Has it impacted how you feel about the Smiths or are you able to separate the past from the present, the band from the man? I find it very difficult to do so. Johnny Spence, Northern Ireland It hasn’t impacted how I feel about the Smiths. That’s all I can say about that. I’m certainly able to separate the past from the present. I don’t know whether you can separate the band from the man, but I can separate myself from the man and what I did, so when I do see how disappointed people are, it really does make me sad. But it’s completely out of my control. And I can only really do what is in my control. So I play Smiths songs for reasons that I think are real. And over the years I’ve tried to take care of the catalogue and the releases as much as I was able to. As I would have done anyway. So, you know, I see it the way everybody else sees it. I don’t have any answers. And I don’t want to have any answers. Nabihah Iqbal, musician and writer Where do you go to think? I go to a room in my house for half an hour in the morning and half an hour at night and meditate. I’ve done that for 20 years. It still doesn’t get any easier for anyone who’s thinking of taking it up, but it works, it does work. Most people use running to unwind, but for some reason, I just get more rewound and get a lot of ideas. I certainly don’t zone out. But, yeah, either meditating or running. Bernard Butler, musician We have both had many casual musical flings but one very strong personal bond in our lives. How has your relationship with the wonderful Angie influenced your creativity, and does she have a favourite guitar? I’ll answer the easy bit first: Angie’s always loved Les Pauls. That’s to do with when we first met – she was 14 and I was 15. We were into Johnny Thunders and the Heartbreakers, so she became bit of a Gibson fan. I’ve had a Gold Top guitar for 20-odd years and I think if I’ve ever got rid of that one, she’d leave me. The important thing I can say about my relationship with Angie is that she made me brave at 15, 16. Not only did Angie know me before everybody else knew me, but she knew me before I knew myself. She was there before the Smiths started: it was me and Angie. And then when that whole thing got together, it was me and Angie and Joe Moss [the late manager of the Smiths]. Not only was I with my soulmate, but I was with somebody who was very smart and very talented. Lottie Pendlebury, singer and guitarist of Goat Girl I feel that listening to the Smiths growing up and hearing your guitar playing was crucial to my understanding of the guitar and how to approach it, as I can imagine it was for many others. Who were your main influences growing up and what kind of techniques did they provide you with? Wow. Well, first off, it’s great to get a question from Lottie because she’s one of my favourite musicians to come out over the last few years. Whenever I hear a Goat Girl track and I don’t know it’s them, I’ll say to whoever I’m with: “I really like this, who’s this?” And it’s always Goat Girl; I should know by now. So I’m chuffed about that. The biggest influence on me would have to be Bert Jansch. When I was about 14, a friend of mine told me he’d got into this folk group called Pentangle. And I immediately thought: “Well, OK, I don’t need to know any more about that.” Anyway, when I was round at his house, he played me Basket of Light by Pentangle. And I couldn’t believe what I heard, especially from the guitar: it was jazzy, it was bluesy and kind of funky, it went off all over the place. I could see straight away that there are people who are influenced by Bert Jansch that don’t even know it. Anyone who got into Nick Drake – totally into Bert. Anyone who got into Led Zeppelin’s acoustic stuff, Neil Young, Donovan, therefore the Beatles. No Bert Jansch, no Back to the Old House, no Unhappy Birthday, even my electric stuff. So it runs all the way through what I was doing in the Smiths. All roads lead back to Bert Jansch. Maxine Peake, actor You really are a musical chameleon – would you ever consider becoming an actor? If so, what would be your preferred medium: film, TV or stage? I personally think you would be a natural. Do you know what, Maxine? Telly or film, I’m not fussy. I’d like to play a menacing, villainous eastern European gangster or a drug dealer. One or the other, as long as it’s not a fucking musician from Manchester in the 80s. That’s about the depth of my range. Or if Robert Downey Jr decides to retire I’ll just take his gig – got the same haircut. It’s apparent that you keep getting better and better with age. Can you speak to the role that removing alcohol from your life has played in that? Mike Shennan, Ontario, Canada Giving up alcohol has played a massive part in the last 20-odd years of my life, from day one. Without getting judgy, because people get very touchy about this shit, I can really recommend it. I’m not coming from a place of abstinence or a place of “my drink and drugs hell”, but for me, I just thought it was a shit drug, and other drugs were better. No, seriously, if anyone gave me a pill that would make me feel that shitty the next day and say such stupid things then I just wouldn’t be taking it. Neil Tennant, musician You’ve played on orchestral film soundtracks – do you ever listen to or take inspiration from classical guitar music? I don’t, to be honest, no. Whenever I’ve been recommended classical music – once or twice by Neil in fact – I’ve enjoyed it. But it’s just a little bit too formal for me. I like the guitar to do everything but formal. I’m aware that it can be dramatic and expressive, but whenever I’ve listened to Julian Bream or something like that, it has always felt just too stiff to me. I was at Glastonbury in 2019 when you played There Is a Light That Never Goes Out at the end of your set. Without wanting to sound too gushy and obsessive, men and women in their 40s and 50s were openly crying, I guess because it felt like you were giving us permission to love these songs again. What is going through your head when you perform these songs? Do you feel any sadness or regret, or do you feel that you are claiming them fresh, as yours? Lindsay Wright, London I’ve been asked about claiming the Smiths songs quite a lot before and I’m not doing that. Because I’m a musician, I’m thinking about joy and about giving people that I like something they love. I feel like their sort of leader, conducting everybody. Of course I’m aware that there’s a lot of different meanings going on for people, and I experience this huge wave of elation, there’s no doubt about it. After just a few seconds, I’m just joining along with everybody else really. It’s no deeper than that. But I don’t think I need to claim anything, because I wrote them. Bobby Gillespie, musician When you left the Smiths you said you’d like to be like Nils Lofgren. It was something I instantly understood, but could you explain to non-Nils fans what you meant? Never been asked that before; trust Bobby. My introduction to Nils Lofgren was in the 1970s and finding out that he was a young, hyperactive ace guitar player who had been brought in as a ringer for Neil Young’s Tonight’s the Night. He was little, like me, and a great singer. Then in the 80s, he was playing with Bruce Springsteen. So I guess really what Bobby was understanding was this idea of the ringer. I always found that really attractive: John McGeoch did it when he went from Magazine to the Banshees to Public Image; Ronnie Wood did it when he went from the Faces to the Rolling Stones. Nile Rodgers has done it with countless groups. And I was relating to that, really, as a way for me out of this shitstorm that was the Smiths split. You’ve recently collaborated with one of today’s most popular artists, Billie Eilish, on the brilliant track No Time to Die, which won a Grammy. Are you planning on doing another collaboration like this? I would love to see you work with Taylor Swift, who you recently tweeted about playing your signature Jaguar guitar! Paula, Malaga, Spain Well, I can’t think of one collaboration that I’ve done over 40 years that I went after. They all come about by being invited by always very interesting people. When me and my band were listening to Billie’s first record on the tour bus, I had no idea that I was going to be doing the Bond song with her that would get to No 1. So it’s quite likely that some other stuff is going to happen that I don’t know about. That window is always open for me, for whoever it is. Pauline Black, singer My favourite track on your new album, Fever Dreams Pts 1-4, is Ariel. The music and the lyrics successfully mesh together with a convincing, almost dark intention. You have spoken about getting in touch with your “feminine side” on this album. Sylvia Plath, who wrote the astonishing collection of poems Ariel, and who you’ve said in interviews influenced this song, very much turned upside down the notion of “feminine” as it was understood in 1965. So I am interested to know how you embrace your “feminine side” in this new age of gender politics in 2022? Well, I was brought up with a sister who’s 11 months younger than me. And we are incredibly close. And I’ve been with my wife since I was 15. And I’ve got a daughter who’s now 27. As well as that, I’ve worked with some really amazing women like Chrissie Hynde and Kirsty MacColl. So it’s never really been too difficult to have an awareness of the life that the women around me might be living. I think there are a lot of men out in the world right now who are really enjoying the opportunity to be part of a change. It’s an exciting time of, hopefully, enlightenment. Now I’m aware that plenty of people might scoff at that and think I’m being naive, but speak for yourself! But I’m really glad Pauline clicked with Ariel, because if that’s coming across, that’s good, because it’s there. Billy Bragg, singer-songwriter and activist You once told me that your unique guitar style was just “Martin Carthy licks sped up”. How influential was traditional folk music on your development as a musician? Well, to follow on from Lottie’s question, because of that introduction to Bert, you then need to know about Davey Graham and Martin Carthy. This was just before punk, and compared with the heavy rock that my mates were getting into, the more radical folk stuff just sounded much more interesting and tougher and less straight to me. But “Martin Carthy sped up” is actually quite a good way of describing what I was doing, with the equipment of the Patti Smith Group. The idea of folk music played through punk gear was really modern, but – I also should insert here – with the chord changes of the girl groups. My technique was folk playing, but harmonically I was going for Phil Spector music, with gear that my peers were using. Which book has had the biggest impact on you and why? Sarah Corbyn, Essex I’d say The Outsider by Colin Wilson, because it’s the ultimate explanation of a certain kind of mindset that I’ve had, that I’ve recognised in myself from being a kid and maybe even a predicament sometimes in my own thinking, my own life. Or The Bhagavad Gita, which Chrissie Hynde introduced me to, because you can read it and read it and read it, and then keep doing it for thousands of lifetimes. Chris Packham, naturalist Johnny, the world is in a big mess but me and some of my equally defiant mates are determined to make a last stand for life. We will probably end up on a muddy hill surrounded by those who just don’t care. Facing such odds, will you be willing to provide the rallying song to stir our hearts in the time of ultimate darkness? No pressure there then! I think even if I was to be ambitious enough to try and tackle a song on a big level, if it happened, it would be by accident. The last song on the new album, Human, is the closest I’ve got to writing something like that. It’s the most stirring song I’ve written myself on my own. But now I think of it, I’d either do it by accident or, yeah, I’ll try and accept the challenge! Harry Hill, comedian Johnny, out of 10 what would you give me for my turn as Mozzer on Celebrity Stars in Their Eyes? [Hill sang This Charming Man.] PS: if you and the fellas ever decide to regroup and his nibs won’t play ball, I still have the wig – and more importantly, the hearing aid. I sort of remember that. I’m going to have to give Harry a solid two out of 10 for that, and he can make of that what he will. As for the offer, I don’t even know what to make of that…! What are you most looking forward to in 2022? Gemma Faulkner, London Well, the obvious thing is playing concerts. Human contact. I’m very fortunate that in my life I have strangers say hello to me on the street. And plenty of them just say “Hi” and walk on – they don’t need to do selfies or anything like that. There was a time probably leading up to the pandemic that I was a little overwhelmed with selfies. And after a couple of years, I’m not saying: everybody come and take a selfie – but I’m looking forward to human contact on a large scale. Johnny Marr’s new double album, Fever Dreams Pts 1-4, is released on 25 February via BMG. Marr tours UK arenas with Blondie starting at Glasgow’s SSE Hydro, 22 AprilHow do you react when someone politely but firmly tells you that you’re talking nonsense about something that’s important to you? Do you gracefully and immediately give way to their greater expertise? Or do you double down? Most of us are in the latter camp. Voicing our beliefs tends to solidify them. We may like to think of ourselves as rational creatures, constantly assessing the world for new information that might change our minds, but this is not how our brains work. Explaining to someone that their belief is flat-out wrong is not a good way of getting them to drop it. And research shows that the process of “myth-busting” – setting out a common false statement, then explaining why it is wrong – backfires because it counterintuitively reinforces and helps spread the myths. This is why the premise of last week’s Question Time was so flawed. The presenter of the BBC programme, Fiona Bruce, announced in mid-January that the programme wanted to explore why some people had chosen not to be vaccinated against Covid and specifically invited them to apply to be an audience member on the programme. Understanding why some people have not yet been vaccinated despite the wealth of evidence that the vaccines are safe, effective and save lives is hugely important to improving take-up. But there are numerous research reports on this to which a current affairs programme such as Question Time has little to add. And if the objective was instead to increase understanding and build empathy among viewers, its tribal format, in which rhetorical flourish is deployed to score quick wins over opponents, could not be less well suited to the task. In response to widely aired concerns, the programme said it would vet potential audience members to allow ordinary unvaccinated members of the public through while filtering out the fanatics. This is to misunderstand that the expression of reasonable-sounding doubts can be a much more effective transmitter of misinformation than ranting and raving. And sure enough, the programme ended up falling into a number of disinformation traps. The audience member who challenged the panel on vaccine effectiveness was given a huge platform to make a number of false statements about Covid vaccines, including that they have “fairly horrific” side effects whose incidence we do not know. The highly respected immunologist on the panel, Robin Shattock, comprehensively debunked them, while also expressing respect for people who question the evidence. When the audience member challenged Shattock, saying he had looked at the data himself, citing a report to suggest there may be under-reporting, Bruce reminded him of the latter’s credentials. The clip of this exchange will have been viewed many more times than the programme itself: it has gone viral on social media and been widely reported in the press. The tone with which it has been shared has been overwhelmingly positive, with a dash of mocking – isn’t it great how well this misinformation has been demolished (and enjoy someone getting truly owned by a leading expert)? This is because that is exactly what people who have zero doubts about vaccines see: a clip that resoundingly debunks anti-vax myths. But research about how we react to misinformation suggests people with doubts about vaccines, who are less inclined to trust scientific authority, might have seen something different. Dangerous misinformation about vaccines was repeated, reinforcing things they have already heard. Someone who shares some of their doubts was talked down to on the basis of some credible-sounding questions about the legitimacy of data, which may have left them feeling just as confused. The sneery tone of the headlines and social media posts might have felt aimed at them too. This is no criticism of Shattock, who I think did the best job he could under the circumstances, but it is a prime example of a counter-productive piece of public health messaging. Overall, information around vaccines in the UK has been excellent, focusing on the positive story about why to get vaccinated, avoiding the repetition of misinformation by myth-busting and complex explanations that many people do not engage with. But this episode shows the extent to which it is harmful public health messaging that is more likely to go viral. Question Time also bought into another piece of conventional wisdom that disintegrates on close examination: the idea that on most issues people can be divided into tribes based on their fixed beliefs. The whole endeavour was based on the premise that “the unvaccinated” are a group of people who have been “unrepresented” on our national broadcaster, as if they share a coherent set of attitudes. But people have not yet been vaccinated for all sorts of reasons. Imagine thinking it useful to sort a Question Time audience on the basis of other unhealthy behaviour, such as smoking or excessive drinking. While conspiracy thinking can exert a strong pull, in-depth attitudinal research illustrates that people can hold conflicting beliefs at the same time and that they might appear to be in one “tribe” or another depending on how a conversation is framed. For example, a study that interviewed 60 people for two hours each on racism found many people simultaneously hold beliefs that are helpful and unhelpful for anti-racism campaigns. “The idea that there are fixed groups of people – pro-vaccine, anti-vaccine and a persuadable group in the middle – is a massive oversimplification that can become a self-fulfilling prophecy,” Nicky Hawkins, a communications expert who has researched vaccine messaging, tells me. Indeed, people are still coming forward to have their first vaccination, suggesting some are still changing their mind. Too many of us buy into the old, and slightly vain, liberal idea that good and rational speech will always win out over bad and logically incoherent speech. And that people who disagree with us are less complex and more stupid than we are. Freedom of expression is critical to democracy in its own right, but insights from cognitive psychology put paid to the idea that the truest idea will win out, particularly in a world where social media platforms make most profit out of the stuff that hardens our views by making us angry. Campaigners who want to change minds have to be much smarter than simply explaining what makes other people so wrong. • Sonia Sodha is an Observer columnistIf a sign of a team’s progress is their ability to win close matches, Scotland are heading firmly in the right direction. This was hardly a conclusive statement of their Six Nations title credentials but it was not a bad start. It was a second successive victory over England for the first time since 1984 – they went on to win their second grand slam that year – and a third in five meetings with England. If there are plenty of hurdles in the way before such thoughts can be entertained this year, Scotland will head to Cardiff next Saturday with a huge spring in their step. This was far from a perfect performance as their coach, Gregor Townsend, will no doubt point out when the analysis begins in earnest. But after the victories in Llanelli, Twickenham and Paris in the past 16 months, and another tight squeeze against Australia in the autumn, the belief coursing through the tartan ranks is palpable. The encouraging thing is they can play much better than this, but victory was everything. Momentum is firmly with them. Scotland enjoyed more possession and territory than any other side in the Six Nations last year. Here, though, they were living off scraps for the first hour. After 50 minutes they had spent seven seconds in England’s 22. The home side had one real opportunity to score a try and they took it with alacrity. It started with a quick lineout routine and when Maro Itoje rushed up in defence, Stuart Hogg did brilliantly to skip around the England lock’s tackle and slip the charging Darcy Graham through a gap between Nick Isiekwe and Elliot Daly. The Edinburgh wing sized up the situation, stepped inside Joe Marchant and found the supporting Ben White on an inside support line. What a moment for the 23-year-old London Irish scrum-half. His inclusion in the squad – ahead of the more experienced George Horne – and then the matchday 23, given the form of Edinburgh’s Ben Vellacott, raised a few eyebrows north of the border. When Ali Price went off for an HIA after 12 minutes, those concerns only heightened further. One wondered if Townsend had taken an unnecessary gamble. No wonder White was grinning as he was handed his coat on the sidelines following Price’s return. A 12-minute cameo and a debut try. Hogg spoke passionately before the match about the influence of the defence coach, Steve Tandy, on this team. Since the Welshman came in after the 2019 World Cup, said Hogg, Scotland have learned to love defending as much as attacking. The stats bear Hogg out. Scotland have had the best defence in the championship for the past two years. There was more evidence of it here, in spades. England seemed sure to score after half an hour when they mauled a lineout over the line, but Scotland got bodies under the ball and held it up. It was a major let-off. In the final stages, having regained the lead with Finn Russell’s penalty eight minutes from time, they defended frantically but with trust in their systems. If they rode their ruck at times, they continued to believe and got their reward when Russell’s cross-kick was patted forward into touch by Luke Cowan-Dickie. It was hard not argue that Graham, a threat all day with his footwork and pace, would not have scored. The referee, Ben O’Keeffe, agreed and Murrayfield roared its approval. “Scotland, Scotland” reverberated around the ground. The chorus of Flower of Scotland sprang up as the hosts had successive five-metre scrums against England’s seven-man pack. If it was a surprise they did not opt for another one, but Russell’s penalty gave them a lead to defend as the minutes kicked down. As the game ended with four successive scrums in Scotland territory, that nagging doubt persisted. Were England going to steal it at the death? Not this time. Graham won the ball back among a tangle of bodies and Hogg booted the ball off the field, punching the air in celebration. Pandemonium. Scotland are on the march.What is “The Souvenir”? In Joanna Hogg’s autobiographically inspired 2019 drama, that title appeared to refer specifically to an 18th-century Fragonard painting depicting a young woman (the heroine of Rousseau’s epistolary novel Julie, apparently) carving the name of her lover into a tree trunk. In that film, set in the 1980s, Julie Harte (played by Hogg’s goddaughter Honor Swinton Byrne) is introduced to the painting by an enigmatic man with whom she is falling in love. Like Hogg, Julie is perplexed by what the painting means and by her own increasingly tumultuous feelings for her mysterious companion. In this flipside second instalment of Hogg’s most personal and surprisingly most accessible work, the word “souvenir” takes on a rather more metatextual meaning. This time the film itself becomes a kind of cinematic keepsake, a memory of a memory (or a dream of a dream?) set in the aftermath of Julie’s relationship with the heroin-addicted Anthony. An overwhelming presence in the first episode, as portrayed by Tom Burke, Anthony is now an even more confounding absence, leaving Julie struggling to make sense of their former life together, with all its mysteries and misdirections. Who was her lover? Did she ever really know him? Did he actually work for the Foreign Office? Where did he go as the end approached? Who did he talk to? What was he thinking? More significantly, The Souvenir Part II finds Julie finding herself, embracing her own future as a film-maker even as she wrestles with the ghosts of the past. Like Eva Husson’s underrated Mothering Sunday (which I stumblingly described in this paper as feeling “more like an emotional memory than an unfolding narrative”), this is a creative coming-of-age story – a portrait of the artist as a young woman discovering her own voice. Appropriately enough, the very last voice we hear in the film’s wonderfully self-reflexive finale is that of Hogg herself. Facing the prospect of having to make her film-school graduation project while still reeling from the fallout of her doomed relationship, Julie channels her personal experiences into a free-form script (a “memorial”) that baffles and irks her tutors. Meanwhile, creative battles also engulf Julie’s fellow film students, most notably wannabe auteur Patrick (Richard Ayoade), whose own film has more than a hint of Julien Temple’s Absolute Beginners (“I always wanted to be like Orson Welles”), and who tells his editor: “You’re forcing me to have a tantrum!” It’s a laugh-out-loud moment, one of many in Hogg’s oeuvre in which intense soul-searching is habitually broken by brittle humour, alerting us to a playful sensibility beneath the often austere surface. There are shocks too: a domestic scene in which Julie’s mother, Rosalind (played once again by a flinty Tilda Swinton), reacts with tremulous grace to an unexpected breakage gave me a start that had me burying my face in my hands – a sort of laughing-screaming-squirming symphony of tragicomic awkwardness. As for the film Julie is making, at times it appears that we are watching a Pirandello-esque behind-the-scenes doc about the making of The Souvenir, viewed through a kaleidoscopic maze of self-reflection. Just as Julie tells her tutors that she’s no longer interested in showing life “as it plays out” but rather “as I imagine it”, so Hogg also uses an audacious cinematic sleight of hand to conjure yet another movie-within-the-movie, revisiting events that we have previously seen portrayed with uncanny realism, but here reimagined as fantastical flights of fancy that owe a debt to the dreamy dance sequences of old-school Hollywood musicals. It’s a bold move, and one that invokes both Singin’ in the Rain and Fellini’s 8½ – not comparisons I thought I’d be making after reviewing The Souvenir. Yet watching parts I and II back to back (the first is conveniently available on BBC iPlayer), they do miraculously come together as a coherent whole, an adventurous meditation on the alchemical process of making life imitate art and vice versa. Hogg (who recently confessed to me her love of disaster movies) is currently working on a ghost story, her first foray into “genre” cinema. I can’t wait!To me it’s one of the perpetual mysteries of gardening: why some plants, despite appearing to really have it all, somehow still languish away from the horticultural spotlight. Very near to the top of that list must be hellebores, with their exotic blooms opening up as if by magic in the dead of winter. Their flowers often last for months at a time on evergreen, drought-tolerant, fuss-free plants. I often wonder if it’s their incredible generosity combined with ease of cultivation that causes us to take them for granted. Seeming to defy the seasons, Helleborus foetidus ‘Wester Flisk Group’ is bursting into bloom right now, its finely divided foliage and pistachio-flowers on salmon-pink stems making it appear like it belongs on some far-flung forest floor in the tropics. If you crave the look of a schefflera or one of the palmate begonias, but can’t handle their upkeep (or price tag), this makes a perfect doppleganger. Like all hellebores, it even thrives in dry shade where little else will grow. If truly fabulous winter greenery is your thing, Helleborus x sternii ‘Blackthorn Strain’ has prickly edged leaves covered in the most wonderfully reptilian green mottling, a botanical animal that gives you full-on Jurassic Park vibes. Finally, on the foliage front, the soft, bright green mounds of Helleborus multifidus erupt out of the ground like a bubbling emerald spring. Now, let’s talk flowers. “Unique” can be an overused word in horticulture, but the haunting mix of steel-blue, violet and grey hues in the velvety petals of Helleborus ‘Blue Diamond’ is really impossible to find anywhere else in the botanical world. Unlike in other plants where all the extra petals of double flowers can remove part of their wild charm, in hellebores they give them the wondrous ability to impersonate other species. To my eyes, Helleborus ‘Onyx Odyssey’ looks like a giant cherry blossom but, as its name suggests, with the deepest black and a silvery-grey powder coating over its petals. ‘Wedding Party Bridesmaid’ is altogether more soft and delicate with a whiff of the forest cacti bloom about it. White petals are tipped with blackcurrant edging on one end, fading to palest jade green towards the centre. Just straight-up gorgeous. There is even a whole series of doubles with an elegant water lily-esque look. ‘Hebe’ has burgundy breaks that bleed through the ice-white petals and, if you want even more colour, ‘Artemis’ features a very similar wine-coloured mottling, but over acid yellow. Given that some of this detail needs to be appreciated close up and their nodding heads can hide some of their true wonder in the garden, their splendour is sometimes best appreciated as a cut flower, with individual blooms placed floating in a bowl of water. A beautiful, unconventional form of floristry indoors, or alternatively the easiest eye-catching display floating in container ponds or water urns outdoors. It really is hard to think of any single plant that can offer quite so much, at a time of year that often offers so little. Follow James on Twitter @BotanygeekIf, as seems increasingly probable, Russia decides not to launch an all-out invasion of Ukraine, tub-thumping US and British politicians who have spent weeks scaring the public with loose talk of looming Armageddon will have some explaining to do. The military build-up directed by Vladimir Putin, Russia’s president, is real enough. But suspicion grows that the actual as opposed to the hypothetical threat of a large-scale conventional attack is being mis-read, misinterpreted, over-estimated or deliberately exaggerated. It wouldn’t be the first time. This view is shared in part by Ukraine’s leader, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, who last week demanded that the US president, Joe Biden, stop suggesting invasion was “imminent”. Wild American talk of war was damaging his country and stoking panic, he said. Fulminating against “self-fulfilling prophecies”, Emmanuel Macron, France’s president, is also trying to calm the rhetoric. He and Germany’s chancellor, Olaf Scholz, who has refused to join the armchair warriors, may soon meet Putin for talks in Moscow. Warning lights flashed red in late January when British intelligence officials briefed anonymously that invasion could be “two to three weeks away”. This echoed alarmist US predictions of conflict “at any time”. A furious war on truth is already under way. Russia claims US mercenaries are active in Ukraine. Dubious allegations of a plot to oust Zelenskiy were floated by Liz Truss’s Foreign Office. Washington says a fake video, not yet seen by anyone, shows a staged attack on Russian forces. As Britain’s Boris Johnson, keen to show fealty and distract from partygate, warned of a “lightning” strike, Biden talked in messianic terms about a “world-changing” conflict, beginning in February. They may yet be right. But February has arrived, and still no war. As Biden orders the 82nd Airborne Division to eastern Europe this weekend, Putin is chilling with his “dear friend”, President Xi Jinping, at the winter Olympics in Beijing – not an obvious spot from which to launch a blitzkrieg. Deploring “western hysteria”, the Kremlin denies any intention to invade. Putin said last week he hoped “dialogue” would succeed – while refusing to pull back his forces. Putin is not a man to be trusted. His reasoning is twisted, his brinkmanship notorious, his instincts brutal. But he does seem to have been given pause by the feverish US response. He now appears focused on extracting maximum diplomatic advantage, meaning concessions on European security, Nato, and new US medium-range missile deployments, while maintaining military pressure. Putin has also given Kyiv’s “western puppets” a nasty shock. That may have been his game-plan all along. If this phoney war ends with a whimper, not a bang, Johnson and other mini-Churchills will declare victory, saying they faced down aggression. European leaders will argue that diplomacy was vindicated. Even so, relieved people across Europe, subjected daily to over-heated predictions of mayhem, will be entitled to ask: what, really, was all that about? Was the intelligence wrong – again? The answer, in a word, is China. It’s true Biden strongly backs Nato, which underpins US interests in Europe. It’s true, too, that as a cold war veteran, his instinct is to uphold democracy and freedom in countries threatened by Moscow. Yet the overriding, urgent thrust of his foreign policy to date has focused on the Indo-Pacific region, and specifically on America’s greatest challenger, China – not on Europe. So when the US was confronted by a possibly precedent-setting attack on a sovereign nation, the chilling implications for self-governing Taiwan and Beijing’s other target territories quickly became central to White House calculations. Taiwan is not a war the US would necessarily win. It’s not a war Biden wants to fight. But he knows any sign of weakness in confronting Putin over Ukraine may be read in Beijing as indicating fatal weakness over Taiwan. When he cites “world-changing” threats, Biden is talking principally about this accelerating, unboundaried 21st-century contest with China. In a globalised world, few if any conflicts occur in isolation. In this sense, Ukraine is an early skirmish in what historians may one day view as a new hundred years war. Restless Kazakhstan, where Putin recently deployed troops with Beijing’s blessing, is another frontline. Others include potential or actual conflict zones from the Baltic republics and Belarus to Libya, Syria, Myanmar, the Indian frontier, Xinjiang and the South China Sea. China and Russia are moving into ever closer alliance. Their leaders share the same post-Communist, authoritarian, nationalist ideology. Both view the US as the champion of an international, democratic, rules-based system they want to tear down. Both believe America is in terminal decline. Even before this weekend’s tryst, Putin and Xi had formed a common front to resist western sanctions on Russia over Ukraine and on China over its Hong Kong crackdown and Uyghur genocide. Now they are doubling down. The two countries play an “important stabilising role” in global affairs, rendering international relations “more equitable and inclusive”, Putin told Xinhua news agency. While military cooperation and trade are growing rapidly, new deals on gas supplies to China, Russia’s biggest energy customer, are also in the pipeline. A Nato-style mutual defence treaty may not be far off. The birth of this Sino-Russian axis, conceived in opposition to the US-led western democracies, is the most globally significant strategic development since the Soviet Union collapsed 30 years ago. It will define the coming age. Fear of what China might do helps explain Biden’s frenetic, sometimes hyperbolic, response to the siege of Kyiv. It’s important Putin be shown bullying does not work. But this crisis, fundamentally, is not solely about Ukraine or even Europe. Writ large, it’s about the whole scary, contested, disorderly new world that awaits.It was in 2016, that Mr B, a survivor of sexual abuse, heard that a female victim had reported his attacker for attempted rape. “I went mad when I heard that,” he says. “I could just about cope with knowing what he had done to me, but when I heard that I just thought: ‘You dirty bastard, you are not getting away with this any longer.’” The attacker was Nazir Ahmed, or Lord Ahmed of Rotherham as he prefers to be known, and last Friday he was sentenced to five and a half years in prison for child sex offences, namely the attempted rape of a young girl and sexual assault of a boy, during the 1970s. Ahmed was a businessman who owned a string of fish and chip shops before becoming a property developer and then entered politics as a Labour councillor in Rotherham in 1990. He served as a magistrate, and in 1998, became a life peer on the recommendation of Tony Blair. He has has been described to me as “the most powerful Pakistani in the UK” and I was told by one of his victims that within the Pakistani community he was held in the highest esteem and given “the royal treatment, wherever he went.” Not any longer. In handing down the sentence last week, the judge told Ahmed that his crimes had “had a profound and lifelong effect on his victims”. This weekend Mr B, one of the two survivors who brought the case against Ahmed, told me his story. It is the first time he has spoken at length about what he suffered. “I felt relief when I heard the sentence,” he says, having just left the courtroom. “In court my whole body was shaking.” The abuse began when Mr B was five and continued for five years, ending when the family moved out of the area, in 1972. But reporting Ahmed to the police was a difficult decision for Mr B. Both victims live in the same neighbourhood as their abuser, and attend the same mosque. As a result, Mr B worried not only for himself, but for his children if he should go to the police. “There might be weeks when I would not think about it and then it would all come flooding back,” he told me. “The Jimmy Savile case was really difficult for me because it was on the news all the time and I would relate it to myself.” Seeing Ahmed in the community was also difficult for Mr B, he says, leaving him feeling like he “couldn’t cope”. The abuse affected Mr B’s relationship with his father, who he blamed for “letting him [Ahmed] into the house”. As an adult, he accepts that his father knew nothing about the abuse, but he still regrets the years of mistrust between them which it caused. The trial was terrifying, he says. The defence cross-examined him as to the exact nature of the abuse, which he found highly distressing. The prosecution asked him to describe details of the sexual acts, and asked him how come his mother didn’t see that his underwear was full of semen. He broke down in the witness box, and the judge halted proceedings. But, he told me: “I came back and forced myself to carry on telling the jury the truth. I thought: ‘Fifty years you’ve had of this and one more day won’t kill you.’” Nonetheless, he told me that giving evidence in court was one of the worst days of his life. It left him scarred. Mr B admits that he has contemplated taking his own life, such was the trauma and deep shame he suffered as a victim of sexual abuse. “That’s how profound the damage has been,” he says. “And this is what that man has done. It’s time for him to feel the shame, not his victims.” I asked Mr B about how he coped with the trauma in the aftermath of his courageous decision to face this shame head on, and report Ahmed to the police. “My immediate family have been brilliant. To this day not one of them have questioned me – they believed me. Same with my close friends. They let me know through a third person that they were with me, but they would not probe unless I wanted to speak out.” Mr B still has one battle to fight before he can try to rebuild his life. “There is no real justice while he is still carrying his peerage around,” he says. “His political career should be in tatters but while he can call himself Lord he still has status. And he will believe he still is part of the establishment.” Only an act of parliament can remove his title, but none exists. Mr B is determined to help change this. It is hard to know the mood music in Rotherham following this latest scandal, involving one of its most high-profile citizens, but the messages of support are finding their way to the survivors. Indeed, Rotherham has had its fair share of scrutiny when it comes to the sexual abuse of children, as we have seen with the so-called “grooming gang” exposé, which led to an independent inquiry in 2014. It was described as the biggest child protection scandal in UK history. Zlakha Ahmed, founder and director of Apna Haq, a survivor-led organisation based in Rotherham, says: “We know how incredibly difficult the gruelling process to get justice can be, to give evidence against someone who has a lot of power and influence within the community. This conviction will encourage others to come forward.” “Ahmed may well be friends with Imran Khan [prime minister of Pakistan] and countless lords,” says Mr B, “but he is now a man who has been brought down by two ordinary people. And I can feel proud of that.”Boris Johnson’s book, Shakespeare: The Riddle of Genius, is now so late it’s embarrassing to mention it. But in the meantime, Shakespeare himself seems to have taken up residence as Whitehall’s writer-in-chief. As so often in times of political upheaval, it’s to Shakespeare’s grasp of motive and policy, and human quirks and struggles, that we turn. Johnson’s current travails, like arguments around the English civil war, the battle for women’s suffrage, and Bush’s response to 9/11, are revealingly reframed by Shakespearean parallels. The PM has recently compared himself to Othello, nominating Dominic Cummings as his Iago. It’s an allusion that cannot turn out well – even in a Lulu Lytle bedchamber. Cummings himself has suggested Johnson is a shambolic Prospero, avoiding his political duties including chairing the Cobra committee, sequestering himself instead with his books. Perhaps Prospero was, indeed, exiled to his magical island after 54 letters of no confidence in his dukedom. Elsewhere, it’s Macbeth that provides the script for a misogynistic story in which the leader’s strong-minded wife pulls the strings. Carrie has some work to do on her ambition, though: Shakespeare’s heroine at least has the king and national domination in her sights, rather than some overweening spads and international pet rescue. As No 10 empties, Johnson, a man who seems more at home in the convivial oblivion of sociability – the world of comedy, as well as of parties – wears the aspect of isolation and abandonment. He is a Macbeth holed up in his castle, a Coriolanus deserted by his allies. A politician who likened himself to Brutus during his own long leadership campaign has, like Caesar’s assassin, now seen fortune’s wheel spin away from him. The PM’s Friday “pep talk” to his remaining staff drew not on Shakespeare directly, but on a Hamlet spin-off, Disney’s The Lion King. Quoting Rafiki, a version of the play’s good-natured but ineffectual buddy Horatio, Johnson observed “change is good, and change is necessary, even when it’s tough”. It’s not quite the swan of Avon. Many more apposite quotations present themselves. Perhaps, from The Tempest, “Canst thou bring me to the party?”, or the reassurance in Titus Andronicus that “the ambush of our friends be strong”. Or even, in response to Sue Gray’s report, “Dost thou think, because thou art virtuous, there shall be no more cakes and ale?” (Twelfth Night). There’s plenty more Shakespearean advice for any political leader on the ropes, from Henry V’s war with France diverting attention from domestic woes, to Richard III flanked by Catholic bishops and holding a Bible in a performance of piety (surely we must be due a christening?). Johnson is certainly no Othello: that soldier of firm principle, dignity and fatal uxoriousness is a distant comparison. Nothing would get Othello on to a zip wire, and his take on “watermelon smiles” would be worth hearing. An indulgent Shakespearean analogy might rather cast Johnson as Falstaff, the cheerful, carnal and pragmatic companion to the young Prince Hal in the two parts of Henry IV. Falstaff might well – if he could be bothered – have written two columns advocating opposite views. He might well have refused to divulge the number of his children. He would certainly cadge off wealthier friends. Johnson’s repetition at a press conference of the myth that The Merry Wives of Windsor was commissioned by a Queen Elizabeth in love with Falstaff doesn’t augur well for his book’s accuracy, but does tell us something about his identification with this degenerate. In Windsor, Falstaff tries to present himself as a ladies’ man. The wives are immune to his perjured romance, and instead of getting his end away, he is thrown out in a basket of soiled laundry. Comparisons between the braggart PM and Falstaff are commonplace. But few trace that character arc as Shakespeare himself does. Over the course of his Falstaffiad, Shakespeare makes clear that beneath the buffoon lies something disturbingly venal. His bonhomie is only skin deep. Turning his relationships into transactions – a loan here, a kickback there – he is loyal only to himself. Falstaff’s ultimate degradation is his casual willingness to send his men “poor and bare” into battle, in the second part of Henry IV. His bleak dismissal of them as “food for powder. They’ll fill a pit as well as better” echoes the equivalent: “Let the bodies pile high.” Shakespeare reveals Falstaff to be a dangerous, narcissistic populist. Let’s hope Johnson is researching that for his book. • Emma Smith is professor of Shakespeare studies at Oxford University and author of This is Shakespeare: How to Read the World’s Greatest PlaywrightIn Mission, Texas, on the border between the US and Mexico, sits the National Butterfly Center. A 100-acre nature preserve once exclusively dedicated to the conservation of plants and wildlife, it has now been thrust into the national spotlight and become a focal point of divisions over the country’s immigration policy. This week, the butterfly center was forced to close its doors indefinitely amid ongoing threats from far-right conspiracists and QAnon followers who falsely claim it is a haven for human-trafficking and illegal migration. “They’re not conspiracies, they’re just outright lies,” Marianna Treviño-Wright, the executive director of the National Butterfly Center, told the Guardian. “I think that’s a very important point that needs to be made. As long as they’re called ‘conspiracies’, then it seems like there’s some plausibility.” The North American Butterfly Association (NABA), which runs the center, decided to close it down indefinitely on Wednesday as a precautionary measure, after being warned to “be armed at all times or out of town” during a We Stand America rally in support of a border wall. The butterfly center first attracted the attention of the far right in 2017. Treviño-Wright and the NABA made headlines for suing the organizations behind the construction of a section of Donald Trump’s border wall after they sought to build straight through the butterfly preserve. Those groups included We Build the Wall, led by Trump’s former chief strategist Steve Bannon and founder Brian Kolfage, which is now facing corruption and fraud charges. Conspiracy theories about the butterfly center snowballed after Kolfage posted a series of tweets, claiming it was run by “left wing thugs with a sham butterfly agenda” and asserting without evidence that “rampant sex trade” was taking place on the property. Treviño-Wright said an increase in online and in-person harassment soon followed. A court date for the case about the section of border wall on the center’s property has not been set yet. Treviño-Wright said since the lawsuit she has faced personal threats and on one occasion, assault, by the extremist Virginia Republican congressional candidate Kimberly Lowe who visited the butterfly center last month and demanded to see “‘illegals crossing on rafts”. In an audio recording of the visit, Lowe is heard claiming baselessly that Treviño-Wright was “OK with children being sex-trafficked, raped and murdered”. “It’s utterly ridiculous that instead of Democrats and a pizza joint, it’s immigrants and a butterfly center,” Treviño-Wright said, comparing the situation to the debunked Pizzagate conspiracy that took off in 2016 in an attempt to paint the then presidential candidate Hilary Clinton as a proponent of human trafficking. The butterfly center’s closure this week did not come as a surprise to Treviño-Wright. “This has been escalating. Not just the attacks on us, but the agenda in the political landscape. I think it makes sense for the [NABA] board to pump the brakes. If this madness is going to continue until the midterms or, God forbid, beyond that, we need to have personnel and a plan in place to protect ourselves as best as possible to be prepared for this horrible situation.” Treviño-Wright said the construction of sections of the border wall, and the subsequent vitriol that came from QAnon followers and Trump supporters, had a profound effect on the butterfly center and its staff. “When you’re targeted by laws that are designed to be destructive, it’s very difficult to continue operations as normal. So it’s been disruptive. It’s been destructive. And it’s made it very difficult for us to focus on our mission, which is environmental conservation and education.” Choking back tears, Treviño-Wright explained the events of recent years had put a strain on her mental health and personal relationships. “It really has made me a misanthrope. I used to believe much better of people, but now I’m afraid to even go to the grocery store because I can’t trust that the person with the cart next to me doesn’t believe” the lies, Treviño-Wright said. On her accidental venture into political activism, Treviño-Wright called herself: “Utterly reluctant, unwilling, and anxious-to-not-be-here-or-be-doing-this-any-more.” The butterfly center is now sharing strategies for dealing with confrontational conspiracists with the Children’s Museum of Denver, which was forcibly shut down after anti-maskers frequently directed their anger towards staff. Treviño-Wright said she didn’t know if her center would reopen, but “certainly hope[s] it does. “It’s a magical place and it’s a place I’ve poured the last 10 years of my life into developing and defending. I hope there’s a wonderful future in store for the National Butterfly Center, but as long as these people get away with these things, I’m not sure of anything. Not just for anything but for our entire country. “It’s just unbelievable that somehow things have reached this point in American history that a nature center stands at the crossroads of whether our country slides full-on into authoritarianism or our democratic republic survives.”Like a serially unfaithful husband pleading with his much-betrayed wife for one last chance – a speech he’s had plenty of practice at – Boris Johnson is telling anyone prepared to listen that he can change. Don’t kick me out of the house, so he begs Tory MPs with their fingers on the trigger of a confidence vote, I will prove to you that I can be a different man. He did the same after the release of Sue Gray’s heavily circumscribed, and yet still highly damning, preliminary report about the orgy of lockdown-busting booze-ups at Number 10. Unable to quarrel with her conclusion that there were “failures of leadership and judgment”, the prime minister told the Commons: “I get it and I will fix it.” No, he doesn’t. No, he won’t. Even if this sly old leopard sincerely wanted to change his spots, he is incapable of it. The Conservative MPs who are invited to meetings with him hear faux-earnest pledges that he will pay more attention to their views in future and assemble a more professional team at Number 10. Only the hopelessly credulous will believe this. He is 57. People of that vintage rarely change. When they do, it is only because they possess the exceptionally high level of personal discipline required for someone to transform their essential nature at a mature age. One of the things we know about Mr Johnson is that he doesn’t do discipline. His recklessness, his deceitfulness, his entitled attitude that rules never apply to him and his unwillingness to face the consequences of his own actions are why this scandal happened. It’s because he can’t change and refused to even try to change when he moved into Number 10 that his premiership is self-imperilled. One of the notable things about his personality is how very little it has altered over the years. The twentysomething tyro journalist who was sacked from the Times for confecting a quote and mendaciously attributing it to his historian godfather is completely recognisable as the man of many years later who issued a stream of false denials about partying in Downing Street. He won’t change. It is much more likely that he will stay the same, but even more so. If he somehow survives this scandal and clings on as prime minister, he will almost certainly become an even worse iteration of himself. Witness his desperate attempt to smear Sir Keir Starmer with the false claim that, in his previous role as director of public prosecutions, the Labour leader was personally responsible for the failure to prosecute Jimmy Savile. It was grotesque at every level, this Trumpian attempt to associate the leader of the opposition with Britain’s most rapacious paedophile. It was a lie and so demonstrably untrue that even the cautious BBC labelled it “false”. Not only was it shameful, it was also extremely stupid, because the net result was not to strengthen Mr Johnson’s grip on the premiership, but to make it more precarious. Quite a lot of Conservative MPs, including ones as yet undecided about what to do about him, recoiled in disgust. It so appalled the head of his policy unit that she tried to persuade him to issue a full retraction and apology. When he refused, Munira Mirza resigned. Hers was much the most significant of the cascade of departures from Number 10 over recent days. While the other advisers had only been members of his inner circle for a relatively short time before they were spat out, Ms Mirza was one of the Johnson long marchers. She was with him at City Hall and has been at his side for 14 years. He once said that she was one of the five women he most admires, a list that also included Boudicca and his grandmother. I shudder to think what Ms Mirza has seen during her many years aboard the Johnson rollercoaster. Anyone who has been with him that long must have a lead-lined stomach. She was even prepared to defend him when he likened women wearing burqas to “bank robbers” and “letter boxes”. For her, the “scurrilous accusation” about the Labour leader was something so sick-making that she couldn’t take any more. In an excoriating resignation letter, she lambasted him for “an inappropriate and partisan reference to a horrendous case of child sex abuse”. She was surely writing more in vain hope than serious expectation when she told him that it was “not too late” for him to say sorry “for a grave error of judgment”. Ms Mirza knows him better than almost anyone else and she knows he cannot change. It is essential to remember this whenever you hear Mr Johnson suggest that he can relaunch his premiership by building a refreshed regime at Number 10. After the mass exodus of his most senior aides, received wisdom at Westminster is that he will struggle to attract quality people to fill the vacancies. Would you sign up to work for a prime minister who might very well not be there in three months – or even three weeks? Would you want to put your career in the hands of an infamously capricious boss and the feverish calculations of Tory MPs debating whether or not to try to evict him? In a ruse to try to make himself sound serious about doing things differently, Mr Johnson says he want to create an Office of the Prime Minister, an institution all his predecessors managed to do without. A new brass plate won’t remove the fundamental source of the dysfunctionality in Downing Street because he is the fundamental source. From the lethal mishandling of many aspects of the pandemic to Wallpapergate and much else besides, all the scandals and follies that have been spawned in Number 10 during his time there have one common denominator: him. Whitehall understands this. Senior civil servants who have been tipped as potential permanent secretaries for the new Office of the Prime Minister have told colleagues that they have absolutely no interest in working in proximity to the lord of misrule at Number 10. It was announced last night that Steve Barclay will move from the Cabinet Office to become the new chief of staff and Guto Harri, an adviser to Mr Johnson when he was mayor of London, is the new director of communications. They may have persuaded themselves that they have what it takes to make him a better prime minister. All one can say to them is that many others have deluded themselves that they could change Mr Johnson – wives, girlfriends, editors, party leaders, civil servants, colleagues, staffers. Their invariable fate has been miserable failure. Remember the parable of Allegra Stratton. A successful journalist and then a well-regarded aide to the chancellor, she was lured on to team Johnson with the ego-seducing promise of a significant, influential and glamorous role as his chief spokeswoman. He told her she would find him an eager audience for her advice. The job offer then dematerialised when the prime minister changed his mind and she was shunted into a lesser function for a while before quitting in tears when she was exposed joking about a Christmas party she did not even attend. Consider the moral of Dominic Cummings. Thinking himself both more clever and more ruthless than Mr Johnson, he thought he had the guile, the ideas and the energy to control the prime minister and rule in his name from behind the throne. He ended up being ejected from Number 10 carrying a box of his belongings. Ponder on the fate of Dan Rosenfield. He became chief of staff at Number 10 in January 2021 when the prime minister was blaming his previous bunch of aides for the anarchy in the building. Mr Rosenfield arrived with glowing commendations from people who had worked with him. He was a superb operator, they said, with a record of getting things done both at the Treasury and in business. Tory MPs and cabinet ministers were assured that Dan was the man to fix Downing Street. Instead, he has become yet another figure who strayed into the chaos field generated by Mr Johnson and was then consumed by it. Barely more than a year after he took up the post, Mr Rosenfield has tendered his resignation. He, Mr Cummings and Ms Stratton are very different characters. All made the terrible mistake of thinking they were strong enough to cure Mr Johnson of his weaknesses. On Friday, the prime minister gave a talk to his remaining staff in which he quoted a character from The Lion King: “Change is good.” There’s only one change to the personnel at Number 10 that would do some real good. • Andrew Rawnsley is Chief Political Commentator of the ObserverAfter chatting on WhatsApp about the latest series of Ozark, Paula Leonard’s* daughter broached a difficult topic: she needed two bills paid, as she was locked out of her online bank account after getting a new phone. Leonard immediately moved to help her US-based daughter as she has done in the past. “There was this chit-chat and a lot of use of the word mum,” she says. “I think that was so clever because you have a Pavlovian response to ‘mum’ from your children. That gets you.” Over the next hour she arranged two bank transfers to the same account – one for £1,523 and another for £1,345. It was when there was a request for a third sum of £1,276, and a claim that bailiffs were threatening action, that Leonard, 75, realised there may be a problem. “While I was texting her, I emailed her and got a message back to say ‘That isn’t me mum, it must be a scam.’” It was then that she phoned the bank. Leonard is a victim of the latest form of fraud to balloon online, in which people are contacted by fraudsters claiming to be members of their family, who say they have lost their mobile and also access to online banking to pay bills. Lloyds Bank says the number of cases reported by customers soared by the end of last year, with victims losing an average of £1,950 each. When Leonard tried to ring the number during the scam, there was a crackling line, then a text message arrived saying “I think my mic is broken”. When she did not respond to the final demand, the criminals continued with “Mum?” and “Is it done?”. Then Leonard received texts from another number, with a photograph of a woman, saying: “I’m really sorry that my son Joshua has done this to you, and I’ll do what I can to get the money back.” She regarded this as an attempt by the fraudsters to reopen communication. Impersonating family members is a new tactic by criminals to undermine people’s mental safeguards against being defrauded, says Jake Moore, a cyber-security advisor at internet security firm ESET. “These scammers are well aware that if you can add the psychological element into a scam, they work far better than the previously used phishing emails thrown out as a net, where maybe they would see 3% to 4% of a return,” he says. “When you are being called mum or dad, that is what many people would have in their phonebook. Preying on the heartstrings by saying they have lost their phone – it fits in with what is very likely.” Moore says that it is easy for criminals to obtain a database of names, phone numbers and dates of birth through the dark web and social media channels. Charlie Shakeshaft, founder of Individual Protection Solutions, which aims to warn against scams, says fraudsters trade information on potential victims, including so-called “sucker lists” of people who have fallen for these crimes before. From there, the criminals can identify age groups of people who may have children of university age and who, for example, might ask for money. Typically, the conversation on WhatsApp, or via text message, is started by an automated bot, and then forwarded to a human who can communicate with the victim if they engage, says Moore. “Some can take weeks because they believe that, if they can really dupe those people, it might be worth it,” he says. This method is particularly sinister, says Shakeshaft. “People’s natural instinct is to worry about their child and to prey on that, in order to steal money from a victim, is pure evil.” Leonard says that the loss of almost £3,000 hurts financially, but is also infuriating for someone who considers herself self-sufficient and aware of threats. “It has hit my confidence and my pride,” she adds. She says that her banking app has a warning when transferring money to be aware of scams, but she continued with the payment as the request for cash was similar to what her daughter had asked for in the past. Nationwide, where she holds her account, told Cash that it would be giving a full refund “given the individual circumstances of the case”. It says that since there were warnings on the app, the building society had fulfilled its obligations under the contingent reimbursement model (CRM), a code of practice designed to give victims fairer and more consistent redress. “When making a decision to refund, we take into account a range of factors, including whether it was reasonable to believe the situation the member found themselves in. “In this case, her daughter lives abroad and is in the process of moving back home. Her daughter has previously received money from her mother. Therefore, a request like this was not unusual.” WhatsApp says that the company launched a campaign last year entitled “Stop. Think. Call”, encouraging people to pause and consider whether unusual, or urgent, requests for money, appear strange and to call a person before transferring any funds. “We have designed WhatsApp to protect people from unwanted contact, which is why, whenever you get a message from someone who isn’t in your contacts, we ask if you want to block or report them. We then review reports for abuse, and if we find an account has breached our terms of service, we will ban it,” it says. “We use a combination of techniques to enforce our policies and prevent abuse, including machine learning techniques to tackle fake accounts and fraudulent activity, and we assist law enforcement with their investigations in response to valid legal requests.” The company advises people who receive a suspicious message to ask for a voice note to verify that someone really is who they say they are. Lloyds warns people to be wary of any number that is not already in their contacts, and to try the original stored number of the person who is apparently making contact. HSBC, Britain’s largest bank, has also highlighted the growing number of victims of the fraud. “WhatsApp is typically the platform we are seeing this happen on, more often than not,” says the bank. The Lending Standards Board (LSB), which oversees the CRM, says organisations have to work together. “Other sectors need to come together with financial services providers and understand where the danger spots lie within the customer journey, so that each organisation can take responsibility for intervention at the right point,” said chief executive Emma Lovell. * Name has been changedFacebook was much in the news last week, although you may not realise that because it has been renamed Meta in the hope the bad vibes associated with its maiden name would gradually fade from public memory. (Google tried the same stunt with Alphabet and that hasn’t worked either.) For a change, though, Facebook’s latest moment at the top of the news agenda had nothing to do with scandals and everything to do with its financial results, which were so unexpectedly bad that the shares dropped 25% at one point, taking $240bn (£177bn) off its market value, which in turn led to a 2% drop in the Nasdaq index. Given that Facebook has hitherto been a licence to print money, so much so that at one stage (in 2019), when it was fined $5bn by the Federal Trade Commission, its shares actually went up as Wall Street registered that the ostensibly massive fine was actually the equivalent of a fleabite on an elephant. But this time was different. Why? Three factors stood out from reports of Mark Zuckerberg’s conference call with stock market analysts: the impact of TikTok; Apple’s move to require iPhone users to consent to being tracked by advertisers; and the revelation that the hitherto unstoppable growth in the number of Facebook users has stalled. Zuckerberg’s newfound obsession with TikTok must have puzzled many observers. After all, TikTok is not a social network. It’s a service that hosts short-form user videos, from genres such as pranks, stunts, tricks, jokes, dance and entertainment. It is owned by the Chinese company ByteDance, is understood by nobody over the age of 40 and has taken the world by storm. As a form of Chinese cultural imperialism, it makes Xi Jinping’s belt-and-road initiative look amateurish. So why is it keeping Zuckerberg awake at night? The answer is that TikTok caters brilliantly to a demographic group – so-called young adults – that Facebook, with its ageing demographics (parents and grandparents), doesn’t seem to serve well any more. This explains its zeal to re-energise Reels (its ludicrous attempt to mimic the short-video genre) and to reprioritise young adults in its other offerings. But the real problem for Facebook is that TikTok is monopolising its users’ attention, which is where the money for surveillance capitalism comes from. As Ben Thompson, the veteran tech analyst, puts it: “The problem for Meta is that its business isn’t based on surfacing content from your friends; it’s based on engagement and serving ads, which means any service that occupies your time and attention – and TikTok occupies a lot of it – is a fundamental threat.” The second source of woe for Facebook is the impact of Apple’s “app-tracking transparency” (ATT) feature, introduced last year with version 14.5 of its iOS mobile operating system. This required iPhone users to give explicit consent for user-level and device ID-based monitoring by apps. Not surprisingly, users declined in droves. And the impact for Facebook has now become clear – in the form of $10bn in lost advertising revenue. That’s 8.5% of the company’s 2021 revenues, but, more significantly, a quarter of its overall profit for the year. It’s easy to see why results like these might lead investors to reconsider their stock portfolios. But Facebook has had wobbles before and recovered. As a company, it has vast resources of cash and talent. Given time, it might be able to find a way of luring young adults away from TikTok and of navigating round Apple’s ATT. But for anyone who takes a longer-term view of these difficulties, the big story is that the company’s user base may have stopped growing. The figures revealed last week show that the number of daily active users fell by 500,000 and that the numbers of monthly active users seems to have levelled off at 2.91 billion. If this is the beginning of a trend, it’s really significant. Why? Basically it’s all about network effects. Way back in 1990, Bob Metcalfe, the co-inventor of Ethernet, formulated a “law” that says the value of a communications network is proportional to the square of the number of connected users of the system. This law has driven every networking system on the planet and harnessing it has always been the goal of company founders. The trick was to attract users quickly (by not charging for services) and to get to the point where user numbers are big enough to make it very difficult to break into the market. Facebook reached that point long ago and if you want a measure of its power at the moment, try working out what the square of 2.91bn is. The reason the network effect is so powerful is that as long as the number of users is increasing, the company is riding a virtuous circle. The more users it has, the greater the incentive for new users to sign up. From the beginning, driving growth in the number of users has been Zuckerberg’s overriding obsession. It’s why he has always turned a tin ear to the voices of caution when the company ran into scandals and charges of causing societal damage. But network effects work both ways. If user numbers start to decline, then the virtuous circle suddenly turns vicious, leading to a downward spiral. Maybe this is what TikTok is already doing to Facebook’s Instagram, for example. Zuckerberg is smart enough to know his position as master of the current universe may be transitory. Sic transit gloria and all that. Which may explain why he plans to be master of the coming metaverse. • John Naughton chairs the advisory board of the Minderoo Centre for Technology and Democracy at Cambridge UniversityThis week I’ve been to Istanbul, New York, Guangzhou, Turin, Bangkok and the Arctic, among other places. And that was just by Thursday. I want to say ‘sadly this was via a box of chocolates’, but I’m actually not sad at all, because they were absolutely terrific. Fifth Dimension chocolates marry super luxe handmade chocolates with tastes from around the world. Every day I sat down and read my menu which told me about the ingredients and their global inspiration. Biepu, for example, is from when the makers (Albert and Russell) travelled to Taiwan and made Hakka tea using sesame seeds and peanuts – thus both ingredients appear in the chocolate. (Biepu was a favourite. I sighed after eating it.) Siem Reap (Cambodian curry) is white chocolate with lemongrass, galangal, coconut and chilli. Hong Kong is milk chocolate with a soy sauce caramel. You get the idea. It may sound sad, but every day I looked forward to my little chocolate (I had a box of 12 – some days I did travel to more than one place, truth be told). January was a particularly anhedonic month for me, as it nearly always is. I usually try to go away in January, but travel isn’t easy at the moment is it? I found myself often looking up the city/town the chocolate was named after and finding out a bit more about its ingredients. Prices start at £22.60 for a box of 12. Much cheaper, and less stressful, than air travel. 5dchocolates.com Follow Annalisa on Twitter @AnnalisaBI scored a two in Wordle the other day. God. The rush, as the five squares in the second line blinked green, one by one, touched on the sublime. I felt like Mary Magdalen in the Caravaggio painting, lost in ecstasy. Oh mama. Up until this point, I had considered that those who found the solution in two guesses were simply lucky. Consistent threes and fours – this was a surer marker of Wordle prowess. Once I had scored a two myself, however, I began to doubt this hypothesis. Surely, only the most elite players could manage such a feat. Surely, I was now part of this pantheon. How did I do it, I hear ye mortals enquire? How did I reach ROBOT in two? Why, a combination of stellar start word (RATES), impeccable logic and a poetic appreciation of the Wordle lexicon, which appears to offer an oblique commentary on 21st life (TROLL… PROXY… PRICK…). No doubt this has helped the internet word puzzle to become, as one Twitter wag put it, “The sourdough starter of Omicron”, spreading at the same speed as its companion variant. According to the (non-affiliated) account @WordleStats, the number of people sharing their Wordle scores was roughly doubling each week in January: from 137,586 on 12 January to 280,622 on 19 January. This is just the people who are sharing their scores; there are perhaps millions more, Wordling in private. Not since the Sudoku-mania of the mid-00s, or perhaps even the first crossword craze of the 1910s, has a novel puzzle so captured the zeitgeist. The Wordle origin story is already part of the nano-mythology of the internet – it was designed by the British programmer, Josh Wardle, as a present for his girlfriend, Palak Shah, who was a fan of the New York Times’s Spelling Bee game. The beauty lies in its simplicity. You have to guess a five-letter word. You have six guesses. It would be addictive were the entire English-speaking world not rationed to a single hit per day. “One puzzle a day with exactly one solution. There is something almost religious about it, no?” wrote the American author Brandon Taylor in an essay on his Substack newsletter. “There is something peculiarly Calvinist about Wordle, or perhaps Wordle illuminates something particularly Calvinist about digital scarcity.” I logged on to Twitter to proselytise my miracle score – only to be confronted by a guy who had got it in one. A total fluke, obviously. What is it about these silly games that compels us so? Why do I experience a little rush of joy, each day, when I remember there’s still the Wordle to do? Alan Connor, author of Two Girls, One on Each Knee, a history of the crossword, notes that the pandemic has provided the perfect conditions for an upsurge of interest in word games of all kinds. “It’s no surprise that those who have had more time alone should see the appeal in losing themselves in a puzzle for a spell, but it also works for those who’ve been run off their feet: a puzzle is, at least, something you can feel you’ve finished.” Connor sees Wordle as a “charming gateway” to the world of “moving letters around for the sheer pleasure of it”, but it is far from the only distraction we have turned to. The crossword setters and puzzle compilers he knows report that they’ve never had so much interest. Publications from the Sun to the Telegraph to the New Yorker have upped their puzzle content in recent months – and this was from a position of strength. On the 100th anniversary of the crossword in 2013, Connor commissioned a YouGov survey on the popularity of the crossword and found that three in 10 British adults attempted a crossword each week and more than one in five made their decision to buy a newspaper based on the particular crossword culture of the publication. The solution to the clue that forms the title of his book is PATELLA, by the way. Like so many word puzzles, Wordle is really a numbers game masquerading as a letters game, according to mathematician Alex Bellos, Guardian puzzle compiler and author of the Language Lover’s Puzzle Book. “You’ll find that the people who are really brilliant at word games are mathematical. It’s quite often maths graduates who win the international Scrabble competitions and set cryptic crosswords.” The crucial strategy is that of “exhaustion”, he says – which is maybe why I’m so good at it. No, not that sort of exhaustion: “You have a finite number of solutions and you have to exhaustively look at every permutation and combination. It’s a natural instinct for mathematicians. You also have to be drawn to the non-human, a bit like a robot, working through letters in every different position.” Yet really successful puzzle games seem to share certain irresistible human elements, too – competition, status-seeking and superstition. Everyone Bellos knows has now arrived at a favourite first word, he says. “They are probably quite protective of them, too. They’re almost like lucky charms.” The author Laura Shepherd-Robinson tells me she used to have RATIO as her starter word. “Then I made the mistake of telling my husband,” she says. “He would work backwards from that knowledge when he saw my little yellow and green score on Twitter. So I’ve had to mix it up now. He is insufferable if he gets it in two or three.” My own feeling is that word games – like chord sequences, like chess, like translating a Russian sonnet into English while retaining the same metrical form – lie in the sweetspot between maths and art, logic and creativity, left brain and right. It’s the same metaphysical zone in which you would find Jorge Luis Borges’s Library of Babel, containing books with every possible permutation of 25 characters arranged over 410 pages of 40 lines each. Somewhere, amid the apparent randomness of the seemingly indefinite but not quite infinite library, there must exist a book containing the key to the universe. And also, its refutation. Word games are “about breaking meaning down to its atomic units,” says Adrienne Raphel, author of Thinking Inside the Box, a history of word puzzles. “When they are put together the letters make sense – but pull them apart and they have a different kind of elemental power. It taps into the primal instinct that we have where we see letters and we have to play with them.” Letter blocks are, of course, one of the first toys we give to toddlers. When Raphel first encountered Wordle, she was struck by the grid’s similarity to the Roman “magic square”, one of the earliest and most enduring of word games. A magic square is a grid of letters where the words read the same across as they do down. In English, magic squares of up to nine letters across have been constructed. A 10x10 is seen as the holy grail. But the most famous example is the SATOR 5x5 square, a palindrome, which reads: SATOR AREPO TENET OPERA ROTAS (roughly: “farmer Arepo works with a wheel”). It is one of the most common forms of Roman graffiti, turning up everywhere from Pompeii to Syria to Cirencester but its meaning is unknown. It may have been a charm for warding off evil spirits, or a way for early Christians to signal their presence to one another. “In Roman times, people delighted in the idea of remixing the same letters and getting new words,” Raphel says. “It must have seemed magical.” She detects similar properties in the game Boggle, in which the player must find the words snaking through a 4x4 grid of random letters. “It’s the magic feeling of creating a chaos of symbol, from which patterns emerge. People think of it as this junior cousin to Scrabble – I actually think Scrabble is inferior.” Maya Angelou would have been with her – the great poet was a Boggle nut and held regular tournaments in her Harlem home. But as a recovering Scrabble addict (I developed a seriously bad online habit in the mid-00s) I would maintain that Scrabble has its own life lessons to impart. A rookie player will often fixate on the word they can nearly make with their tiles, or moan about the constraints of the board. “Can’t make a thing with these darned letters!” they will cry. But the darned letters are the point. You must operate on the board in front of you with the constraints that you have. As in life. There is, of course, great art to creating a puzzle – just as there is a science to creating a perfect rhyme. “A good clue can give you all the pleasures of being duped that a mystery story can,” said Stephen Sondheim, who compiled cryptic crosswords. “It has surface innocence, surprise, the revelation of a concealed meaning, and the catharsis of solution.” Vladimir Nabokov composed chess problems and saw them in much the same way. “Chess problems demand from the composer the same virtues that characterise all worthwhile art: originality, invention, conciseness, harmony, complexity and splendid insincerity.” He additionally published the first known crosswords in Russian, admiring “their geometric, closed structure… reminiscent of chess”. One could begin to think that word games were the stuff of life itself. Or, perhaps, the inverse, an enormous waste of life. There’s something rather disturbing about the relish with which the husband in Brief Encounter attacks his Times crossword while poor Celia Johnson pines away. Connor points out that there was once a moral panic about the crossword – “coming here from America and wasting workers’ time” – before it became seen as a respectable, intellectual pastime. But in the 21st century – and this would be a very 21st century way of seeing things – we are more apt to see these things as means of “optimising” ourselves to ever-greater efficiency. Shepherd-Robinson canvasses her online group of writers (all Wordle nuts) and finds them split on the matter. Some see Wordle as just another form of procrastination. She, and many others, however, see it as a “warm-up exercise” for the day’s intellectual labours. “Wordle uses the same part of my brain that I’m using when I’m really wrestling with a plot,” she says. Essentially, it’s a logic problem, isn’t it? You are narrowing the path to the right answer. That’s exactly how I approach a book.” Even if it is a form of timewasting, though, it’s a relatively safe one, given that you have to wait 24 hours for each new puzzle. This is entirely deliberate. Wardle had worked in Silicon Valley, where software designers typically try to capture as much of your attention as they possibly can: by making the game endless, by sending you constant push notifications, by encouraging you to collect “gems” or build your “streak” (see: Duolingo, Simply Piano, the ghastly official Scrabble app, etc). “Philosophically, I enjoy doing the opposite of all those things… which I think has bizarrely had this effect where the game feels really human and just enjoyable,” he told Slate. This is what the author Brandon Taylor was driving at in his essay on Wordle. The internet once promised to be a space of boundless freedom, where we could each be fully ourselves. Social media has, however, brought about something like the opposite. As soon as anyone shares something interesting or funny or clever or cool, others imitate it and soon everyone is tweeting the same memes, idioms and ideas. Everyone is always “optimising” whether they realise it or not. As such, Taylor resists any temptation to share his first word, his score or his strategy. “I don’t want to be a replicant. I don’t want to be a cyborg. I don’t want to be just like everyone else, playing the same words and solving the puzzle in the same way.” He wants to do it in his own dumb way. Which seems pretty smart to me. And in short bursts, a word game can offer a respite from the endless imperatives of ambition, competition, optimisation. “When language is so often weaponised and over-scrutinised, it can be hugely curative to turn words into nothing more than pieces in a game,” says Connor. Bellos sees such games as the mental equivalent of isolating a muscle in the gym. “It’s pure concentration,” he says. “And when you do enter this cocoon of concentration, you forget about everything else in the world. You’re focused on this one small, elegant, aesthetically pleasing thing. For a few minutes, it’s a beautiful world.” He stops himself. “God, I sound pretentious.”This time last year, Sarah (not her real name) was a regular donor to the food bank drop-off point outside her local Sainsbury’s. But in March 2021 she had to stop. Despite working full-time and being on universal credit, the mother of two has for the past few months had to rely on food banks. “I have gone from being an average working-class citizen to somebody who’s in poverty,” said the 44-year-old Londoner. She is one of a growing number of former donors who, food aid workers report, are now turning to food banks themselves as the soaring cost of living expands the demographic of people struggling to afford food. “It’s so distressing to see the numbers of people coming who have never been in this position before,” said Sabine Goodwin of Independent Food Aid Network. “We’re seeing people who hadn’t even had to contemplate using a food bank, who might have been donating to a food bank this time last year. And it’s happening in every part of the country.” A Food Standards Agency survey published last month found that between April and June last year, 15% of people in England, Wales and Northern Ireland were food insecure (which means they were facing either reduced quality, variety or desirability of diet, or disrupted eating patterns and reduced food intake) and 4% reported visiting a food bank in the past 12 months. But the numbers are believed to have grown considerably. Research by poverty charity Turn2us found that four in 10 of those on universal credit – about 2.5 million people – would be unable to afford food after the axing in October of the £20 uplift. Sarah’s journey to poverty started when the breakdown of her 20-year relationship led to her moving out of her family home in March. But the soaring cost of food and fuel combined with rent, her share of childcare costs, and October’s universal credit cut, meant she was soon struggling to make ends meet. Now she thinks of going to the dentist as an unaffordable luxury, cannot afford after-school clubs for her teenage children and avoids turning the heating on. Without access to a food bank, she said, “my options would be just bread and butter, really. I would be going hungry”. When she first visited the food bank in June, she was ashamed. “I felt like ‘should I really be here? Am I in need enough?’ It was a really bad feeling. But luckily the team there were amazing and put me at ease very quickly.” Even with food banks, she still struggles to get enough to eat. “You really have to be mindful what you buy because you can’t get everything from the food bank.” Sarah, who now also volunteers at a food bank, said there should be more walk-in hubs offering food along with advice on the “too complicated” benefits system. As well as looming energy price rises, Sarah also faces moving flat and paying more rent. “I don’t know what I’m going to do,” she sighs. “It’s so mega expensive.” Demand for food banks had been growing since the start of the pandemic, but in recent months, numbers have grown exponentially. Charlotte White, manager of Earlsfield food bank in south-west London, said those relying on them have increased from 25-30 people a week to well over 100 households. “We’re terrified by what we’re seeing,” she said. “In the past two months it has gone crazy, in terms of the volume we’re seeing, but also the complexity of the problems and issues people are coming in with.” Former food bank donors, volunteers and support workers are turning to them, as are growing numbers of families and, for the first time, people with mortgages. “People will say, ‘I used to give to food banks and now I need you.’ We have also had some of our volunteers saying, ‘Could I take a bag today? Is that OK?’.” As many as 50% of the people Earlsfield helps are in work. “The guests we’ve seen for a long time are suffering more than ever, and we have this whole load of new guests needing us for the first time.” Paul O’Brien of social justice charity Micah Liverpool has seen the use of its food bank grow steadily since the universal credit cut. He predicts another influx of new registrations from April, when fuel prices rise. He wants more action from the government. “There are only so many food banks,” he said. “The pressure on the third sector is just too great.” Broke Not Broken, which runs a food bank in Perth and Kinross, has doubled its opening hours to meet demand and is helping more working people – including families with two working parents. “Before Covid, the reason most people used us was benefit sanctions. That’s not the case now,” said Annie McCormack, the charity’s chair. “Now pretty much every referral is here because of low incomes, or because they’re waiting to be moved on to universal credit, which takes a minimum of five weeks.” She worries how her small charity will survive. “We need to think seriously about how we continue. It’s a challenging question because we need more and more volunteers to be able to deliver parcels. Last April, we thought we could see the light at the end of the tunnel. The tunnel is never-ending now.”Made up in equal parts of emotional pop bangers and riveting electronic anomie, Mitski’s hotly anticipated fifth album does not disappoint. This Japanese American indie artist’s strides towards the mainstream are laced with resonant themes; disembodied hands, cleanliness and “the dark” recur as images. The hooks are sharp. A series of tunes skew hard towards sleek, oversaturated 80s pop. In addition to the maximalist cris de coeur The Only Heartbreaker and Love Me More – both previously released – Mitski packs in bouncy romps such as Should’ve Been Me, outlining the pitfalls of a relationship with deceptive orchestral cheer. The dulcet Americana of Heat Lightning could sit easily alongside the notionally more commercial work of Lana Del Rey. And yet the mesmerising album opener – Valentine, Texas – and its devastating midpoint – Everyone – cast Mitski as an altogether more frightening artist, a fierce being with “wet teeth”, one who ill-advisedly invites in “the dark” to take “whatever it wants”. “But it didn’t want me/ Yet,” she notes, a phrase pregnant with unresolved tension and dissonant musicality. This is an album that wrestles with the sisyphean slog of remaining engaged – with love, with work, with life. And you can dance to it.A throwaway moment in Monica Ali’s new novel introduces us to a minor character, an unpublished young black author who, when he talks of struggling to sell his manuscript – a futuristic thriller about an eco-terrorist attack on a billionaire’s post-apocalyptic bolthole in New Zealand – finds himself told to try something “closer to home”; drop the sci-fi, in other words, and write about being black in Britain today. You sense Ali speaks of what she knows; born in Dhaka and raised in England, she has arguably spent her whole career to date wriggling in the jaws of publishing’s authenticity fetish. Brick Lane, her bestselling 2003 debut about a Bangladeshi teenager’s arranged marriage in east London, earned her a reputation as a vital voice of multicultural Britain – which meant no one quite knew what to make of her next book, Alentejo Blue, tales of village life in rural Portugal. She fared better with In the Kitchen, about migrant labour in London; less so – putting it mildly - with the counterfactual shenanigans of Untold Story, in which Princess Diana, fearing assassination, fakes her own death and relocates to the US after cosmetic surgery in Brazil. The pattern – one novel a market-pleaser, the next a curious left turn – continues with Ali’s latest book, which is set in London in the wake of the Brexit vote and centres on Yasmin, a trainee doctor who is the daughter of Bengali immigrants. She’s about to marry her colleague, Joe, who lives with his subtly domineering mother, Harriet, a feminist academic still famous for posing nude in her 70s heyday. The setup starts off as giggly meet-the-parents comedy, with early laughs coming at the expense of the malapropisms and wonky grammar of Yasmin’s head-wobbling mother, Anisah, who mistakes a Howard Hodgkin painting on Harriet’s wall for a long-cherished childhood artwork by Joe. For his part, Joe faces embarrassment of his own when his mother’s self-congratulatory liberalism all but corners his fiancee into planning a Muslim wedding against her will. As Ali pokes fun at the unwitting ironies of one-size-fits-all feminism, the easy gags soon give way to the drama of a busy plot rife with secrets and lies. Yasmin gets a shock when a nurse on her ward lifts the lid on Joe’s double life, foreshadowed in segments told from his therapist’s point of view. An even more seismic upset follows the revelation that her parents’ cross-class marriage was a murkier affair than let on by the family lore of an unarranged love match. We stick chiefly to Yasmin’s perspective, her self-image slowly unravelling once she begins to grasp the nature of the shadow cast by her increasingly hard-drinking father, also a doctor. Private turmoil is amplified by ever-present workplace aggro, as Ali portrays a hard-pressed NHS prey to dodgy contractors and hidebound hierarchies, with a whistleblower subplot involving overmedicated geriatrics. There’s also lashings of sex, thanks to Yasmin’s suave older superior, an outlet for tit-for-tat infidelity; more lurid turns involve Joe’s relationship with his mother, whose readiness to walk in on him in the shower (among other liberties) further brings into relief Yasmin’s body-conscious inhibitions, before paving the way for a gnarly Oedipal storyline. If the novel’s mickey-taking of Harriet as a superannuated pin-up of second-wave feminism feels especially pointed, it may be relevant that Germaine Greer once wrote sharply on the row over Brick Lane, suggesting non-Asian readers trusted its portrayal of British Bangladeshis simply because Ali had a Bangladeshi father, a fact that counted for less “in the eyes of British Bangladeshis”... some of whom “did not recognise themselves”. Either way, Harriet’s story, like everyone’s here, is ultimately about sympathy, not score-settling. Even Ali’s broadest strokes – as when Anisah falls for a lesbian performance artist – butter us up for a sucker-punch climax in which a variety of buried sorrows come to light. We all, the novel seems to say, have our cross to bear, even overweening mums and dads, and (as Yasmin ends up thinking) “life is not simple”: a last-page banality brought to life by dint of the accumulated backstory generously granted to each member of the book’s two families. A topically freighted tale of premarital tension told with easy-reading propulsion, Love Marriage has the air of a surefire hit, and at the very least deserves to underwrite whatever curveball Ali has up her sleeve for next time: roll on the eco-thriller. • Love Marriage by Monica Ali is published by Virago (£18.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyTravellers have been warned to check their half-term holiday plans to make sure they meet Covid vaccination rules when travelling to EU destinations as a growing number of countries impose new restrictions. France joined Spain and Denmark last week in requiring anyone who completed their vaccination jabs more than 270 days ago to have a booster to enter the country – or be considered unvaccinated. Austria requires boosters after 180 days. It means that any of the 18 million people in the UK who had their second dose before mid-May in 2021 would need to have been boosted if they travel to those countries on Saturday, 12 February. Yet only 65% of over-12s have had a booster so far. People travelling to Italy, Croatia and Switzerland, as well as New York or California, will not face the same border checks but may find it harder to go to restaurants, museums and other indoor venues if they have not been boosted. Tourism leaders urged ministers to negotiate with European countries to prevent chaotic scenes at airports as the travel industry begins to revive. “It is too late now for regulations to change [before half term],” said Chris Rowles, the chair of Aito, which represents specialist travel companies. “Travellers, especially with children under 18, will have to be careful and well aware of individual countries’ regulations to ensure they can travel without problems.” The EU had been trying to develop a common approach between the 27 member states, he said, but they had taken different approaches. “What our government must do is negotiate with the EU to ensure that we are included in any joint EU regulations to make travel more seamless across Europe,” Rowles said, adding that the rules should be agreed for all four nations in the UK. Craig Burton, managing director of Ski Solutions, said most skiers had been aware of the issues, but the different restrictions had made things “really complicated”, particularly for families with children under 12, most of whom cannot be vaccinated in the UK, but face vaccine requirements in some countries. “We have heard of some people getting caught out by the passport validity rules, when they’re dusting down their passport for the first time in a couple of years,” Burton said. EU rules require travellers from third countries such as the UK to have a passport issued within the last 10 years – some British passports include extra months if they were renewed early. Rules within countries sounded “scary”, Burton added, “but it’s manageable”. “I was in Italy last week. They have the ‘super green pass’ [to prove vaccination status]. You download the QR code from your NHS app and save it as a screensaver, show it at the ski lifts and away you go.” Paul Charles, chief executive of travel consultancy the PC Agency, said: “Overall, it’s clear that we’re in a no-man’s-land phase coming out of the pandemic. It’s causing a lot of confusion because people are having to do calculations about when they’ve had the vaccine, and, if they’ve got children, whether they’ve had enough vaccines. “We’re seeing a jigsaw puzzle of restrictions emerging, and customers will choose somewhere that’s easier to go. This is a key booking period for the summer holidays, and France is going to lose out enormously.” Tom Jenkins, the chief executive of ETOA, the trade association for tour operators in European destinations, said most travellers would not be surprised to have to navigate complex restrictions. “What people probably aren’t prepared for is the scrutiny that British passport holders are going to be subjected to once they arrive in Europe,” he said. “This has been a phenomenon at the margins of most travellers’ awareness. Now they’re going to find themselves in the midst of it. We’re used to seeing non-EU travellers standing in a queue to get into Paris or Italy. Now British nationals will be part of that queue.” Since the UK formally left the EU on 1 January 2021, British travellers have faced passport checks. With traveller numbers depressed by the pandemic, that has not made much difference to the experience of many people so far. But as the volume of British tourists increases, they will test the capacity of officials in some destinations to process non-EU travellers. The appetite for foreign holidays appears to be returning. Tui said it was seeing strong demand for the Canaries, Greece and mainland Spain.For the first time in a long time, I’ve been reading my own columns from the start. The impetus came when a friend reached out to say he’d started doing so, on account of his imminent fatherhood. Going over the early articles might, he said, give him a sense of things to come. I was cheered by this, because I am extremely vain, but also slightly embarrassed since he’d worked out to do this before I had, now that I face the prospect of another baby and a startling lack of memory about how it should be cared for. I simply can’t remember much about the early days of fatherhood, because I wrote about the experiences of rearing an actual baby while I was rearing an actual baby. It’s a time in one’s life where memory undergoes a dark age. Stress, sleep deprivation and the constant buffeting of immediate, short-term goals means there are entire months that might only be retrieved from my brain via hypnosis. This time four years ago, on the other hand, I’d been reading books, buying a small arsenal of clothes, accessories and equipment, cleaning and re-cleaning our house until it squeaked and gleamed like one of those crime labs you see in films. This time out, I haven’t bought a single new piece of clothing, would sooner resit my maths GCSE than read another book about parenting, and the combination of two years spent with both of us working from home, and the grubby ambulations of our three-and-a-half year old son, have precluded our house from being any more hygienic than one of those crime scenes you see in films. We do, of course, have some reason to be less worried. We’ve done it once before and, grubbiness and tantrums aside, he’s mostly turned out all right. He was also the last baby to be born on either side of the family for a couple of years, and this inherited an unprecedented jackpot in hand-me-downs so our ceiling now bulges with baby toys, gadgets and clothes. But the day and daily of child-rearing feels distant and hard to conjure. So, here I sit, wading back through old columns to see if they can stand me in better stead, only to be found wanting. Not by the words themselves, of course – even I am rendered powerless by my trademark mix of gentle humour and wry observation. No, by the fact that I failed to create a step-by-step guide to baby care, and chronicled instead my boring old thoughts and feelings about the ordeal. Overall, I’m stunned by the hubris. Of watching a guy, week by week, learning how little he knows, but always without realising that the frontiers of his ignorance will be stretched back further still by the following week. To some extent, perhaps, it’s cheering; to watch this blundering moron fail, but fail upwards, step by step. If he could do it, I reckon, so can I. Did Ye Hear Mammy Died? by Séamas O’Reilly is out now (Little, Brown, £16.99). Buy a copy from guardianbookshop at £14.78 Follow Séamas on Twitter @shockproofbeatsLevelling up secretary Michael Gove last week unveiled the government’s long-delayed plans to address regional and social inequalities, but cash-strapped councils across England are having to plan heavy cuts to frontline services after more than a decade of ongoing austerity. Recent funding increases have not undone £15bn of cuts in central government grants to local authorities between 2010 and 2020, and councils wrestling with the impact of Covid are set to pass a succession of savings measures plus widespread council tax increases. Several local authorities are facing votes on service cuts in the coming weeks. •Nottingham is planning cuts to youth services, with all play schemes axed and a move toward targeted rather than universal provision. Its Early Help service would see a reduction in staffing and early intervention for families. Funding for its Base 51 youth centre, which provides services including counselling and crisis support, would be axed. Six of the city’s nine children’s centres would close from 2023. •Sandwell in the West Midlands is reviewing the respite support it provides, to allow unpaid carers such as family members a much-needed break while the person they care for is looked after by someone else. Sandwell plans to halve this from 56 days a year to 28, which the council admits “will reduce the level of service offered”. It is also planning to increase the amount adult care users pay for non-residential care. •Kent is planning to cut more than £2m from subsidised bus services, with some contracts potentially terminating. The cost of a school bus discount pass will rise by £80 a year, and by £30 for children receiving free school meals. The council is also planning to cut travel concessions for those accompanying disabled people. •Liverpool is planning to cut funding for community organisations that run three libraries: they took these over from the council in 2015 to save them from closure. •Hartlepool is planning to end free home-to-school transport for 16- to 19-year-olds with special education needs and disabilities (Send). Support may be axed for current students or perhaps just for new starters. •Croydon is planning to save more than £1m a year through reviews of care packages for disabled and elderly people and those with mental health needs. Other councils are explicitly looking to save money by reviewing high-cost care packages. A spokesperson for the Department for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities said the government was increasing councils’ “core spending power” by 4% and “providing the largest cash-terms increase in grant funding in 10 years”.As Thitsar* walked through her neighbourhood one December morning, she was struck by its emptiness. The bamboo shacks that line the streets of Hlaing Tharyar, an industrial township on the outskirts of Myanmar’s largest city, Yangon, lay in tatters, overgrown with weeds. The vendors who once weaved through traffic had vanished, as had many of the informal settlements where they lived and the roadside tea shops where they gathered. Streets that had once resounded with chants for democracy were now eerily silent. The scene was nearly unrecognisable from just 10 months earlier, when Hlaing Tharyar was a hotbed of resistance following the 1 February military coup which overthrew the elected government led by Aung San Suu Kyi. Over the past decade, Myanmar’s manufacturing and garment industry saw huge growth, much of it centred in Hlaing Tharyar. Hundreds of thousands of women and men from farming backgrounds flocked to the township to work in its factories, many of which supplied clothes to international brands. When the coup happened, these factory workers came out in full force to resist. Garment workers led Yangon’s first protests on 6 February, and continued demonstrating even as many were fired from their jobs. By late February, soldiers were regularly shooting protesters. On 14 March, hundreds of soldiers and police surrounded protesters and fired at them with assault rifles, killing at least 66 people, which Human Rights Watch described as a massacre. The crackdowns, along with a spiralling economic downturn, caused a mass exodus of Hlaing Tharyar’s factory workers back to their rural villages. Fighting in the countryside is now raging between armed civilian anti-coup groups and the military, which is responding with arson, airstrikes, shelling and other indiscriminate attacks. One year on, those who remain in Hlaing Tharyar are struggling just to survive. The coup and accompanying violence and instability have left the garment sector in tatters. Poverty and food insecurity have climbed. The UN Development Programme has offered grim forecasts, including that urban poverty would triple by this year compared with 2019 levels and that overall poverty rates would return to levels not seen since 2005. Thitsar remembers Hlaing Tharyar’s week of terror last March, when she hid with her aunt. “We barricaded ourselves inside until everything was over,” she says. Now she is out of a job. After months of falling orders, her factory closed in September. Meanwhile, food prices have risen by about 30%, she says. She is now clinging to the hope that her factory will reopen. Even those still in work face a range of hardships. On 3 September, two prominent unions accused employers of “taking advantage of the coup” to sack workers, target union leaders and drive down wages. Than Htun*, another garment worker in Hlaing Tharyar, actively protested in February, but returned to work after several co-workers were fired for going on strike. He says workers were routinely coerced into taking extra shifts, overtime pay has been cut and workers have been made to sleep in an unfinished building next to the factory in case of sudden labour inspections. Military officers and local officials have since forcibly evicted more than 8,000 families and destroyed their homes, according to research by University College London. People in Hlaing Tharyar are also living under a cloud of fear caused by a rise in explosions and killings, carried out by both military-sponsored vigilante militias and anti-coup urban guerrilla groups which have increased across the country since June. In December alone, the township suffered at least 16 explosions in five incidents targeting police stations and military bases, according to a tally of local media reports and announcements from guerrilla groups carried out by the Guardian. Military informants are also ubiquitous, as are random checkpoints where soldiers and police inspect people’s belongings and the contents of their phones. For Thitsar, these changes have made her fearful of even going outside for everyday errands. “There are arbitrary shootings and explosions. If there’s a conflict, anyone can get caught in the middle,” she says. For Than Htun, the neighbourhood is unrecognisable. Market stalls now shut by 8pm, while all-day electricity cuts have become common as public boycotts of electricity bills squeeze the junta’s revenues. Sometimes, the streets are completely dark when he finishes his shift at 7pm. As the military increases surveillance around the country, he feels as if he is always being watched. “Even when I’m in my own room, I feel the need to wear earphones when listening to the news. It’s like I’m in a strange land.” * Names have been changed to protect their identity Nway is a freelance reporter based in Yangon. She is writing under a pseudonym for security reasons Additional editing by Emily FishbeinAi Weiwei, 64, must qualify by now as a grand old man of contemporary art except that as a sculptor, photographer and documentary film-maker, he is characterised by unflagging energy and youthful playfulness. As a child, he lived in a dugout in China’s “Little Siberia” where his poet father, Ai Qing, had been banished, condemned as a “rightist”. In 2011, he was “disappeared” for 81 days in a Chinese jail and then spent four years under house arrest. In 2015, he left China and has since lived in Berlin, Cambridge and Portugal. His latest show at Kettle’s Yard, The Liberty of Doubt, exhibits Chinese antiquities – bought in 2020 at a Cambridge auction sale – alongside his own work. You seem always to have been interested in what constitutes a fake and even once described yourself as simultaneously “sincere and insincere”? I talk about fakes all the time. My architecture company in China is called Fake. People joke and say: the only real company, producing real stuff, in China is “Fake”. I thought maybe I’d do a show about authenticity. I’ve been a collector of Chinese antiquities for 30 years, I used to look for them in thousands of shops in China. I enjoyed it because every piece is a mystery. The Cambridge auction happened when I was driving to Portugal. I told my partner to use her garage to store the works – they arrived badly wrapped in newspaper. I realised that many were not authentic but they were not badly made. They were super-good – perfect – except that they did not have the patina of 500 years ago. Then I showed them to friends, one of whom, a retired top US dealer, said: “Weiwei, it is all fake.” Another friend who sells antiques in China said: “Not only is this fake, I even know who made it.” And I thought: this is interesting. There is a 2020 work in the show of a toilet roll made out of marble (2020). Do you like using valuable materials ironically? Playfulness is so important – I think I am like a cat. Cats are always wondering. If you throw a paper ball to a cat, it can play for a whole day…. Life is a serious matter, but also ironic. When marble was used in the past, it had a monumental or memorialising status. Toilet paper disappeared from the shelves during the pandemic. This is a society in which we can send a shuttle into outer space yet cannot solve a humble problem – the moment deserved to be remembered. In your autobiography, you write of your “wilful tendency to let the dice fall where they may” – does that streak of gambling and opportunism contribute to your art? The first intention of life itself is to grab something. It is like a drunk person having to grab something to hold on to… grabbing reflects my mind: as an artist, if I don’t grab something, I might as well be dead. It is my inner need to do that. To what extent have the years spent living in the dugout influenced your life? What did they teach you about survival? And what did being dirt-poor teach you about riches? My father was a poet, and the word “money” never came out of his mouth. He was such a pure man. What mattered was imagination and the spiritual and the daily practice of language. This time was a training in understanding that nothing belongs to you except your mind and your health. The rest is illusion. If I look back, it was an extremely difficult time. If you look at my iPhone, I have this image of the dugout… it was in a vast, vast desert – the Gobi desert – with no sign of life. But we survived. We survived the lack of material things. We also had to protect our dignity from total insult and discrimination – but I didn’t really pay much very attention until much later. That time taught me how low humanity can go. And at what point in your life did you start to feel a spirit of resistance in yourself? When I started to research the students who died in the Sichuan earthquake in 2008, right before the Olympics opened [the Chinese government censored and controlled all information about the earthquake]. Piece by piece, we found them – the names, schools and universities of 5,219 students. I felt desperate at that time. I felt I could collapse at any moment and I knew the authorities could make me disappear easily. What would your father have made of your success had he lived to see it? He died in 1996. I went back [to China] from New York in 1993. I was trying to stay calmly in China – doing nothing, sometimes playing poker with my brother, just to be there as his son. I knew the time was getting closer and one night we came to the hospital and he had passed away. We didn’t have very close relations, we were together all the time but didn’t have that much communication. He had been tragic in his life. His mind was always somewhere else. He never wanted me to become an artist. He was tolerant that I did art, but knew what art was like in China, that it could bring all kinds of trouble. He had been punished by doing poetry – so he did not encourage nor try to stop me. He would never have imagined that I would become a well-known artist. Do you think your son, Ai Lao, has the artistic or poetic gene? He is 13, and I think my son has better potential than me – I was very late in recognising I could do some art but he, I can see, is very creative and with a strong mind and good skill. But I am not sure he would want to become an artist. And I don’t give him any advice. One of your films that will be part of the exhibition is Human Flow (2017), about the refugee crisis. I imagine you must have keen fellow feeling for the refugees… To be a refugee, you have to give up everything: your language, first; your people, your culture, even your religion. It is never a clear choice. I can understand their courage to give up everything in exchange for their children’s future. And many courageous people lose their lives on the way to their destination. That’s a price they are paying… They need safety and to be helped and treated with compassion and to be told “here you can stay”, but we don’t even give that possibility, and that makes me really frustrated. They ask so little and are giving up so much. Could you ever envisage living in China again? I’d love to go back. My mum is almost 90 and thinks about me and my safety but tells me: do not come back. I take her words seriously. No mum tells her son: “do not come back”, but she is sincere because of what she experienced when I was disappeared. In the whole nation, no one could give her one sentence about where I was and that made her older by many years so that, when I came out, I could see all the worry and absence of sleep marked on her face. This morning, knowing I was interviewing you, a headline leapt out at me: where is Chinese tennis champion Peng Shuai? She is in the very safe hands of the Communist party. They will make sure she behaves exactly according to the party. She may already be thinking she made a mistake in exposing this very deep, dark relationship. She has put her family, friends, career at stake. There is no spirit for her any more. She has become another person, and whatever she tells you is not true. I know your work involves many people – how many do you employ regularly in your team and is it really true, as you often modestly argue, that you are mostly the ideas man nowadays? We have about 30 people – mostly, they find me. Many have been with me 10, 20 or even 30 years. Once we were together, we became like a family. We live together and have fun. I have survived a difficult life and I am a very handy person – my hands are always working. If your hands are not working, your brain is not going to function. I am very capable: carpentry, stone, iron. I have also become skilful on social media. Everything is about the continuity of learning, and learning comes from curiosity. Does your energy ever flag? I have much less energy, which is natural when you are getting older. My older dog always takes a nap while my younger dog runs round with more curiosity. But when you do something you believe in, it attracts you and you are part of it. You borrow your energy from others. The Liberty of Doubt is at Kettle’s Yard, Cambridge, 12 February-19 JuneThe news that one more prominent man in the world of media has been forced to resign over a sex scandal barely warrants the raise of an eyebrow these days, but it is noteworthy if he resigns because there was sex with no scandal. This was the case for Jeff Zucker, now ex-president of CNN, who stepped down last week after it was revealed that he was romantically involved with a colleague, Allison Gollust. While Zucker’s resignation has prompted speculation about political machinations behind the scenes, it’s hard to see what he actually did wrong. The relationship was consensual; both Zucker and Gollust are divorced and of a similar age (he’s 56, she’s 49). By Zucker’s own admission, his fault was the failure to disclose the relationship when it began, in line with company policy. Much as it pains me to agree with the HBO Real Time host Bill Maher, he had a point when he remarked: “This used to be called discretion.” So is the office romance now a resigning offence? According to one 2017 study, 11% of people met their long-term partner at work, compared with 19% in 1995. There are generations coming of age now that will find it impossible to imagine a world before the advent of dating apps, but for those of us of Gen X and older, work was one of the places you might reliably hope to meet people with similar interests, abilities or outlooks. It’s a staple of sitcoms: the tentative flirtation between Tim and Dawn in The Office struck a chord with millions of viewers because there can be few adults who have not sought to leaven the tedium of another work day with an exchange of glances, in-jokes or “accidental” encounters at the coffee machine with an attractive colleague. Perhaps it’s still a generational thing; season one of And Just Like That…, the reboot of Sex and the City, ended with 55-year-old Carrie snogging her boss in the lift at work. Even if it doesn’t lead anywhere, the office flirtation can offer a welcome bright spot in a long day; one more harmless pleasure the pandemic has stolen from us. Or is it harmless? Perhaps more than any other intimate relationship, the office romance is open to abuse because of the implications for careers and livelihoods. There were those, mostly men, who lamented that the #MeToo and #TimesUp movements sounded the death knell for office flirtations, as companies increasingly tightened their policies around workplace relationships, a move welcomed by many women weary of their male bosses’ and colleagues’ inability to distinguish between compliments and harassment. Facebook and Google now have a rule that employees can ask a co-worker out only once; if they’re turned down, any subsequent attempt could be a disciplinary matter. Maybe the office romance has become so fraught that it should be consigned to history. After all, home-working, Zoom and the recent dearth of work parties everywhere except Downing Street have more or less killed it off entirely. For many Britons, the idea of “love contracts”, as implemented by some US companies, would be excruciating; most of us would rather be celibate forever than sit in front of an HR manager with a colleague we’ve started shagging to sign legal disclaimers about professional behaviour and declarations that neither party was coerced. I confess that I’m on the side of workplace romances: I owe my existence to one. My parents met teaching at the same school and continued to work happily together as colleagues until they both retired. Of course, policies that protect younger and more vulnerable employees from exploitation are a necessary step towards equality and respect, but it’s also important that companies trust workers to manage their professional and personal lives as consenting adults. I’m wary of any policy that would force people to choose between their relationship and their job; in the case of Zucker and Gollust, he took the rap, but it’s easy to see how women could end up disproportionately affected by such rules. And if the history of art, literature and human behaviour has taught us anything, it’s that attempting to forbid romantic liaisons only makes them more attractive. • This article was amended on 6 February 2022. An earlier version incorrectly described Bill Maher as a “Fox News host”. • Stephanie Merritt’s books include While You SleepPam &amp; Tommy (Disney+) Mary Beard’s Forbidden Art (BBC Two) | iPlayer Station Eleven (Starzplay) Race and Medical Experiments: What’s the Truth? (Channel 4) | All 4 It’s odd to think of the Disney+ series Pam &amp; Tommy as a period piece, but as it’s set in the 1990s, that’s what it is. Based on an article by Amanda Chicago Lewis, it dramatises the fallout from the sex tape stolen from Mötley Crüe’s Tommy Lee and Playboy model/Baywatch actor Pamela Anderson, and also serves as a time capsule of the dawn of internet porn and the sexual mores of the era. These days, would Anderson be slut-shamed on a global level? Mind you, just as she didn’t consent to the release of the tape (a hedonistic sex marathon believed to generate $77m), nor did she give her blessing to this series, which is something to consider as the eight episodes unfold. The tone verges on hyperreal – at one point Lee’s penis talks, bobbing away like a CGI-uncooked sausage – but the people are real. Craig Gillespie (I, Tonya) directs the first three episodes and also executive produces. What saves Pam &amp; Tommy from disappearing beneath a churning sea of retrospective-“ick” is a crisp script from Robert Siegel (The Wrestler) – Lee shouting: “I’m going to be a dad. On purpose” – and bravura performances. Lily James is transformed into Pam with hairpieces, fake teeth and prosthetics, including breasts so gargantuan, female viewers may be thinking less of sex than of biting bra straps and backache. Initially there’s the fear that James is going to play Anderson as a human pout, a pinkie-chewing 90s Marilyn Monroe in denim cut-off shorts, but as the nightmare develops, so does her vulnerability and anger. As Lee (tattooed, jockstrapped, strutting around his Malibu mansion waving a gun), Sebastian Stan (Captain America: The First Avenger) goes full cartoon LA rock star, though in fairness, so do most LA rock stars. Seth Rogen (who helped develop the project) is fine as the appallingly treated workman who steals the tape, but we see far too much of him: his justifications, his regret, his being ripped off too, his interest in theology… enough already! Indeed, after lively opening episodes, the series starts to struggle as it gets into legal actions resulting from the leaking of the tape. This show seems to want to be viewed in the same light as Paul Thomas Anderson’s 1997 porn-set masterpiece Boogie Nights, but the piquant blend of sleaze and heart isn’t quite there. James is dynamite though: Anderson is portrayed not as a Barbie doll having a tantrum, but as a real hurting woman. For the shock of the illicit, the first of BBC Two’s two-part documentary Mary Beard’s Forbidden Art delivered arty obscenities and cultural nasties by the shovelful: penises galore, war atrocities, incest, bestiality. It wasn’t long before I was so burnt out and desensitised, a full-blown multi-species orgy could have erupted at the other end of the sofa and I’d have just sighed and chucked over some wet wipes. This was an engrossing documentary in which the Cambridge University professor of classics examined not only banned works, but also art that people choose to look away from. Tracey Emin spoke candidly about her oeuvre, detailing her assaults, abortions and cancer: “If I go through hell, I make paintings about hell.” Turner prize winner Martin Creed showed videos depicting people first vomiting, then defecating on to the floor (shocking – no one wiped). Daphne Todd won the BP portrait award in 2010 for her painting of her 100-year-old mother shortly after her death. Todd stopped painting her after three days, saying: “I didn’t want it to get to a point where there was a smell, I suppose.” Even Beard blanched at that one. A 10-part Starzplay adaptation of Emily St John Mandel’s 2014 bestseller, Station Eleven, adapted by Patrick Somerville, arrives bearing a spookily familiar theme. A virus destroys the world’s population, and years later, a troupe of thespians travel around, foraging, surviving, performing the works of Shakespeare, keeping the spirit of creativity alive. I wasn’t optimistic (foraging hippy troupes? I’ve done my time at Glastonbury), but a few episodes in, I’m finding Station Eleven richly themed and intriguing. This is about wars of the outer and inner world (love and hope versus evil and menace). In the virus scenes, it’s inky in its darkness: dead people slump over workstations; a plane crashes in a long, slow moment; snow-blanketed cars are marooned in a motionless jam. Danielle Deadwyler is haunting as the heartbroken, demotivated author of a graphic novel called Station Eleven. Mackenzie Davis is raw and credible as Kirsten, who was a child actor performing on stage in King Lear when the plague struck and the lead (Gael García Bernal) died. Kirsten goes on to become one of the Shakespearean performers, but is she too zealous about protecting the troupe at all costs? At times, Station Eleven becomes choked up on themes, time zones and characters, and liberties have been taken with reality: in this post-civilisation, everybody has straight white teeth – clearly all the dentists survived. Still, especially considering our own recent history, this is meaty, absorbing fare, with a true sense of global and personal catastrophe. Sometimes a documentary sharply nudges you awake and makes you look at things differently. Seyi Rhodes’s hardworking Channel 4 documentary Race and Medical Experiments: What’s the Truth? did just that. An examination of heightened vaccine hesitancy among ethnic minorities, it took a forensic look at why some people of colour harbour an ingrained distrust of science and medicine. Rhodes travelled to the US to relate some grim history. In Tuskegee, Alabama, black people with syphilis were treated as experiments and allowed to die, even though a cure was available. Among other outrages, he also looked into the 20th-century testing of mustard gas on hundreds of British and Indian soldiers. Rhodes, who is vaccinated himself, steered this shocking documentary with calm authority, explaining how people of colour were helping one another overcome their deep-set hesitancy. This was a sobering, valuable hour shining a bright torch into a dark area. What else I’m watching BBC Three relaunch The channel’s return to terrestrial TV last week included RuPaul’s Drag Race UK Vs the World and repeats of Fleabag, which originally aired on BBC Three, as did Sally Rooney’s Normal People. An adaptation of Rooney’s debut novel, Conversations With Friends, is imminent. Celebrity Hunted (Channel 4) A celebrity version of the show in which contestants evade capture by “hunters”, but for how long? In the opener, former Olympic sprinter Iwan Thomas popped home! (Last time, Stanley Johnson seemed to go on his hols.) All in aid of Stand Up to Cancer. The Tourist (BBC One) The series finale of the Australian outback-based thriller that turned out to have more plotholes than a doily. Still, Jamie Dornan and Danielle Macdonald are good, the locations are stunning, and at least it’s been a bit different.The air, heavy in the late afternoon sunshine, hums with the work of the bees in Babylonstoren’s garden of Eden. Here, owners Karen Roos and Koos Bekker grow more than 300 varieties of edible or medicinal plants in the extraordinary gardens inspired by the farms that supplied ships passing the Cape of Good Hope in the 17th century, when the farm was first established. Today, the werf (farmyard) and its structures remain among the finest unspoilt examples of traditional Cape Dutch architectural styles. In this positively utopian setting in South Africa’s Cape Winelands, the Owners’ House – the Babylonstoren estate’s principal home – is irresistible. Roos’s deft touch and nuanced appreciation of tradition are unmistakable in the simplicity of her homestead, which has been not so much restored as fully reinvigorated. The farmhouse itself dates back to 1777. When Roos, the former editor of South Africa’s Elle Decoration, and Bekker, a telecoms billionaire, first bought Babylonstoren, one of its many attractions was the fact that the house had never been restored. The most recent work, in fact, dated back to 1931 when a Victorian renovation to remove the gables was undone and the gables replaced. The couple – who also own the Newt in Somerset, a magnificent, newly restored 300-acre hotel and estate – have long had a commitment to authenticity. In the sitting room at Babylonstoren, for example, Roos supervised the painstaking removal of 23 layers of paint to reveal the original ochre-hued brown wall paint finely edged with stripes of teal, cream and dark brown. The colours were exactly matched and the room carefully repainted. “It has the benefit of downplaying the heaviness of the dark wood built-in cupboards that the Dutch loved so much,” says Roos. “They have the potential to be overwhelming if the walls are whitewashed, but here they just melt in with the original wall colour.” The sitting room – with its contemporary linen, leather and steel furnishings that meld seamlessly with the 240-year-old structure – is cool and calm, and forms the crossbar of the home’s traditional H-structure. As such, it has doors linking to the two perpendicular rear wings of the house. To the left is the door leading to the main bedroom suite and to the right is the kitchen. Throughout the home original fittings have been reconditioned to their original splendour – worn flagstones polished to a high gloss, and wide yellow-wood floorboards, ceiling beams, wooden windows and sills set deep into the thick clay-brick walls all restored. Despite the grand heritage of Babylonstoren, this is unmistakably a farmhouse. Much of the action takes place in the kitchen, with its huge open hearth and enormous refectory table. There’s an Aga gas hob and wood-burning stove and the kitchen chandelier – made from an antique wine-bottle drier – is rustic yet contemporary. While the sitting room and bedrooms are the essence of comfortable, traditional minimalism, the library-cum-study (voorkamer) is a room of wonder. Cabinets are filled with collections and objets, from shards of pottery dug up on the farm and original VOC Delftware to massive ammonites and an encyclopaedic collection of butterflies. When it’s time for a rest, a scarlet-covered couch is the perfect place for an afternoon nap in front of the fireplace. The floor-to-near-ceiling-high windows in the voorkamer are typical of Cape Dutch homes. The windows are deep-set, revealing the thickness of the stone and clay-brick walls built to withstand the intense heat in summer. The curvaceous Norman Cherner vintage chair is perfectly at home in this eclectic yet cohesive space. The magnificent wetroom evokes spa-like Edwardian bathrooms. The marble double basin and taps are from a salvage building yard, the mirror was custom made, and the rainshower is from Axor. The glass-and-wood display cabinet from a junk shop is filled with a vignette of bathroom luxuries reminiscent of an old-school apothecary. It is fitting that this home, which has been continuously occupied for 240 years, is no stiff museum piece. Its interiors pay tribute to its traditional heritage, but it is Karen’s appreciation for contemporary aesthetics that brings the Owners’ House to life. The ensuite bathrooms are a wonderful example of this. Individual in style, they evoke a grand era of Edwardian spas and the lavish luxury of indoor plumbing. You can just imagine splashing about in the massive circular bath or languishing under the rain shower in the wetroom. All in all, Babylonstoren’s principal home is a living, fresh celebration of Cape Dutch style. babylonstoren.comThe news that Newcastle Cathedral is going to host monthly comedy nights, complete with “full bar” and merchandise outlet, has annoyed a former chaplain to the Queen. Dr Gavin Ashenden described it as “a misuse” and feared the “awesome” cathedral would be reduced to “an O2 Arena or a nightclub”. “If the diocese of Newcastle wants to have comedians, it should hire a comedy club,” he said, “but to do it in a cathedral is offensive to everyone who thinks a cathedral is a holy space.” I like comedy but it’s hard to immediately dismiss this view. You imagine a comedy gig-style lighting state, all reds and greens and lager brand gobos flickering up the walls, and it all feeling somehow diabolical in the context of shadowy gothic architecture. And then in the middle, the confident standup, spotlit, microphone in hand, swearing and talking about being dumped and saying that the statues of the saints look like paedos. The raucous laughter echoing up the nave, spilt beer trickling into the lettering of the memorial flagstones, while the comedian perches a buttock on the altar and goes into his bit about internet porn. I’ve never liked those bars or clubs that exist in deconsecrated Victorian churches or chapels. It feels a bit sad, the spiritual hopes of the people who commissioned and built those dignified places dashed nightly, their confidence and piety made foolish by the passing of time, as punters drink or dance or rush to the new lean-to toilet block. They’re fine buildings whose congregations have long scattered, and so logically they should be used, but a part of me feels that demolition would be kinder to the memory of the long-dead worshippers who once filled them. So is Ashenden right when he says that, by allowing David O’Doherty’s forthcoming gig, the Church of England has shown “spiritual illiteracy”? It’s a catchy phrase, no less than you’d expect from a media-savvy former cleric, though I’m not sure what it actually means. At first glance, it really feels like it means something insightful but then you look at it for a bit longer and no more meaning is forthcoming. I reckon it just means he thinks the church has done something bad and so he’s saying it in a vaguely religious and ecclesiastical way to suit the mood. It’s the same instinct that might cause someone to compliment a particularly delicious plate of haggis by putting on a comedy Scottish accent. I feel I’m uniquely placed to opine on this issue because I actually performed at a comedy gig in a cathedral a week ago. Perhaps “performed” is putting it a bit strongly. I chatted. It was part of the Bristol Slapstick festival and I was interviewed about my favourite bits of slapstick from film and TV, in front of a big screen to show the clips, in Bristol Cathedral. My wife, who was in the audience, says she isn’t sure if there was a bar. But she said she really enjoyed the evening so I think there must have been. I thought it was a lovely event: Bristol’s annual festival celebrating silent and physical comedy, having weathered the existential threat of lockdown, returning triumphantly to its audience of pratfall enthusiasts. And while its usual venue, the Bristol Beacon, is being refurbished, it was welcomed into the most ancient of the city’s indoor spaces, its medieval cathedral. It was a happy atmosphere, with vergers wearing the regalia of the cathedral mingling with festival volunteers in their slapstick-branded sweatshirts, everyone enthusiastic about the hundreds of people who were arriving, and anxious for the show to be a success. We ended the evening with a tribute to the wonderful Barry Cryer, who had died a couple of days earlier. So was it “offensive to everyone who thinks a cathedral is a holy space”? I’m not very religious, but neither am I an atheist. I’m a “don’t know”. I hope there’s a nice big God, and I hope I find myself believing in one when I expire, but I don’t reckon thinking about it a lot is going to give me the answer. I like churches, though – I find them both calming and moving, a combination rarely achieved by TV drama. During the event, I was extremely pleased to be in a cathedral. Would Ashenden say that was irrelevant because I’m not a practising Anglican? Presumably not because neither is he any more. Though formerly a priest of the Church of England, he has subsequently changed service provider and is now a Roman Catholic. He says he left the C of E because of its “capitulation to the increasingly intense and non-negotiable demands of a secular culture”. I understand his frustration. Religion, many people think, is supposed to offer clarity: rules and salvation. Eternal and unchanging truths. The woolly and hand-wringing Church of England, the state religion of an increasingly irreligious state, coping with declining congregations and disintegrating architecture, might seem like a poor excuse for a belief system compared with its muscular and unwavering rivals. Far from converting people to its doctrines, it seems more concerned with accommodating the faithless. Maybe that’s why I like it. To me, the troubled, thoughtful and well-meaning fogginess of the C of E feels much more truthful, a much more comprehensible and sane reflection of how the human condition feels, than all those more dynamic philosophies. Other religions may have retained the fiery naivety of youth, but the Anglican church has the mild and tolerant befuddlement of experience, which is the closest thing to wisdom that I’ll ever believe in. And it has all these amazing buildings. Why not take as a starting point that people should be going inside them, for whatever reason? They should be part of our lives. They are beautiful and imbued with centuries of faith, but also of politics and compromise and hypocrisy. Bristol Cathedral was an abbey before Henry VIII took a shine to a younger woman. It’s a cathedral because of a midlife crisis. That doesn’t feel like an entirely inappropriate venue for comedy.China should not have been given the honour of hosting this year’s Winter Olympics. When Beijing hosted the summer Games in 2008, the prevailing hope was that engagement with China would lead to greater openness. Such views now look naive. Instead, the opposite has happened: while China’s economy has boomed, the last decade has seen a concerted crackdown on human rights, a centralisation of political power and creeping and extensive surveillance, as athletes and officials are now discovering. This growing authoritarianism has reached new and sinister heights under President Xi Jinping, including the dismantling of Hong Kong’s democracy. Most horrific is the situation in Xinjiang, where there is extensive evidence of mass “re-education” camps, forced labour, forced sterilisation and cultural repression on an industrial scale against the Uyghur people. The appalling treatment of the Uyghurs has led our parliament and others around the world to recognise that China’s actions amount to genocide. This is why Labour has pressured the government into a political boycott: with no officials, politicians or representatives attending the Games. We did not say athletes should stay at home, because they train for their whole careers for the chance to take part in the Olympics. Cancelling the Winter Games would not be fair on competitors or on the Chinese people, who are not responsible for their government’s atrocities. And the Olympics offers a platform not only to the host nation, but to all athletes. From the two black American athletes, Tommie Smith and John Carlos, raising their black-gloved fists in solidarity with oppressed black and minority ethnic people across the world in 1968, to 2016’s first refugee Olympic team. Team GB should be free to focus on doing their job: competing to the highest possible standard and winning medals. Their very presence at the Winter Olympics provides a platform for the values that Labour wants to inform Britain’s role in the world: security, prosperity and respect. But media coverage of the Games should recognise the context in which they are taking place, including highlighting the horrific human rights situation in China. Our politicians and diplomats are rightly staying at home, but this does not mean they should stay silent. They should raise these issues publicly and in international forums. The public should feel pride in Britain’s athletes, but also in our nation’s values, by standing up for fundamental rights, and showing solidarity with the oppressed in China. The Conservatives are divided on China and have no clear strategy. After years of boosterish talk of a “golden era” of British-Chinese relations, during which the UK became the largest recipient of Chinese investment in Europe while turning a blind eye to human rights and security concerns, the government has performed a series of U-turns. While the foreign secretary tries to talk tough, the chancellor is trying to cash cheques and chase investment regardless of sensitivities. They even opposed an effort to ensure Britain doesn’t sign trade deals with countries believed to be committing genocide. Where the government is failing to act, Labour has a plan. It starts with a complete audit of the UK-China relationship, as well as bringing new measures to help UK businesses to ensure their supply chains do not include workers subject to human rights violations and to ban the products of forced labour. We would extend targeted sanctions against Chinese officials directly responsible for persecution and redouble diplomatic efforts to allow the UN unfettered access to Xinjiang. The government needs to take a strong, clear-eyed and consistent approach to China, seeking to cooperate where we can on climate change and global health while standing firm on human rights, freedom and security. We should cheer for our stars but we must not forget that the Winter Olympics is an important moment for Britain to stand up for our values. We must not turn a blind eye to genocide. • David Lammy is the Labour MP for Tottenham and shadow foreign secretaryWhen the Troubles kicked off in Belfast in August 1969, Kenneth Branagh was eight years old. He recalls cowering under a table with his mother and his older brother as paving stones were torn from the street and hurled through the windows of their Catholic neighbours. Ciarán Hinds was away on holiday in the countryside, and only found out what was going on when his father, a doctor, phoned to say he wouldn’t be joining the family for his usual week, because he felt honour-bound to stay and tend to his patients. Branagh was from working-class Protestant stock, while Hinds was a 16-year-old former altar boy from a Catholic family, whose school was close to the Branagh house. Though they never knew each other, they would have gone to the same cinema, hung out in the same park, and suffered the same Sunday doldrums. “Belfast Sunday evening, you know, was a grim time,” says Branagh. Even the kids’ playground in the park was shut, Hinds adds: “And not only was the playground locked, but each individual swing was too, and the roundabout was padlocked.” “It was savage, wasn’t it?” chips in Branagh. “Brutal, brutal!” sighs Hinds, shaking his head in mock disbelief. Spruced up for a photocall at an upmarket hotel in London, in the final publicity push for Branagh’s semi-autobiographical film Belfast, they have the easy banter of two drinking buddies enjoying the craic over a Guinness in an Irish pub. But, though they went on to the same London drama school – Rada – it has taken more than half a century for them to get together to process an experience that ushered in decades of bloodshed, and deeply affected each of them in different ways. “When the new school term started, there was this sense of a major elemental change,” says Hinds, whose family stayed in Belfast through the Troubles. The Branaghs, meanwhile, emigrated to the English town of Reading, driven out – the film suggests – by an increasingly vicious with-us-or-against-us culture on the streets around their home. Belfast is dedicated to “those who stayed, those who left and all those who were lost”. The Troubles are not the only bit of history that has shaped this most personal film. Branagh started work on Belfast in March 2020, emerging from his shed after his first day’s writing to find Boris Johnson on television announcing the lockdown. “I’ve always known that the separation from Ireland, and the separation from a settled sense of knowing who you were, was a big thing in my life,” he says. “I knew that I wanted to write about it, but didn’t know what the story would be or who it would be for. And I suppose it was really the lockdown that unleashed a way to tell it, because, particularly at the beginning of it, so many people from all parts of the world, who I hadn’t seen for a while, got in contact, really wanting to know how you were and what you were doing, and I was doing the same thing. It sent me back to that sense of this story being about separation, and whether, in the telling of it, you could reconnect to something that was permanent, and not merely an exercise in sentimentality or nostalgia.” Six months later Hinds was in Lyon, where his partner, Hélène Patarot, was rehearsing a play, when his agent got in touch to say Branagh wanted to fix up a Zoom call. “Ken said, ‘Would you mind if I sent you the script?’ I managed not to shout ‘Would I mind?’ And a few pages in, something just connected, deep back into the core of the home that you’ve left; at the root of it was the authenticity, and the fun and the spark and the soul.” As “Pop” – the grandfather of nine-year-old Buddy – Hinds is a back-yard philosopher who dispenses advice – and maths homework – from a throne on the outside toilet, while the formidable Granny (Judi Dench) sits at the window, listening in, with a put-down always to hand. There is a 19-year age gap between Hinds and Dench. “I said: ‘I’ll age up and you age down and we’ll meet in the middle,” he says. The part of Buddy is played by Jude Hill, who was just nine when the film was shot. The perspective and palette of the film is shaped around his ardent awkwardness, its monochrome broken by flashes of brilliant colour as he sits with Granny in the cinema, eyes wide in delight as Raquel Welch and Dick Van Dyke romp across the screen in One Million Years BC and Chitty Chitty Bang Bang. He competes with a maths geek for the attention of a clever Catholic girl in his class, is lured into a gang and coerced into joining a shoplifting raid on the local corner shop, escaping with a single bar of turkish delight, which nobody likes. How true to life are these dramatic anecdotes? Well, says Branagh, his father was a joiner like Buddy’s, who was often away working in England, and he did compete for the attentions of a Catholic classmate with another boy who was much better than him at maths. In the run-up to filming, he took the company on a tour of Belfast, which included a visit to the house in which the girl used to live. He has no idea if she would have any memory of him: “She probably only remembers the maths geek.” There also really was a cornershop called Mr Singh’s, where he once got involved in a shoplifting escapade. “The turkish delight episode is mortifyingly true. It was all I could bloody well grab. Mr Singh’s was at the bottom of the street, so it was madness. Just a few hours later a real copper turns up at our house thinking ‘I’ll give five minutes to scaring the living bejaysus out of this kid’ – with the full approval of my mother. I had to explain to Jude about the old way of policing – that if you saw a cop car outside the house it could only mean one thing.” For those who witnessed Branagh’s spectacular rise in the 1980s – playing Henry V for the RSC while still in his early 20s and then setting up his own Renaissance company, enabling him to reprise his performance on film five years later – his account of his early years comes as a surprise. By the time Branagh emerged from drama school, Hinds was a regular at Glasgow Citizens theatre – “a working-class people’s theatre doing an incredible European repertoire, which seemed to have every exciting young actor in the country: there’s this fellow called Ciarán Hinds, a bloke called Gary Oldman, and another one called Mark Rylance,” says Branagh. “And I couldn’t get an audition for love nor money. Then John Boorman’s Excalibur arrived with another tide of Irish actors, and Ciarán was there again. He’s always been right in the middle of those waves.” Hinds, meanwhile, had his own outsider narrative going on. “It’s very funny because in our generation there were hardly any of us,” he says, though he had been friends with Liam Neeson since they started acting together in amateur productions in their teens. Though his major roles have mainly been in the theatre – he met his partner, the French-Vietnamese actor Hélène Patarot, while working on Peter Brook’s Mahabharata in 1987 – he has worked with Steven Spielberg and Martin Scorsese, and was ranked 31st in an Irish Times list of all-time great Irish film actors in 2020 (one ahead of his Belfast co-star Jamie Dornan). To see the two men together is to witness the yin and yang of a successful life in showbusiness: the reliably good and quietly in-demand character actor, who has combined a blue-chip career with nice little earners in blockbusters such as Harry Potter and Game of Thrones (“I never think: ‘I want to play that role.’ My mind doesn’t work that way,” Hinds has said), and the mover and shaker, who has made a speciality of directing himself in starring roles. When the doors did open for Branagh his origins were nowhere to be seen. He was the new Laurence Olivier, heir to a tradition of great actor managers, whose power matches, first with Emma Thompson and then with Helena Bonham Carter, meant he was seldom out of the gossip columns. The memories tumble out of him. “Can you now imagine, having seen this film, how discombobulating it was for me?” he demands. “Not to deal with the work – the work was amazing, and to have a chance to make a film of Henry V and have our own theatre company and everything. I woke up this morning with this incredible sense memory of 1 February 1988, Borough Market rehearsal room, Much Ado About Nothing, with Judi Dench directing and me playing Benedick. I just remember I was as happy as a sandboy. Almost from the time I left Belfast, that was the first time I felt: ‘God this is it. I’m in a family, and with somebody who knows what they’re doing. We trust each other. We’re doing an honest day’s work for an honest day’s pay.’ “Then cut to a year later and suddenly you’ve made a film of Henry V and there’s a bit of a pre-digital world media storm. So you’re in way too many newspapers. You’re annoying the bejaysus out of plenty of people. And it was completely at odds with the background I came from, so I dealt with it as best I could. It wasn’t so much impostor syndrome, just that I never needed or asked for the rest of it. I knew you had to bang the drum and you couldn’t be churlish with people, but you paid a price.” He stresses that he’s not playing the victim card. “I’m sure I said and did some stupid things, but I was always a devotee and an enthusiast, so the real me was always watching your man here [he nods at Hinds], or people like him that I admired, and thinking: ‘God, isn’t it amazing what they’re doing.’ For me, the thing about being famous, or a star or a personality, was that I didn’t really know quite how to handle it. And I’m sure I mishandled it. And now of course, I couldn’t give a monkey’s about it because life’s too short to worry about that kind of thing. And I’m back to enjoying the work.” Belfast has already won him a Golden Globe for best original screenplay and last week was nominated for six Baftas, including best film. It looks set for a good showing at the Oscars, but a reminder of that other sort of notoriety came the day before our interview, when a little social media storm blew up over a newspaper column suggesting that Jamie Dornan, who plays Buddy’s “Pa”, was too good-looking to pass for a working-class joiner from 1960s Belfast. “Could you get in touch with [the writer] and say that we need a word with him? Because that’s possibly insulting to the men of Belfast,” riffs Hinds, in his best barroom heavy drawl. “Just possibly insulting to my father,” laughs Branagh. “Yeah,” says Hinds, “that would certainly be insulting. Gorgeous man.” Joking aside, they agree that the furore cast light on the architecture of the film. Buddy’s Pa is a glamorous figure to his son, who elides the heroes he sees on family cinema outings with the semi-stranger who rides into town once a fortnight bearing gifts. “The film is rife with the vocabulary of what we would have seen in cinemas quite close to each other, but through a nine-year-old’s eyes,” says Branagh. “The stories that helped him frame the way the world was came out of westerns and glamourised figures on the screen. And he’s at that age when you hope and want your parents to match up to John Wayne or Jimmy Stewart – or Gary Cooper, who was all that plus sensitive.” Part of the point of sticking so closely to the young boy’s perspective, adds Branagh, was that the film didn’t have to paint a political picture, “because that’s not what the boy saw: what he saw was small-scale intimidation, the beginnings of a kind of gangsterism, and at that stage he wasn’t in a position to see higher political causes. So it inevitably has a narrowness of perspective, which means that you can get away without doing what many mightier minds than mine have done, which is to fall prey to believing that it is right and proper to try and explain everything.” Hinds still has sisters in Belfast, though he lives between Paris and London and has visited less frequently since his mother died a few years ago. It’s a very different city today, he says. “You really don’t want things to break out again. I would despair if they did. But as we know, it only takes a single match to strike a tinderbox. I’m hoping that in a few years’ time, the British public will see sense and vote to go back into Europe. It’s not about surrendering. It’s got to do with understanding that things might take longer than you think, and having patience and thinking further ahead to what it means to generations to come.” As simple as it sounds, adds Branagh, the message of the film is summed up by Buddy’s Pa, after the little boy solemnly asks if there could ever be a future for him and his Catholic classmate. “Pa says: ‘She could be a vegetarian antichrist for all I care. But if you respect each other, and you’re kind, then they’re welcome in our house any day of the week.’ So the film is a plea, really, for what I hope the future holds, which is open communication, understanding, respect, tolerance – all the things that are easy to say, and hard to do. But the prize at the end of that is peace and prosperity. I think that’s worth going for.” Belfast is in cinemas nowDuring a visit to 1 Police Plaza, the headquarters of the NYPD in downtown Manhattan, Joe Biden asked officer Sumit Sulan to stand as he praised his bravery. Last month, the rookie officer shot and killed a man who mortally wounded two of his colleagues while responding to a domestic dispute in Harlem. The deaths of the two young officers, Jason Rivera, 22, and Wilbert Mora, 27, was one of several violent episodes that have shaken New York and tested its new mayor, former police captain Eric Adams. “I admire the hell out of all of you,” Biden, flanked by Adams and other elected officials, said to the rows of uniformed blue seated behind him. “The answer is not to defund the police,” he continued to applause. “It’s to give you the tools, the training, the funding to be partners, to be protectors.” Later, the presidential motorcade crossed the East River to Queens, where Biden met with a violence intervention group and community leaders at Public School 111, in a classroom decorated for Black History Month. “We can’t just talk about violence and not talk about students feeling safe in schools,” K Bain, the founder and executive director of Community Capacity Development, a community violence intervention program, told the president. “I agree,” Biden interjected quietly, as Bain advocated for a community-based approach to reducing violence. The meetings at 1 Police Plaza and PS 111 underscored the complex public safety – and political – challenge confronting Democratic leaders from New York’s city hall to the White House and many other places across the US. Amid rising crime, Democrats are under pressure to prove that they are aggressively confronting the issue, an increasingly salient concern among voters, without abandoning their promises of police reform and accountability in response to the repeated police killings of Black Americans and a history of racism in law enforcement. In New York, Biden sent dual messages. He forcefully asserted his support for law enforcement, loudly distancing himself from activist calls to “defund the police”, which emerged during the summer of racial justice protests after the killing of George Floyd and that Republicans are mercilessly using to try to brand the president and his party as unconcerned with public safety. But Biden also sought to convey that he was listening to – and even learning from – the communities of color most affected by the pandemic-era violence. “We all want safety, right?” said Quentin James, the president of Collective Pac, an organization dedicated to electing African American candidates. “Safety from criminals but also safety from police overreach. It’s not either/or. It has to be both/and.” Gun violence and homicides rose sharply in 2020 and 2021, with Black and Latino communities hit the hardest. Though the toll remains far lower than it was in the early 1990s, the jump from 2019 to 2020 represented the largest single-year spike in homicides in modern history, according to the CDC. “This is not a make-believe kind of thing,” said Hank Sheinkopf, a prominent New York-based Democratic consultant who was a police officer before working in politics. Public polling shows voters are deeply concerned about rising crime and unhappy with Biden’s handling of the issue. A Fox Business poll from December found that 77% of voters, including 67% of Democrats, were concerned about higher crime rates across the country. The only issue more concerning to voters, according to the poll, was inflation. Yet, in a sign of the complexity of the issue, the same poll found that despite voters’ growing concern over the issue, less than half said they feared criminal activity “in their neighborhood”. “It’s the sense that things are out of control,” Sheinkopf said. “And Democrats tend to lose elections when things appear to be out of control.” Republicans believe the issue will be a powerful motivator for their base in November, especially against a Democratic party divided over its response to the problem. And there are signs the Republican effort to paint American cities as lawless under Democratic control, amplified by a conservative media echo chamber, are resonating. According to Gallup’s annual “mood of the nation” survey, just 24% of Americans were satisfied with efforts to “reduce or control crime”, the lowest it’s been. Frank Luntz, a prominent Republican pollster, said the issue was a top priority for voters in his focus groups, many of whom have grown disillusioned with political leadership on the issue. “It’s not just the spike in criminality that impacts people,” he said in an email. “It’s the perception that anyone, anywhere could themselves become a victim. It’s also the belief among many that the police are being handcuffed by the politicians into doing nothing.” The White House has pushed back on rightwing accusations that it has been unresponsive to the issue, pointing to the crime-fighting agenda Biden released last summer. “I think we all agree or should agree that violent crime is a serious problem,” the White House press secretary, Jen Psaki, said, noting the uptick began in 2020, under the previous administration. “We’re about the facts here, and addressing crime is something that is a root of the president’s agenda.” From Richard Nixon’s “law and order” to Donald Trump’s “American carnage”, Republicans have a long history of using the threat of crime to stoke fear among white voters, said Michael Tesler, a political scientist at the University of California at Irvine who has written extensively about the partisan divisions over race and identity. “The Republican party and their base are increasingly animated by white grievance issues,” he said. “You can see this in their playbook on critical race theory, the strong push against Biden’s immigration policies and also on crime.” The politics of violent crime are complex, said James. But he said the debate too often ignores the voices and the needs of the people in the communities that are the most affected. “Crime is always of concern with Black voters,” he said. “But we’re hearing about it now because it’s happening in places that people thought were safer.” Experts who study violence point to several possible drivers, among them the economic hardship and social instability caused by the pandemic, which fell hardest on impoverished communities and led to fewer criminal trials, school closures and after-school programs, and reduced access to mental health services and drug treatment. Another possible contributing factor is the surge of firearm purchases and the rise of “ghost guns” – firearms assembled from parts bought online that lack serial numbers needed to trace them. DeVone Boggan, the founder of Advance Peace, a community violence intervention program, said the pandemic “exposed just how disconnected those communities” are from the services they need to address systemic health and economic disparities. But it’s also proved how successful meaningful investment in violence prevention programs can be. In Richmond, California, where Advance Peace was first developed, gun homicide rates dropped by nearly 70% over the past decade. In 2020, the Bay Area city saw only a modest increase in homicides, with 22 people killed that year compared with 17 the year before. “That tells us that when we make long-term commitments to non-law-enforcement-based strategies, and we make requisite funding commitments long-term … that work can support reductions in gunfire even when you see things like a pandemic,” said Boggan, who made this point directly to Biden during a meeting at the White House on gun crime prevention in June. During his visit to New York, Biden emphasized his administration’s efforts to reduce violent crime by cracking down on illegal gun sales and encouraging state and local governments to use the pandemic relief aid to “put more cops on the beat”. Biden has also called on Congress to approve his budget proposal, which includes $300m in federal grants for police departments and $200m for community violence prevention programs, and to pass gun safety legislation, like universal background checks. Yet the approach also highlights the limits of what Biden can do without action in Congress and buy-in from local governments. A bipartisan attempt to overhaul policing tactics and accountability collapsed last year. A proposal to invest $5bn in community violence intervention initiatives is tied up in the stalled negotiations over the president’s Build Back Better agenda – derailed by Republican intransigence and conservative Democrats. The focus on crime also brings Biden to the forefront of an issue that has proved difficult for him over the course of his long tenure in elected office. As a senator, Biden helped write several major pieces of anti-crime legislation, including a 1994 omnibus bill that academics and many elected officials in both parties now say paved the way for an era of mass incarceration of Black Americans. During the 2020 presidential primary, Biden was pushed to disavow some elements of the bill he helped write. And as president, he has taken steps to further undo the legacy of the law, such as endorsing a bill that would end the sentencing disparity between crack and powder cocaine offenses. Now he finds himself caught between an aggressive Republican campaign to paint him as soft on crime and a progressive flank demanding he live up to his promises of criminal justice reform. Many Democrats see Adams as a model. Adams, the city’s second Black mayor and a moderate who joined the NYPD after being beaten by officers when he was 15, placed public safety as the center of his campaign, portraying himself as a bridge between liberal activists and law enforcement. Sheinkopf said the mayor’s credibility with law enforcement and his support among voters of color helps deflect Republican accusations that the party is anti-police as well as progressive criticism of a tougher approach. “All he’s got to do is cling to Adams and say, ‘I’m going to follow what Eric Adams does because he’s an expert,’” Sheinkopf said. The interplay was on display in New York, where Adams, referring to himself as the “Biden of Brooklyn”, praised the president as he called for a “9/11-type response” to the “domestic terror that is pervasive in this city and country”. “Mayor Adams, you and I agree,” Biden said at the NYPD headquarters. The alliance worries progressives who hear echoes of the punitive “law and order” approach Democrats embraced in the 1990s. Aspects of Adam’s “blueprint” to reduce gun violence – welcomed by Democrats who believe the problem has become a political liability for the party – sparked backlash from progressives, such as a proposal to resurrect a version of the plainclothes anti-crime units that were disbanded in 2020. Police reform advocate Robert Gangi called the plan “old wine in a new bottle” that relied “mainly on punitive law enforcement tactics”. Congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, Democrat of New York, told the New York Times that she was concerned Democrats were reverting to a “jails-and-police-centered policy” that doesn’t address the root causes of crime. Boggan, too, worries about this. “If we go down this road, this road that we’ve already been down,” he warned, “we will dramatically and in devastating fashion cost the communities most impacted by gun violence the opportunity for real public safety.”In a vaccination centre in El Alto, Bolivia, the staff bagged up in protective gear far outnumbered the few people sitting in plastic chairs waiting for their injection. A young doctor reeled off a list of all the vaccines available: Sinopharm, Sputnik, Pfizer, Moderna. What’s lacking is demand. They see 100 people on a good day. South America, once the region most afflicted by the pandemic, is now the most vaccinated in the world. But this turnaround doesn’t extend to Bolivia, where roughly half the population is yet to receive a single dose – even though the state has had all the vaccines it needs since October. As it stands, 45% of the population has received two doses, and a further 12% have had a single dose. Less than 7% have received a booster dose. Data leaked from the Ministry of Health before Christmas gave a more detailed snapshot, revealing huge variations between municipalities. In general, departmental capitals had high levels of vaccination. Smaller cities were doing less well. But in many rural municipalities, particularly in the altiplano, less than 30% of the adult population had received a dose. On 23 December, the government announced that either a vaccine certificate or a negative PCR test would be required to enter many public places from 1 January. For a few days at the start of the year, Bolivia suddenly had the highest rate of first doses per capita in the world. But the measure triggered protests and blockades in major cities, led by social organisations aligned with the governing Movimiento al Socialismo (MAS). Spokespeople for the organisations said they weren’t against vaccination per se, but that it ought to be voluntary. They held that the requirement would in effect make vaccination obligatory. On 5 January, the government delayed the introduction of the requirement. Then, on 19 January, it suspended the requirement for the duration of the sanitary emergency. Vaccination rates slumped. According to Dr Yercin Mamani, former director of the departmental health service in Cochabamba, vaccine access is no longer the main problem. Instead, for various reasons, people are refusing vaccination. Mamani identified three groups. “First, the self-described anti-vaxxers,” said Mamani. “This is a very small group. Even in their biggest protests, they’ve never cleared 100 people.” The second group refuse the vaccine for religious reasons. “Roughly 30% of the population is evangelical. Of this group, two-thirds have not accepted vaccination. In many places – especially in rural settings, where these churches are a little more radical – they’ve even come to demonise it.” The third group is less clearly defined, but Mamani described it as mostly rural, with a low level of education – and susceptible to misinformation about vaccines. Such misinformation circulates on Facebook and WhatsApp, services used by most Bolivians. “Since the pandemic started, there’s been more misinformation than ever,” said Lucas Illanes, a journalist at Chequea Bolivia, a fact-checking service. “Even Bolivian authorities and recognised public figures spread misinformation.” Illanes cited the case of chlorine dioxide, a toxic substance touted as a miracle cure for Covid-19. Its proponents have been invited on to TV shows and given press conferences, and even now figures in the government promote its use – against the advice of the Ministry of Health. But Dr Pedro Pachaguaya, an anthropologist, pushed back against the idea that indigenous peoples were simply falling prey to misinformation. “It isn’t denialism about Covid, nor is it the typical anti-vaccine denialism.” Rather, there is a lack of trust in the healthcare system, and a strong preference for traditional medicine. That lack of trust comes in part from previous negative experiences. “When these populations go to the healthcare system, they suffer mistreatment. And this trauma means they don’t want to go back.” Nor has the healthcare system appreciated that these people already have their own traditional medicine systems. “Instead of being understood, these systems have been made invisible, erased, in a violent way,” said Pachaguaya. “And that’s the fundamental problem the healthcare system has here.” The effectiveness of traditional medicines is a topic that Chequea Bolivia approaches carefully. “Talking about misinformation related to traditional medicine is a very delicate topic in Bolivia,” said Illanes. “Often we can’t assess whether it is true or false, because, in the end, there just isn’t much scientific investigation regarding traditional medicine and Covid.” Pachaguaya believes the best results will come when modern and traditional medicine are used together. For that, the government needs a culturally sensitive communications strategy. Pachaguaya cited the debacle around vaccine certificates as evidence of its absence. “The people who are threatening blockades are people who support the government. It is their people, our people. We have to understand their feelings and perceptions regarding the vaccine,” said Pachaguaya. “Those that should be occupying themselves with this communication are neglecting it. They assume it is ignorance, but it’s not ignorance. Right now, people are thirsty for knowledge.”I find myself increasingly wearied by the language of our weather forecasters - dribs and drabs, spits and spots, mist and murk - and long for something more dramatic. So God bless the BBC for the following headline from last weekend: “US east coast hunkers down as ‘bombogenesis’ snowstorm hits.” The report went on to explain this apocalyptic-sounding event thus: “Experts say the storm will undergo bombogenesis, meaning that colder air is expected to mix with warmer sea air, leading to a swift drop in atmospheric pressure. The process leads to a so-called bomb cyclone.” That’s more like it. As if that wasn’t enough, there was a report of a record lightning bolt, also in the US, which stretched nearly 500 miles and has been named a “megaflash” and lit up the skies of Texas, Louisiana and Mississippi in April 2020, according to the World Meteorological Organization. The previous best was a measly 440-mile flash in Brazil. OK, I know that we don’t have such dramatic extremes in this country, but I fear that spits and spots will never cut the mustard again. Marvellous what tripe ends up in my inbox. Consider this: “I wanted to reach out on behalf of our R.Agency client, what3words, the location tech app which has recently officially launched in 50 languages. As part of celebrating this incredible milestone, what3words has launched a fantastic new book we’d love to gift you!” Glossing over the generous offer to reach out to me, I wouldn’t mind if you gave me a copy, but I do draw the line at using gift as a verb. Now, if you’ll excuse me, I must be off to see if there is a bombogenesis snowstorm in the offing and hunker down accordingly. • Jonathan Bouquet is an Observer columnistIt is proving to be one of the essential plays of the past 20 years. In 2002, A Number carried a special, current thrill, tapping into debates about cloning. On an almost bare, tousled stage a baleful Michael Gambon confronted three versions of his son, all played by a clenched Daniel Craig. Is one of these more “real” than the others? Questions raised in Caryl Churchill’s drama continue to matter long after Dolly the sheep has ceased to bleat. What counts more, inheritance or upbringing? How do we recognise another individual? Why do we think of ourselves as being singular? This is the fifth production I have seen: each has glinted with different alarms, jokes and sorrows. Directed by Lyndsey Turner, ignited by magnificent performances from Paapa Essiedu and Lennie James, it has a new luminosity. Turner’s production is beautifully rounded – and spiky. Every aspect presses on Churchill’s themes. Arvo Pärt’s Fratres, an insistent set of variations, is woven between scenes. Es Devlin’s design (Adele’s loss is the theatre’s gain) is sturdily naturalistic but is all-over apricot-coloured as if made of overheated plastic, questionably solid. Essiedu and James set up a terrific dynamic, playing the dialogue less posh than usual, so that questions of money and menace seem particularly immediate; at moments there is a Pinter gangster tang – alongside good domestic detail to do with the casual shucking off and the busybody picking-up of trainers. Both actors have been missing from the stage while lighting up the telly: the stage has missed them. James, who has to remain recognisably the same person while slowly disclosing information that makes an audience see him differently, shifts subtly between caginess, wiliness, regret – suggesting that damage is its own inheritance. Essiedu’s task is the opposite: to create three separate characters from the same material. He is a marvel, twisting from dishevelled anxiety to thuggish rage; pronouncing “Daddy” as if it were the most desperate of words; finally conjuring up an American sunniness which beams from every atom before he has even opened his mouth. He makes you want to see him in everything. At one point he stretches out his hands and stares at them as if they were foreign to him – and strangers to each other. In that gesture he goes to the heart of this extraordinary play. Like Churchill, Alistair McDowall belongs to that small group: the dystopian dramatists. He proved a master of the form in Pomona, first seen at the tiny Orange Tree theatre in 2014, which took off from a hole in the middle of Manchester to explore wild realms of wit and savagery. His new play, The Glow, is more noisily ambitious. It judders between 1863, AD343, 1348 and 1993; its cast includes a Roman soldier, a phoney spiritualist medium, a medieval knight, a woman grieving for her dead son, a scholar researching folklore – and a time-travelling visionary. A rather brilliant cod-academic essay attached to the play text constructs an entire pseudo-academic background, with an invented core text and a thesis about an immortal woman: this is at least as lively as a lot of authentic academic lectures in theatre programmes. It’s a pity there is not more such precise invention in the play itself: a final speech bellows with vapid approximations about apocalypse, with “thunderous force”, “bloated, swelling forms”, “drifting about the void”. Vicky Featherstone’s production is fast, and full of talent. Space and time are sliced and expanded by Jessica Hung Han Yun’s fine lighting design and by Tal Rosner’s transforming videos, which splash and swarm against the walls, stippling them with forest branches or slapping down, as if on a slide morphing under a microscope, what could be a section of an organ or a volcano. Multitasking, Fisayo Akinade brings his particular intelligence and comic gleam to several characters; Rakie Ayola is spiny and focused; Ria Zmitrowicz is explosive, arresting. Yet there is too much windy writing for the play to sear. It is a series of fiery moments, sometimes glowing, but also guttering. Star ratings (out of five) A Number ★★★★ The Glow ★★★ A Number is at the Old Vic, London, until 19 March The Glow is at the Jerwood Theatre Downstairs, Royal Court, London, until 5 MarchBoris Johnson must stay in place to deal with the “hugely damaging” No 10 parties scandal and the cost of living crisis because they are his responsibility to fix, according to the former Tory leader Sir Iain Duncan Smith. The Conservative grandee said he wanted cabinet ministers to “temper their ambitions” and allow Johnson the time to sort out “the big, big crises that are hitting the government”. He said a leadership contest would be destabilising at the moment. But asked whether it was possible to recover the reputation of the party with Boris Johnson remaining as prime minister, he told the BBC’s Sunday Morning programme: “None of us know the answer to that question ... Respect and trust you have to earn, and when you lose it, it’s a very difficult task to get it back across the board. “And so that’s going to be a huge task. The government and the prime minister have set out to try and do that.” Duncan Smith’s remarks came after a disastrous week for Johnson in which he lost five senior staff members and a string of MPs declared they had lost confidence in him. Some MPs believe a vote of no confidence in the prime minister is likely in the coming week and Charles Walker, a former vice-chair of the 1922 Committee, told the Observer that Johnson’s removal was “inevitable”. Around 15 Tory MPs have publicly called on the prime minister to resign, including most recently the former minister Nick Gibb. This weekend, Johnson overhauled his operation, appointing the Cabinet Office minister, Steve Barclay, as his chief of staff, while Guto Harri, a former aide of Johnson’s, becomes his new director of communications. The business secretary, Kwasi Kwarteng, spoke to several broadcasters in support of the prime minister on Sunday, attempting to draw a line under the scandal by saying “the ongoing focus on partygate is not helping anyone”. He also called for Tory MPs to give Johnson “the time and space to deliver on his mandate”. Kwarteng also claimed it had been legitimate for Johnson to throw a slur at the Labour leader in the House of Commons by claiming that Keir Starmer, when he was director of public prosecutions, presided over the failure to prosecute the serial child abuser Jimmy Savile. Two other cabinet ministers, Rishi Sunak and Sajid Javid, have said they would not have made such a comment, which led to the resignation last week of Munira Mirza, Johnson’s longstanding policy chief. There has already been some scepticism about the Johnson’s operational shake-up, which will involve creating a new office of the prime minister and potentially centralising more power into No 10. Gavin Barwell, a former chief of staff for Theresa May, told Sky’s Trevor Phillips On Sunday that Barclay would have a huge brief. He added: “And then the second challenge, and I think probably the key one, is whether the prime minister is going to listen to the good advice that he will give. “There’s only so much difference advisers can make if the person at the top is not actually listening to the advice that we’re giving.”The warm living room of Tété-Michel Kpomassie’s otherwise neat Parisian home has a coffee table in the middle of it piled high with keepsakes – a mountain of black and white pictures, letters and handwritten diaries. It’s an archive of one remarkable man’s intrepidly adventurous and unconventional life to date. Balanced on top of the overloaded files and folders sits a tattered book, its pages faded. On its cover is a portrait of an Inuk in a sealskin jacket, standing next to an icy shore. The title reads Les Esquimaux du Groenland à l’Alaska (The Eskimos from Greenland to Alaska). It’s a 1947 work of nonfiction authored by French anthropologist Robert Gessain. Decades may have passed since the day Kpomassie first set his teenage eyes upon this image in his native Togo, but the 80-year-old remembers the precise moment as if it had happened just minutes before. How could he not? What he found inside has, since that day, consumed him entirely, shaping every chapter of his own story. He ran away from home at 16 to embark on an epic cross-continental mission that delivered him to Greenland, the world’s northernmost country. He was the first African man to set foot there. The adventure resulted in a travelogue, return visits and countless speaking invitations, and, more recently, a rather acrimonious divorce. Now, his very own sealskin jacket hangs by the door to his home in pride of place. Quite what an academic study of the Inuit was doing on the shelves of a small Christian missionary bookshop in 1950s Lomé remains a mystery. Kpomassie stumbled across it while recovering from a tree-top run-in with a snake. The only explanation he can think of, after years of contemplation, is that finding it was his destiny – an undeniable consequence of some predetermined fate. “I picked it up, not understanding the words in front of me,” Kpomassie says, his eyes lighting up as he recounts that morning. “But the man on the cover was smiling right at me. We had a connection, an exchange.” Intrigued, Kpomassie bought the book, sat on the beach and devoured it from cover to cover. Once finished, he read it again and again. “From the minute I completed it,” he says, “I never stopped thinking of Greenland, my country. It was resonating inside me. I don’t understand it. But a magnet was pulling me, so I packed my bags and left, in secret.” The journey which followed is barely believable. If it weren’t for the artefacts laid out in front of me, I might question whether it was a fairytale dreamed up in his mind. It was a trip that saw him traverse Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana, Mauritania and Senegal. There were brief stops in Morocco and Algeria, before he finally disembarked a boat in the south of France. From there, his voyage through Europe was facilitated by the endless kindnesses of strangers and, in particular, the generosity of Jean Callaut – to whom Kpomassie’s own book is dedicated. Callaut was a Frenchman who soon became an adoptive father to the young traveller so far from home. “When people heard my story,” Kpomassie says, “each was certain they were dealing with someone very determined. But if they hadn’t helped me, be in no doubt, I’d have found another way.” Just before noon on 27 June 1965, the boat Kpomassie had boarded in Copenhagen eight days earlier docked in Qaqortoq, a small town in southern Greenland. Eight years had passed since he’d first said goodbye to Togo. And, finally, Kpomassie – now aged 24 – had arrived in his new home. “It was fantastic,” he says, all smiles. “From the ship’s porthole I could see all the people gathering at the harbour waiting for our boat to arrive.” In the hull were supplies, namely coffee and alcohol, that locals had been waiting all winter for. Little did they know that on board was also a surprise of another kind. “I took my time to step out,” he continues, “uncertain of how people would react to seeing me. I suspected none would have met a black man before. When I did, everyone stopped talking, all were staring. They didn’t know if I was a real person or wearing a mask. Children hid behind their mothers. Some cried, presuming I was a spirit from the mountains.” One woman, he later learned, yelled “handsome” in his direction from the crowd. Of course, the Arctic climate and landscapes he encountered as he moved through the country were total opposites to those of Togo. And he was intrigued by the cultural differences, too. “The way each place treated children struck me early on,” he recalls. “In Togo, kids were treated as the subjects of their elders, with strictly enforced hierarchies. In Greenland, meanwhile, parents obeyed their young.” In the book he later wrote, Kpomassie examines and contrasts the customs of his two homelands, looking at their respective treatment of the elderly, rituals for hunting, prayer and death, as well as familial structures and non-monogamy, which in both places was markedly different from modern European ways. And then there was the food, the intensely spiced dishes he grew up eating were a far cry from the boiled seal he was served up night after night, and raw fish eaten straight from the ocean. In time, however, Kpomassie came to consider the two nations’ similarities which, in his mind, also bound them together. Doing so helped him see his own desire to leave Togo in a different light. “I left because at that time I had been made to hate my culture, because of what was happening in Africa,” he says. When he left Lomé, the country was still under French colonial rule. “Christians tried to convert my father,” he says. “African names were banned and we were forced to take Christian ones before being admitted into schools.” What Greenland promised, Kpomassie hoped, was a life free from this violence, where traditions and customs were left to thrive. “The problem was, I discovered that Greenland was also a colonised country,” he says. “Its culture was already being diluted by European influences. They worshipped their sea god, but here missionaries undermined local beliefs, too.” It was only in the northernmost places he visited that Kpomassie would find the freedom he’d been searching for. If anything, he was disappointed by what he found at first in the south. “There were no igloos, no hunters or huskies,” he says. “Everyone was always drinking beer and coffee, and buying Danish food from the department store. After eight years of travel and thousands of kilometres, it dawned on me that arriving in Greenland was only the start of my journey. Because when I asked my hosts where the Inuit igloos and seal-hunters were, I was told to go to the far north.” It was only up there, as autumn and then winter settled in, when the country and its people were plunged into a seemingly endless polar night, that Kpomassie felt he’d truly arrived. “When the first snow falls,” he says, “You see the real Greenland. With the temperature dropping rapidly and, the sea freezing up, that’s when Greenlanders become the kings of their country. Outsiders vanish, age-old knowledge prevails. It’s that liberation I loved the most.” Under the aurora borealis, as far from Africa as he’d ever been, Kpomassie at last found his light. Today, Kpomassie lives in Nanterre, a historic suburb to the west of Paris. Despite being more than 50 years his junior, I struggle to keep up, with both pace and conversation, as we make our way to a nearby restaurant for lunch. As it transpired, Kpomassie tells me, his first pilgrimage to Greenland wasn’t permanent. Only 18 months after arriving, he reluctantly returned to Togo, to share his stories with his compatriots and the family who’d long presumed him dead. “At first,” he says, scanning the wine list, “when I came back from Greenland, I wanted to throw my diary into the sea. I did not want to write a book.” His experiences felt private, almost sacred. “In fact, I didn’t even want to leave, but I couldn’t get the right boat at the right time to head further north. So I toured 16 African nations giving talks. I wrote the book. I somehow got married in France and had two children. But all the while I knew where I ultimately needed to end up.” More than 40 years have passed since his book was first published in French. Since then, there have been a further 22 editions in 10 languages. A new English one arrives this year, with Portuguese and Mandarin versions in the works, too. No doubt its longevity can be attributed to Kpomassie’s skilful storytelling, but it’s by no means the only reason his work has stood the test of time. While many similar travelogues from decades past, written by “explorers”, now feel dated – Eurocentric, patronising or exoticising of their subjects – Kpomassie’s couldn’t be more relevant. The kinship he felt with the Inuit on that first visit saw the publication of a literary work that was well ahead of its time. Since then, Kpomassie has returned a further three times to Greenland, his most recent visit as a lecturer with a Norwegian cruise liner back in 2007. This September he’ll make one final journey to his adoptive nation, where, at 81, he intends to live out his remaining years. Through all the decades since, this has been his plan, he says. Unfortunately, that’s why last year he and his wife of 46 years – the mother of his children – divorced, going their separate ways. “I was married for a long time, but sadly our separation became inevitable,” he says. “She knew from the beginning that Greenland is the most important thing in my life.” The deal, he says, was always that they’d one day swap their comfortable life in France for a retirement spent hunting in the shadow of Greenland’s mountains. At some stage, Kpomassie’s ex-wife – now a grandmother – not unsurprisingly, changed her mind. It created an irreconcilable gap. “Now, she wants to spend her retirement visiting Rome, Florence, Venice,” he says, a little indignant. “From the offset I was honest about where my heart was. We’d always agreed to go together. I understand, of course, that her wishes changed. But mine haven’t.” And what do his children make of it all? Well, they’re not hugely impressed. Kpomassie thinks his big mistake was telling them his intentions in the first place. “If I’d told my family as a 16-year-old, I would never have left Togo,” he says. “Everyone would have tried to reason with me, to stop me. Now my sons are doing the same, but that’s not what I want. My children admire me, but they are afraid, and they feel they should discourage me.” He’ll miss them, he says, but his door will always be open should they wish to come and visit. On arrival in Greenland, Kpomassie hopes to spend a year travelling the country, giving talks to schoolchildren about his adventures in their country and across Africa. Then he’ll head north, where he’ll stay for good. “I’ll have a dog sled and huskies,” he grins. “I’ll find myself a small fishing boat. And here I’ll happily spend my remaining days, and finally find time to write my second book, about my childhood in Africa.” That is, of course, if the authorities allow it. At present, aside from locals, only Danish people are allowed to buy property in Greenland. “I think they might make an exception for me,” he says, winking. “Well, at least I hope so.” He wants to be buried at the foot of an iceberg. “In African animism, we believe in spirits in trees, the sea and mountains,” he continues. “Greenlanders also believe icebergs have a soul. Sitting and staring at the icebergs I can converse with these spirits. I find my ancestors in Africa, but I find them in Greenland more.” Coping without life’s luxuries will be no trouble, Kpomassie assures me, as a waiter delivers him a plate of duck breast and refills our glasses with Côte du Rhône. “All this? It’s superficial,” he says. “The day I put on my sealskin anorak hanging in my hallway, I’ll forget it all and say goodbye. It’s just to survive, I’ve had to adapt. When you pursue a dream,” he continues, eyes twinkling, “one which has grown with you for an entire lifetime, you live and breathe it. It’s inside me. Fulfilling it is not a choice. Anyone would have said my first journey there would be impossible, but I proved them wrong. Why should it be any different this time just because I’m older? It’s my destiny. There is no other way.” Michel the Giant: An African in Greenland, Penguin Modern Classics, £9.99, or £9.29 from guardianbookshop.comA pink-haired pop star soars on to the screen riding a giant blue whale. The crowd cheers as her dress explodes, raining multicoloured petals. In this gorgeous, big-hearted anime from Mamoru Hosoda (Mirai, Summer Wars), Belle is the virtual avatar of Suzu (Kaho Nakamura), a grieving teenager and “mousy country bumpkin”, according to her best friend. We soon learn that her mother, who taught her to play the piano, died when she was a child. Suzu hasn’t been able to sing since. U is a virtual reality she accesses via an app on her phone. It’s here, inside this twinkling digital metropolis, that Suzu becomes Belle and rediscovers her voice. When one of Belle’s concerts is interrupted by a mysterious horned Dragon (Takeru Satoh), U’s self-appointed police step in, threatening to catch him and expose his true identity. Understanding the protection afforded by adopting an avatar, Belle goes out of her way to protect him. The floating city of U sits suspended in an infinite starry sky; Hosoda imagines the internet as a glittering expanse of endless possible connections. In the synthetic world, the camera is dynamic, with the animation rendered in 3D. Suzu’s reality is flatter and hand-drawn. In U, avatars are automatically generated based on their users’ hidden strengths. Belle sings, because Suzu has something to express. The film’s message is a beautiful one: to integrate our real-life vulnerabilities with the persona we project is to become all the more powerful.Manchester has long liked garnishing industry with ornament. For all the four-square practicality of its Victorian streets, its buildings are eclectic in their detail – Byzantine, Flemish, gothic and baroque, encrusted and polychrome, with turrets, domes, gables, swags and cartouches formed from stone, brick and soot-resistant ceramics. Mancunian architecture grew fantasy from the filth of coal-fired wealth. The Tower of Light, white and sparkling, updates this tradition for a low-carbon age. It is essentially a big chimney, but not as LS Lowry would have known it. It’s a dispersion flue, to use the technical term, a 40 metre-high device for extracting fumes from a gas-fired combined heat and power unit beneath it. Its swirling forms resemble those that Antoni Gaudí put on top of Barcelona apartment blocks. They are inspired, say its architects Mike Tonkin and Anna Liu, both by the ornate chimneys on Tudor palaces and by the glass sponge, a submarine organism that is one of David Attenborough’s favourite creatures. The tower is the most visible manifestation of the Manchester Civic Quarter Heat Network, a £24m project to provide a more sustainable heat and power system to the landmarks such as the city’s town hall, central library and convention centre, and the Bridgewater Hall music venue. Conceived in 2019, the network is not so far advanced as to dispense with fossil fuels altogether, but the city council and its partner Vital Energi say it’s a considerable upgrade on previous arrangements. Renewable power sources, they add, can be plugged into the system at a later date. The tower serves a symbolic as well as a practical function, as a statement of the council’s desire for cleaner energy. As this is, in effect, a small power station near the heart of the city, it was felt that something other than a standard flue tower was desirable. A design competition was held, with the hope of creating some sort of marker to what is considered an important gateway to the city’s centre. Tonkin Liu won the competition with a design that aims to be more than an artistic statement. The outer form of the tower – a vertical steel tube that supports the extract flues inside – puts into practice a concept called the “shell lace structure”, which they have developed with the engineers Arup over the past 12 years. It uses principles derived from nature to make a building as strong as possible with the minimum amount of materials. It’s a rigid object shaped by the flow of forces, by dynamics of rotation that, says Tonkin, are fundamental to natural energy. So the steel skin of the tower is stiffened with corrugations and undulations like those of a sea shell. Its structure, like a glass sponge, is a lattice, which efficiently resists both horizontal and vertical loads. It becomes more open and perforated towards the top, where less strength is needed, which also allows the wind to blow through it more easily. Its shape is an ellipse in plan, with the narrower ends aligned with the prevailing wind, so as to reduce resistance. Its spiralling form helps to break up wind pressures, as similar patterns do on ornate Tudor chimneys. All these features allow the steel sheet from which the tower is made to be an exceptionally thin 6mm. The mathematics of this biologically-inspired engineering also create the filigree form that passersby will notice more than anything else, and which amply fulfils the council’s desire for a landmark. It rises from the Wall of Energy, a curving horizontal base clad in robust ceramic tiles – each one made with the techniques and to the approximate size of a Belfast sink – whose three-dimensional undulations echo those of the tower. A long window allows you to see the workings of the heat and power plant inside. Almost everything on both base and tower is white and curvy, but the lower part is more weighty and earthy, the upper more ethereal. By day, light bounces off it and penetrates through it, and reflects off the stainless steel flues that you can glimpse through the openings. By night it’s illuminated with shifting colours that can be changed to suit an occasion – Pride, for example, or a triumph by the city’s blue or red football teams. Car headlights put the rippling tiles into continuous visual motion. This glistening thing is borderline kitsch – it could be one of those futile objects which, in the name of public art, public authorities sometimes commission – but it is saved from such a fate by the determined thought that went into its engineering. Those shapes are not pure whimsy. It’s a work of skill, both by its architects and engineers and by the Lancastrian businesses, Shawton Engineering and Darwen Terracotta, that made the steelwork and the tiles. The next question is how the principles behind the tower might be applied at a larger scale and in a more everyday way. It stands in an area of Manchester that has been extensively redeveloped, with big blocky developers’ towers standing nearby. These are more conventionally constructed, with rectangular frames and concrete cores. In theory, shell-lace construction, applied to buildings like this, could save many tonnes of steel and concrete. In practice, the approach has a way to go. The companies that build such towers usually like both straight lines and techniques they already know. Rooms, windows and doors tend also to come in right-angled shapes that would have to be reconciled with the curves of a shell-lace structure. One can but dream. Meanwhile, you’d have to have a heart of stone not to enjoy the simple pleasures the Tower of Light offers, and the inspired commitment with which it was designed and built.There’s a war happening right now. No, it’s not in Ukraine (at least not yet). It’s on Main Street. In Manhattan, where the New York police department reports shoplifting levels not seen in nearly 30 years, a Rite-Aid store announces it’s closing because of theft losses. Small retailers in New York have given their district attorney an earful. Residents and shop owners in San Francisco say that crime there has “spun out of control”. Chicago has been the target of “rampant” shoplifting incidents. Reports of “flash” shoplifting gangs have prompted legislators to introduce bills to protect businesses as far apart as Kenosha, Wisconsin, and Washington state. Is this real or moral panic? Some columnists, such as Amanda Mull from the Atlantic, says that the “the deeper you search for real, objective evidence of an accelerating retail crime wave, the more difficult it is to be sure that you know anything at all”. The Los Angeles police department recently announced that robbery, burglary and theft are actually down in the city compared with 2019. An activist group in Seattle says that in some cases shoplifting is “justified”. One retail association says that retail theft would be less if Amazon and Facebook didn’t make it so easy to sell stolen goods. When you ask retailers, they’ll tell you that shoplifting is a big and growing problem. Just ask the National Retail Federation. Half of the respondents in that organization’s 2021 retail security survey said they saw an increase in shoplifting this past year. According to the report, theft and fraud cost retailers $62bn in 2020 and the average retail robbery netted more than $7,500 in product – a figure not seen since 2015. More disturbingly, about 69% of retailers said they have also experienced a significant increase in “organized retail crime” activity – thefts involving groups of people – over the past year. The reasons cited included the pandemic, lapse in policing and apprehension, changes to sentencing guidelines and the growth of online marketplaces like Facebook and Amazon. Whatever the reasons, “inventory shrink” (retailer politesse for shoplifting) is above its five-year average and shoplifters are clearly striking quite a blow in their war with retailers. So how are merchants fighting back? Unfortunately, they’re having to spend. Many of my shop-owner clients are taking the obvious internal steps. These would include making sure their stores are organized and tidy, that their employees are trained to be on alert for typical shoplifting tactics, and that mirrors are added to avoid blind spots among updated and prominent signs that warn of prosecution. A handful have hired security guards. Those with very high-dollar inventory (jewelry, say) are taking more steps to secure these products or removing them from their stores each night. Others are installing more protective glass on their exterior windows and display cases. Many others are investing in new security systems or re-designing themselves to thwart shoplifting. A Safeway store in San Francisco, for example, has added automatic gates that immediately swing shut behind entering customers in order to prevent thieves from running out of the store with full shopping carts. Other retailers are setting up coiled wire or putting more of their items under lock and key. The National Association of Shoplifting Prevention takes a different approach by offering retailers the opportunity to participate in “progressive shoplifting prevention” that includes encouraging “a shift in focus to long-term education and awareness solutions, rather than continuing to invest solely in physical prevention and apprehension” by making investments to “reduce recidivism to break the cycle and cure the shoplifting problem rather than continually spending money to repeatedly treat its symptoms”. Or you could do what one small merchant in Denver is doing: charge all customers an additional 1% fee on top of everything else to cover his shoplifting losses. Calling it the “Denver crime spike fee”, the owner says it helps him to recover thousands of dollars in losses. “We’re talking about six figures [in losses] for a really small business like us, and that is meaningful,” he told the Denver Business Journal. “It impacts our employees, and, more importantly, it now is going to impact our shoppers.” Maybe that’s what it takes to win the shoplifting war? I really hope not.Mountains have been firing the imaginations of writers and adventurers for centuries, and Anna Fleming’s debut is the latest addition to a long tradition of literary reflections that includes Nan Shepherd’s The Living Mountain and Robert Macfarlane’s Mountains of the Mind, both of which have clearly influenced Fleming’s writing. There has been a vogue in recent years for memoirs by women seeking to immerse themselves in the natural world as a means of overcoming some deep trauma: divorce, addiction, the death of a parent. Fleming’s book has no such heroine’s journey at its heart; she just loves climbing. At one point she mentions the end of a relationship driving her to a more intense focus on her craft, but skates quickly across the surface of her feelings: “Some people turn to drink, I relaxed on the rock.” While in some ways this is refreshing – male writers rarely frame stories of physical challenge in terms of psychic “healing” – the lack of an overarching narrative means that Fleming’s book can feel a little repetitive. No doubt fellow enthusiasts will revel in the intricate account of each ascent, but the non-specialist may feel it’s weighted too heavily towards the technical detail. I’d have liked to hear more, for example, about the pioneering female climbers she mentions in passing, or to read in greater depth about the psychology of risk, and how the experience of challenging herself on the rock face translated into the rest of her life. That said, she writes beautifully about landscape, and her passion for these ancient formations is physical and poetic; she presents climbing as a form of partner dance. “And within that absorbing outdoor ballet – when stretching and balancing, reaching and releasing – you come to see things differently.” • Time on Rock: A Climber’s Route Into the Mountains by Anna Fleming is published by Canongate (£16.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyHebridean Dark Skies Festival A packed programme of astronomy talks, stargazing, films, music, visual art and theatre combines to create the Dark Skies Festival on the Isle of Lewis, which runs from 11-25 February. The Dark Skies exhibition will feature newly commissioned works by a group of Hebridean artists, stargazing events will be held indoors at the Cosmos Planetarium and outside with Highland Astronomy, and the festival will kick off with a night of comedy and astronomy. Stay at the Royal, a harbourside hotel, with a restaurant specialising in local meat and fish (doubles from £131, B&amp;B, royalstornoway.co.uk). More information at lanntair.com Exmoor The festival in Exmoor happens in autumn, but if you can’t wait that long there are regular Dark Skies events in the school holidays (a Night Sky Stargazing &amp; Bushcraft Adventure evening is taking place on 21 February), while the Dark Sky Discovery Trail is a two-mile route across open moorland that takes in some of the best places to see the stars (exmoorwalks.org/darksky). Stay at the Exmoor White Horse Inn, a 16th-century inn (doubles from £119, B&amp;B, exmoor-whitehorse.co.uk). exmoor-nationalpark.gov.uk Yorkshire Dales &amp; North York Moors Learn about the night sky while hiking across open moorland, soaking in a hot tub, paddling a canoe or listening to expert astronomers – all on offer across the Yorkshire Dales and North York Moors National Park. The festival runs from 18 February to 6 March and includes a rocket-making workshop and planet pizza-making evening. Stay at the 16th-century White Hart Inn (doubles from £120, B&amp;B; whiteharthawes.co.uk). yorkshiredales.org.uk Northumberland One of the least-populated regions of the UK, this is an excellent stargazing spot with little light pollution. Its festival runs from 12-28 February, with events including aurora hunting at the Battlesteads Observatory, astronomy workshops, moon walks and stargazing experiences on Hadrian’s Wall. Stay at the Battlesteads Hotel, just across the road from the observatory, with a buzzy dining room and stylish bedrooms (doubles from £115, B&amp;B, battlesteads.com). northumberlandnationalpark.org.uk South Downs national park The South Downs is holding its festival in February, with star- and moongazing events at Queen Elizabeth Country Park in Hampshire, Seven Sisters Country Park in East Sussex, and Brighton seafront. Local astronomy groups along the coast will hold talks, with tours of the planets at the South Downs Planetarium in Chichester. Stay at the White Horse Inn in Sutton, a coaching inn with a well-loved restaurant (doubles from £133, B&amp;B, whitehorseinn-sutton.co.uk). southdowns.gov.uk Peak District national park Three spots across the park have been designated Dark Sky sites, offering the chance to see some spectacular starlit skies. The car parks at Parsley Hay, near Hartington, Surprise View near Hathersage and Minninglow at Pikehall have astronomy panels to help visitors explore the constellations, and private Stargazing Experiences in Hathersage can be arranged through Dark Sky Telescope Hire (darkskytelescopehire.co.uk). Stay at the George, a historic inn (doubles from £150, B&amp;B, thegeorgehathersage.com). peakdistrict.gov.uk Brecon Beacons national park Keen stargazers should put 23-25 September in their diaries for the second annual Beacons Dark Skies Festival, with events for astrophotographers, families and keen astronomers. Alongside practical workshops, there are talks on the history and folklore that surrounds the constellations and the nocturnal wildlife that depends on them. New for this year is a mobile, inflatable planetarium that will be set up in locations across the Park. Stay at Gliffaes, a country house hotel just outside Crickhowell (doubles from £155, B&amp;B, gliffaeshotel.com). beacons-npa.gov.uk Cumbria Art workshops, wood-whittling courses and guided night-time swims are on offer at the Cumbria Dark Skies Festival (12-26 February), along with woodside walks beneath starry skies, moon watching and listening to nocturnal wildlife. Stay at the Wordsworth Hotel &amp; Spa in Grasmere – a short drive from the Dark Sky Discovery Centre at Allan Bank (doubles from £118, B&amp;B, thewordsworthhotel.co.uk). visitlakedistrict.com Forest of Bowland The Forest’s Dark Skies festival takes place over half-term (12-20 February), and although the live events are fully booked, you can join some online. The skies above the forest are spectacular at any time, however, and it’s easy to stargaze independently, with public Dark Sky Discovery Sites around the Forest – at Beacon Fell Country Park, Gisburn Forest Hub, Slaidburn Village Car Park and Crook o’ Lune picnic site. Stay at the Inn at Whitewell, an elegant 17th-century hotel (doubles from £140, B&amp;B, innatwhitewell.com). forestofbowland.com Cairngorms national park The most northerly Dark Sky Park in the world, the Cairngorms is ablaze with stars – and there’s a chance of seeing the Northern Lights. The skies are so dark it’s possible to see nebula just using binoculars, with the “snow roads” between Braemar and the Spittal of Glenshee and Glen Muick being two of the best places to stargaze. Stay at Culdearn House, a classic Victorian country house hotel (doubles from £220, B&amp;B, culdearn.com). cairngorms.co.uk.The No 10 Downing Street team seems to have moved swiftly from handing out “red meat” to the Tory right to handing in their resignation letters. Now obviously no one wants to lose their job, but if it is going to happen make sure you’re in the right country. Specifically, Denmark. That’s the lesson of a paper exploring the impact of job loss on future employment and earnings. Workers losing their jobs in southern European countries are on average paid 30% less five years later compared with 10% in Scandinavia, mainly because they are less likely to have a job, but also because they end up working for lower-paying firms. Recent Resolution Foundation research has shown that losing your job also results in future pay penalties in the UK. But what is driving the more positive outcomes in Scandinavia? Active labour market policies, which give people support to connect them to good jobs, are where the authors point the fingers. Which is awkward, given the UK spends less than most OECD countries on such policies. Instead, we are busy with the government’s latest sanctions-driven Way to Work campaign to force the short-term unemployed to take any job immediately. This is madness, first because the short-term unemployed are already flowing swiftly back into work and second because it ignores the real problem: the half a million workers who have dropped out of the labour market entirely thanks to the pandemic. Designing active labour market policies for this, and for those affected by the impact of Covid, Brexit and net zero-induced change through the 2020s, is the task we face. And if that helps an ex-Downing Street adviser or two in the meantime, all the better. • Torsten Bell is chief executive of the Resolution Foundation. Read more at resolutionfoundation.orgA comprehensive review of recent studies into a chemical often used in plastics and resins has revealed that the average American is exposed to levels of the dangerous compound that are 5,000 times higher than what the European Union now considers safe. The main exposure route for bisphenol-A (BPA) is via plastic and metal food packaging, and that has prompted a call for strong new limits on its use. In a petition sent last week to the US Food and Drug Administration, consumer advocates and food safety scientists led by the Environmental Defense Fund warned that the European Food Safety Authority’s (EFSA) December review clearly shows that BPA exposure levels in the US represent a “high health risk” for Americans of all ages. “The FDA has an obligation to protect us from toxic chemicals that can come in contact with our food,” said Maricel Maffini, a petition co-author. “These new findings should be a wakeup call to the FDA and all of us that our health is in jeopardy unless we take swift action to limit the amount of BPA that can come into contact with our food.” The chemical mimics estrogen and is linked to a range of serious health problems, including cancer, immunotoxicity, neurological toxicity, mammary gland disease, behavioral changes and decreased sperm counts, among others. Male and female brains in mammals are physically different, and Maffini noted a study that found BPA exposure altered male brains to look more like female brains. EFSA’s research pointed to evidence suggesting harm from BPA exposure can occur at levels 100,000 times lower than previously thought, and scientists have found immune system disruptions occur at particularly low levels. “What we are seeing now is that the levels that we thought were safe – they don’t seem to be safe, and the levels that we identify as causing problems in the immune system are incredibly low,” Maffini said. In food packaging, BPA is typically used to line metal cans to prevent corrosion, though plenty of safer alternatives exist, Maffini said. It’s also mixed into polycarbonate plastic, which is a clear, shatterproof material used in multi-use water bottles, containers that hold pre-prepared foods or containers used to hold ingredients during food prep, among other uses. The petition asks that those applications be prohibited. The FDA has 180 days to respond to the petition, though it can take longer on complex issues, Maffini said. Consumer groups’ petitions have led to some success in recent years. The FDA agreed with a 2016 petition led by the Environmental Defense Fund to ban the use of long-chain PFAS in food packaging, though it has yet to respond to a 2021 petition to ban all PFAS. A 2015 EDF-led petition to prohibit seven carcinogenic food flavorings resulted in the FDA banning the substances in 2018. However, the FDA’s science and position on BPA has often been at odds with that of academic scientists, consumer advocates, the US National Toxicology Program, and the FDA’s own advisory committees, Maffini said. While those groups have consistently found BPA to present a dangerous health threat, the FDA has downplayed the dangers and often relied on inadequate scientific methods to arrive at its conclusions, Maffini said. However, the FDA banned BPA from baby bottles, sippy cups and infant formula packaging in 2012. The agency said in a statement that it doesn’t comment on pending petitions.Anglers are “heartbroken” after a 250-metre stretch of the River Tone in Somerset was stripped of trees by the Environment Agency as part of flood management measures. The semi-wild section of river running through Taunton was a popular spot for anglers and wildlife-lovers, where kingfishers were often spotted. However, the majority of trees were felled last week, leaving the banks of the river as bare earth. Dominic Garnett, 42, an angling guide and coach, has fished the stretch of the river for the past 20 years and has been visiting it since childhood. “It was a semi-wild stretch of river and they have channelised it,” he told PA. “It is absolutely heartbreaking to see the destruction of the places you love – you go there to be with nature and to get away and it’s all just been ripped away.” The length of the river ran through marshland until the 1990s, when the surrounding land was tarmacked to make way for housing and a leisure and shopping complex. Garnett said the area is now prone to flooding. While woodland planting is often used as a flood mitigation strategy, Garnett said representatives of the Environment Agency had told him the trees were felled “because they make the water back up”. “It is like they have taken an old hippie and given him a buzz cut – it is scorched earth tactics.” He pointed out that huge swathes of trees had been cleared only weeks away from nesting season, with river plants dredged out when some species of fish are starting to spawn. “It makes them vulnerable to predators – fish need places to hide,” he said. Mark Barrow, a film-maker who has specialised in productions about freshwater species in the UK’s rivers and lakes for the past 20 years, tweeted that he was “shocked” to discover the scene on the River Tone. “Complete devastation, courtesy of the Environment Agency. Scorched earth work the Russian army would be proud of! Those stumps were decades old trees where I used to watch the local kingfisher. Everything is now disappearing.” A spokeswoman for the Environment Agency said: “Essential work to manage flood risk and protect properties in Bathpool and the upstream town of Taunton is ongoing. “We always work to minimise any impact to the environment when carrying out work and have measures in place to compensate, such as new tree planting. Flooding and coastal erosion can have terrible consequences for people, businesses and the environment.” It is understood the trees at water level were deemed to be creating a flood risk by catching debris and restricting the flow of water. The area is due to be sown with a wild flower seed mix and replanted with native trees.‘What do you see when you look at me?” chant The PappyShow’s ragtag, 13-strong cast of varying races, ages, genders and abilities. Taking the question at face value, performer Bea Holland explains that the eye itself sees nothing; it’s the brain that does the seeing. It’s a neat opening move, and the freewheeling scenes and scenarios that follow dive with some gusto into that very gap: between seeing and looking, perceiving and conceiving; between us and them, and you and me. The cast introduce themselves with affectionate cliches that are rudimentary stereotypes nonetheless: a singsong Italian accent (Debora Minà), kung fu kicks (Jules Chan), bhangra dancing (Simran Hunjun). Later, when we’re softened up, a fashion parade exaggerates and furthermore mismatches the stereotypes: a black woman in a wheelchair rolls up in Breton sailor drag, complete with boating hat, striped jersey and baguette; an east Asian man sports a Rastacap and dreadlock wig; a white woman with a crutch walks on in a black face mask. Later still, they apologise for the blatant cultural appropriation – but characteristically, this becomes less a position statement than an opportunity to riff on the gaps between the making, meaning and believing of apologies: they poke fun at each other’s duplicitous expressions of regret (“I’m sorry I portrayed violence to give the show more drama”), and niftily quote from one of the latest offerings from our prime minister. The evening is full of scenes that cut one way, and undercut another. The cast’s pastel tops form a lovely rainbow when they line up in order of height, but ranked by age or hair-length it’s a mess. Their synchronised-swimming choreography is laughably amateur alongside the machined, identikit precision of the top team on a video projection – but there’s no doubt who looks more human. Therein lies its charm. The devised format and workshoppy feel do make for a patchy evening, and the cultural diversity theme could have made for a stilted one; but the ambience is very convivial – we’re all in this together, somehow – and no one, on stage or in the audience, is reduced from a person to a position. We are all more than we seem. • At Shoreditch Town Hall, London, until 6 February.A majority of Conservative voters want their party to deliver more affordable housing and let councils buy up empty properties, according to new polling which suggests that public frustration with the housing crisis is now more evenly spread across the political divide. Two-thirds of Tories in the UK want new-build developments to include more affordable homes and 68% want higher taxes on second homes and empty properties, according to YouGov polling shared with the Guardian. The research comes after the levelling up white paper disappointed some housing campaigners in England by failing to set targets for increasing the supply of low-rent homes, which is seen by many as a key weapon in the fight against the cost of living crisis. A large minority of Conservative voters – 39% – support giving private renters indefinite tenancies which can only be ended when a tenant wants to move or in cases of criminal damage or severe rent arrears. Such a policy would go much further than the ban on no-fault evictions that Michael Gove, the secretary of state for levelling up, housing and communities, last week said he would deliver. Matt Downie, the chief executive of Crisis, a charity for homeless people, said: “If there is clear cross-party support for making sure that people on lower or no incomes have somewhere stable to live, we’d urge the government to take action on that and start to unravel the enormous housing crisis facing this country. “One of the most obvious ways we can tackle the cost of living crisis is to bring down housing costs.” A study by Heriot-Watt University estimated that 90,000 more social homes needed to be built in England every year to meet demand. But in the year 2020-21, housing associations built 26,010 new homes in England, which was the lowest level since 2016-17, while only 1,650 council homes were built – the fewest since 2014-15. The official figures mean affordable homes accounted for just 18% of new housebuilding. Home ownership among 25- to 34-year-olds has fallen from 51% in 1989 to 28% in 2019, according to the Resolution Foundation. Downie said it was “heartening” that there was such support for increasing the amount of social housing built as part of new developments, which he said was “shockingly low despite there being an obligation [on developers] in theory”. Many developers are able to argue that their schemes would not be financially viable if they had to build large numbers of affordable homes, meaning that local authorities are obliged to dilute their targets for cheap housing. “There is support among both Labour and Conservative voters for almost all the policies we asked about,” said a spokesperson for YouGov. “While Labour voters tend to be more strongly in favour of these policies, foreign investment in the UK house market is more unpopular with Conservatives – 56% of Tory voters would support an end to non-domiciled property ownership, compared with 45% of Labour voters.”Iconic photographs give this new musical play its title: a crouching priest waves a bloodstained white handkerchief as he moves along a city street, past armed soldiers, followed by men bearing a body in their arms. The priest is Father Edward Daly, the city is Derry, the body is 17-year-old John (“Jackie”) Duddy; the date is 30 January 1972, known since as Bloody Sunday. On that day, unarmed civil rights marchers, protesting against internment without trial, were shot at by British soldiers: 13 were killed; 15 wounded. The events of Bloody Sunday have been crafted into drama by composer Brian O’Doherty and playwright Liam Campbell (who died on 20 December last year, just before it went in to rehearsal). They are played out for us by a 34-strong cast of local professional and community actors, accompanied by a 12-strong orchestra, in the symbolically charged setting of the Guildhall, the intended destination never reached by the marchers. On opening night, families of those who lost their lives are in the audience. Their past is brought into our present via the spirit of William McKinney (a finely measured performance from Warren McCook). Returning to the site where he fell, he relives his final hours. Boundaries between past and present blur: William addresses the audience directly; he and others come to sit among us, in the aisles. Under Kieran Griffiths’s direction, scenes flow, swift-paced, over, around and under the raised traverse stage bisecting the hall (designer: Ciaran Bagnall). The actors range easily through performance styles: intimate naturalism; rough comedy; epic monumentality. Tone changes are enhanced by musical shifts of emphasis from strings to percussion, also by movement transitions – Nadine Hegarty choreographs – between life-affirming, soldier-defying dances and tragedy-enhancing, death-dealt stillness. Created to commemorate the 50th anniversary of Bloody Sunday, the production only touches on the two official reports into army actions that day; it does not mention army killings leading up to it, nor IRA killings afterwards. A little more context here would be useful. That said, this performance for, by and about the people of Derry connects powerfully to wider experiences of loss and injustice. We see this, for instance, in William’s explaining, to his anxious fiancee, Elizabeth (perfectly pitched Sharon Duffy), why he feels he must join the march: “I won’t have done enough until the likes of you and me are not treated like second-class citizens in our own land… As Martin Luther King said, ‘We will not be satisfied until justice rolls down like waters, and righteousness like a mighty stream’.” Site-specific? Yes! But with themes that touch us all. The White Handkerchief is at the Guildhall, Derry until 5 February and available online until 9 FebruaryAstronauts Jo (Halle Berry) and Brian (Patrick Wilson) witness a freak accident, caused by an undulating mass of black matter. When they make it back to Earth minus a crew member, no one believes them; Brian is blamed and blacklisted from Nasa. Fast-forward 10 years, and KC (John Bradley from Game of Thrones), a lonely blogger with a cat named Fuzz Aldrin, gets in touch. The moon has fallen out of orbit; its debris will destroy the planet within weeks. It’s up to Brian and Jo to return to space and defeat what they call “the swarm”. There are too many characters and too many redemption arcs in this silly, overstuffed sci-fi. At least the eye-poppingly expensive special effects are cool. Apocalypse expert Roland Emmerich (The Day After Tomorrow, Independence Day) directs, drawing his premise from a conspiracy theory. “You’re telling me that the moon has the biggest cover-up in history?” says a baffled Jo, now the deputy director of Nasa.The war in Afghanistan did not end when US and UK troops left Kabul airport last year; it merely took a different, but still lethal, form. The response of President Joe Biden to the military humiliation inflicted on America by the Taliban has been a scorched-earth policy designed to cause the maximum amount of economic damage to what was already one of the world’s poorest countries. Prosecuting this war by other means involved freezing Afghan state assets held in New York. It meant the threat of sanctions against banks and other foreign companies doing business in Afghanistan. It has involved halting payments from the World Bank’s Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund (ARTF). It meant no emergency Covid-19 financial help from the International Monetary Fund. At the time, it was obvious that this withdrawal of overseas financial aid – which accounted for almost half of Afghanistan’s gross domestic product in 2020 – would have a disastrous impact, and so it has proved. While the illicit opium-based trade is still going strong, the rest of the economy has pretty much collapsed. On average, firms have laid off 60% of their workers. The price of basic foodstuffs has risen by 40%. More than half the population is in need of humanitarian assistance and the poverty rate is in the region of 90%. By some distance, these are the highest levels of distress anywhere in the world. The UN children’s fund Unicef estimates that more than a million Afghan children are at risk of dying from malnutrition or hunger-related disease. The statistics don’t capture the full picture, of people so desperate for food that they are selling their young daughters into marriage or having their organs removed for cash. What is clear is that rather than selectively targeting the Taliban, the US and its European allies are inflicting collective punishment on an entire country in the misguided belief that this is somehow upholding western values. Letting children go hungry does not uphold western values. Closing schools because teachers are going unpaid does not uphold western values. Having lost the war, Washington is now losing the peace. Some humanitarian funding is arriving in Afghanistan through UN agencies and some of the leading development charities, but it is a fraction of the aid that was flowing in to keep schools open and pay the salaries of public sector workers before the Taliban takeover. Precise estimates of the scale of short-term help being provided are difficult because conditions are so chaotic, it is hard to say whether the cash being airlifted in is actually arriving where it is needed. But it is probably around 10% of the $8.5bn (£6.2bn) a year that was coming in before the Taliban took power. As one observer put it, the west’s approach has been to torpedo the economy and then provide a couple of leaky lifeboats to pick up the survivors. Afghanistan’s new rulers did not have an economic plan in August, and still don’t six months on. To an extent, they don’t need, one because they have a ready-made alibi: the economy is a mess because the Americans decided to make it so. There is not the slightest evidence that impoverishing the Afghan people is bringing regime change any closer. What it is doing is ensuring mass unemployment and widespread poverty: the perfect conditions to breed terrorism and generate an exodus of refugees. Biden has an obvious problem. It wouldn’t be a great look for the White House to go soft after so many American lives were lost in a two-decade war that ended in failure. It is hard, though, to escape the conclusion that there would have been a lot more fuss had Donald Trump won the election in 2020 and been pursuing the same policy. True, there has been some small easing of the sanctions to allow banks to do business for certain tightly controlled purposes without incurring sanctions. In December, the World Bank – which is deeply concerned about the deteriorating situation – transferred $280m from the ARTF to Unicef and the World Food Programme. But there has no been real let-up. The Bank says it is in the hands of its shareholders. The IMF says it is guided by the international community. In reality, both are taking orders from the US Treasury and state department, and have effectively become instruments of American foreign policy. That the Taliban holds odious views is not in dispute. It would also be naive to imagine – given the abject confusion – that aid could be turned back on without a large chunk of it being squandered or stolen. The same, though, could be said of many other countries, yet only Afghanistan is being singled out for this brutal form of revenge. Eventually the following will happen. Afghanistan’s foreign-currency reserves will be unfrozen by the Americans. A floor will be put under the economy by an easing of sanctions so that non-humanitarian aid can be provided. The central bank will start to function. Discussions will be allowed to start with the IMF for a conditional bailout package. The World Bank will restart its programmes in an attempt to prevent the gains in human development it has financed over the past two decades being squandered. Strong public pressure needs to be put on the US to make sure this happens sooner rather than later. China has rightly been condemned for its treatment of Uyghurs in Xinjiang, but there has been no similar mobilisation of international opinion against policies that are proving disastrous for millions of innocent, vulnerable Afghans. That needs to change, because what the US is doing amounts to a humanitarian crime. And those who know what’s happening but keep silent are accessories to that crime.Today in a nutshell: High winds put paid to the men’s downhill, Zoi Sadowski-Synnott secured an historic New Zealand gold and Kamila Valieva stunned on the ice Next up: There are medals yet to be won today in the women’s moguls and men’s single luge, and tomorrow we’ll see the first ever Olympic mixed team ski jumping competition After one hour and 16 minutes of gruelling cross-country skiing, Alexander Bolshunov crossed the finish line carrying a Russian Olympic Committee (ROC) banner, some 71 seconds ahead of compatriot Denis Spitsov. Iivo Niskanen of Finland had been instrumental in setting up the breakaway for the three men. He held off a late double Norwegian challenge to claim bronze in the 15km + 15km men’s skiathlon. Zoi Sadowski-Synnott made history by winning New Zealand’s first-ever Winter Olympics gold, capturing the women’s slopestyle title with a dramatic final run that ended US dominance of the discipline. “I tried to think about it last night what it would mean if I managed to land my run and come away with gold, and honestly it feels unreal,” she said. Julia Marino of USA and Australia’s Tess Coady won silver and bronze, the first medals of these Games for their respective nations. Australian curling duo Tahli Gill and Dean Hewitt have had a rollercoaster of a day. They were originally told they were going home after a positive Covid test for Gill, only for health officials to say they could continue after all under “close contact” provisions. They then beat Switzerland 9-6 in the mixed doubles. Italy’s unbeaten run in the curling stretched to seven with victory over China. That guarantees the Italians a semi-final spot. Canada, Great Britain and Sweden have five wins apiece, and Norway sit in fifth place on four wins. One of those four is going to miss out, and this evening’s match between Team GB and Norway could prove pivotal. Patrick Roest of the Netherlands set a new Olympic record in the men’s 5,000m speed skating, then had to sit and watch another five pairs of skaters go to see if it was enough for gold. It wasn’t. Sweden’s Nils van der Poel shaved another 0.47 seconds off the record to snatch the win in the final race. Heartbreaking for Roest. Things you might have missed We all missed the men’s downhill in the Alpine skiing. It was postponed because of high winds. And lots of people missed the opening ceremony in the US – NBC reported only 16 million people watched its live coverage, the lowest viewership in history. China’s first gold medal came late on Saturday in the chaotic mixed short skating relay. They had only appeared in the final after both the US and ROC were penalised in the semi-final. Also towards the close of play on Saturday, Urša Bogataj won the normal hill ski jumping for Slovenia, while Walter Wallberg of Sweden surprised Olympic champion and hot favourite Mikaël Kingsbury of Canada to win the men’s moguls in the freestyle skiing. The International Olympic Committee (IOC) said it will proceed with a meeting with the former world No 1 doubles tennis player Peng Shuai, but details of the meeting will not be shared in advance. A dramatic shootout victory for China over Japan in the women’s ice hockey means that both these sides and the Czech Republic have now each won two matches and the three nations must be strong favourites to progress to the quarter-finals. You might also enjoy reading: Sadowski Synnott wins NZ’s first-ever Winter Olympic gold Trial of protesters against Beijing Olympics postponed in Greece Kaitlyn Weaver: ‘There was so much more to me than I was able to show’ David Lammy: We can’t let China use Games to mask genocide and abuses The briefing’s picture of the day Fifteen-year-old Kamila Valieva delivered one of the highest-scoring short programmes in history to put ROC into a strong lead in the team figure skating. The Russians sit three points ahead of the US and six clear of Japan in third place going into Monday’s final three events. What to look out for next Times are all in local Beijing time. For Sydney it is +3 hours, for London it is -8 hours, for New York it is -13 hours and San Francisco is -16 hours. Later today – Sunday 6 February 8pm Ski jumping – the men’s final round on the normal hill if the wind complies 🥇 8.40pm Freestyle skiing – the third and final run of the women’s moguls 🥇 9.10pm Ice hockey – the US face Switzerland in group A of the women’s preliminary round with *checks notes* nothing at stake because all the teams in that group qualify for the quarter-finals anyway 🏒 9.15pm Luge – 20 men will go for their fourth and final run 🥇 Tomorrow – Monday 7 February 9.05am and 8.05pm Curling – the day starts with the final pool matches in the mixed doubles, including USA v Team GB. The evening session is the two semi-finals 🥌 9.15am – 11.35am Figure skating – the Russian skaters look all set to take team gold 🥇 9.30am and 1.30pm Freestyle skiing – it is free ski qualification day for women in the morning and men in the afternoon 9.30am and 12pm and 2.30pm Alpine skiing – this has all been rescheduled. We will get two runs of the women’s giant slalom to enjoy with Mikaela Shiffrin of the US expected to take centre-stage – and sandwiched in between is the men’s downhill that should have been on today 🥇 12pm Snowboarding – the men’s slopestyle final 🥇 4.30 Speed skating – the final of the women’s 1,500m 🥇 5pm Biathlon – sure to be a highlight, it is the women’s 15km of cross-country skiing and shooting 🥇 6.30pm Ski jumping – it is the mixed team competition, with the final round due at 8.51pm 🥇 7.30pm Short track speed skating – Monday sees the concluding rounds and finals in the women’s 500m and the men’s 1,000m🥇 Full Winter Olympics schedule | Results, sport by sport | Medal table How things stand Here’s what the emoji table looked like at 6.15pm Beijing time … 1 🇳🇴 Norway 🥇 2 🥈 0 🥉 1 total: 3 2 🇸🇪 Sweden 🥇 2 🥈 0 🥉 0 total: 2 3 ◻️ Not Russia 🥇 1 🥈 2 🥉 1 total: 4 4 🇳🇱 Netherlands 🥇 1 🥈 1 🥉 0 total: 2 5 🇸🇮 Slovenia 🥇 1 🥈 0 🥉 1 total: 2 6= 🇨🇳 China 🥇 1 🥈 0 🥉 0 total: 1 6= 🇳🇿 New Zealand 🥇 1 🥈 0 🥉 0 total: 1 Selected others 9 🇨🇦 Canada 🥇 0 🥈 1 🥉 1 total: 2 10= 🇺🇸 United States 🥇 0🥈 1 🥉 0 total: 1 13= 🇦🇺 Australia 🥇 0🥈 0 🥉 1 total: 1 It is always my aim not to have to run a regular errata column here, but yesterday I got so excited by the tight finish of the biathlon relay that I got the silver and bronze medals mixed up. France won the silver, the team representing the ROC were third, not the other way round. Apologies to all concerned. Don’t forget you can get in touch at martin.belam@theguardian.com to point out what I’ve inevitably got wrong today. The last word We need to get this next win and then we can start figuring things out about the knockouts. We’re doing a lot of things right, the dynamic we’ve created has been great, and we’re very happy with our result” – Bruce Mouat, one half of Team GB’s mixed doubles curling team, who are one win from a semi-final berth.Amid the hype over her acclaimed performance as Diana, Princess of Wales in Spencer, Kristen Stewart briefly stopped awards pundits dead in their tracks when, upon being asked about her Oscar buzz, she drily admitted, “I don’t give a shit.” Sacrilege! Some of the best films and performances of all time haven’t been considered by the Academy, she continued. “There’s five spots. What the fuck are you going to do?” Nobody disagrees with Stewart on any of this: just ask our critics, whose ideal Oscar ballots below are knowingly far from the expected reality of next week’s nominations. That the actor’s comments made showbiz headlines anyway speaks to the strange aura the Oscars maintain as a gold standard of cinematic achievement: for several months a year, people fret and discuss and strategise about them, while companies expensively campaign for them, only to spend the rest of the year complaining that they don’t mean anything anyway. Even Stewart’s scepticism emerged while on the campaign trail, being interviewed on a Variety podcast named Awards Circuit. Should she win for Spencer, she’ll doubtless turn up and give a humbly grateful speech anyway. That’s the game. Nobody gives a shit about the Oscars, after all, except when everyone does. Here, then, are our critics’ picks of who and what should be on those Oscars shortlists. Guy Lodge Mark Kermode, Observer film critic Best picture – my shortlist (my winner first) PETITE MAMAN Summer of Soul The Green Knight Titane Censor Céline Sciamma’s Petite Maman rekindled my faith in the universal power of cinema. Summer of Soul was a revelation that has been shortlisted for the documentary feature award. Meanwhile, Julia Ducournau’s Palme d’Or winner Titane bizarrely failed to make the best international feature selection. The bookies favour The Power of the Dog for best film, but Belfast has the popular touch. Best director CÉLINE SCIAMMA – PETITE MAMAN Julia Ducournau – Titane Guillermo del Toro – Nightmare Alley Jane Campion – The Power of the Dog Prano Bailey-Bond – Censor The real-world title fight seems to be between Jane Campion and Kenneth Branagh, with Siân Heder a possibility for Coda. My award would go to either Céline Sciamma, who has barely put a foot wrong since 2007’s Water Lilies, Julia Ducournau, for her thrillingly confident follow-up to Raw, or Guillermo del Toro, who previously won for The Shape of Water. Best actress JENNIFER HUDSON – RESPECT Agathe Rousselle – Titane Kristen Stewart – Spencer Alana Haim – Licorice Pizza Niamh Algar – Censor British writer and director Aleem Khan’s terrific After Love is not eligible for this year’s Oscars – if it were, Joanna Scanlan would be in my list. Of those actually in the running, Jennifer Hudson was born to play Aretha Franklin, although Respect fails to live up to her barnstorming central performance. Special mention to Agathe Rousselle for her fearless turn in Titane. Best actor DEV PATEL – THE GREEN KNIGHT Will Smith – King Richard Riz Ahmed – Mogul Mowgli Bradley Cooper – Nightmare Alley Hidetoshi Nishijima – Drive My Car Will Smith, Benedict Cumberbatch and Andrew Garfield seem to be Oscar frontrunners. A statuette for Smith (who’s been nominated twice before) would be deserved. My picks include the endlessly versatile Dev Patel for The Green Knight and Riz Ahmed (who should have won for Sound of Metal last year) for Mogul Mowgli, which didn’t open in the US until 2021. Best supporting actress KATHRYN HUNTER – THE TRAGEDY OF MACBETH Ariana DeBose – West Side Story Aunjanue Ellis – King Richard Martha Plimpton – Mass Ann Dowd – Mass There are lots of things wrong with Joel Coen’s visually striking but dramatically inert The Tragedy of Macbeth, yet Kathryn Hunter’s astonishingly physical performance elevates the project. Ariana DeBose steals the show in Spielberg’s West Side Story with a performance that is full of energy and wit, while Aunjanue Ellis proves the perfect foil for Will Smith in King Richard. Best supporting actor VINCENT LINDON – TITANE Jason Isaacs – Mass Reed Birney – Mass Ciarán Hinds – Belfast Reece Shearsmith – In the Earth The ensemble cast of Mass seems to have been largely overlooked by the major awards – a tragedy since they are superb. I’ve nominated all four in my supporting actress/actor picks. My list also includes Reece Shearsmith in a film that most Oscar voters won’t have seen or even heard of. But it’s Vincent Lindon’s transformative turn in Titane that takes top prize. Best original score JONNY GREENWOOD – SPENCER Daniel Hart – The Green Knight Robert Aiki Aubrey Lowe – Candyman Germaine Franco – Encanto Jeymes Samuel – The Harder They Fall Depressingly, the 15-strong Oscar shortlist (from which I’ve drawn my picks) includes only one female composer: Germaine Franco. My favourite score of 2021 was Eiko Ishibashi’s heartbreakingly beautiful music for Drive My Car, alongside Nainita Desai’s score for The Reason I Jump, (which isn’t eligible). Jonny Greenwood is a favourite for The Power of the Dog, but his score for Spencer gets my vote. Wendy Ide Best picture – my shortlist (my winner first) THE LOST DAUGHTER The Power of the Dog Zola The Worst Person in the World Red Rocket It has been a thrilling year for cinema, with a wealth of bold, daring visions staking a claim on the big screen. Not that you would necessarily know it to look at this year’s best picture frontrunners. Rather than some of the safer options, I would love to see Janicza Bravo’s nerve-jangling road trip Zola get a nomination or Sean Baker’s grubby, funny Red Rocket. But my pick would be Maggie Gyllenhaal’s sinuous, unsettling debut, The Lost Daughter. Best director JANE CAMPION – THE POWER OF THE DOG Maggie Gyllenhaal – The Lost Daughter Joanna Hogg – The Souvenir Part II Janicza Bravo – Zola Sean Baker – Red Rocket Great direction isn’t just about the showy flex of the big-budget spectacle. For me, one of the most intriguing and satisfying pieces of work this year was the playfully mercurial introspection of Joanna Hogg’s The Souvenir Part II. But my pick for the top prize is Jane Campion, for her emotionally attuned and assured direction of The Power of the Dog. Best actress OLIVIA COLMAN – THE LOST DAUGHTER Alana Haim – Licorice Pizza Renate Reinsve – The Worst Person in the World Tessa Thompson – Passing Agathe Rousselle – Titane It’s hard to pick a favourite in this category. How to choose between the guarded self-possession of Tessa Thompson in Passing and the serrated intensity of Agatha Rousselle in Titane? Renate Reinsve’s magnetism in The Worst Person in The World and Alana Haim’s glorious delivery of the line: “Fuck off, teenagers”? Ultimately, however, it has to be Olivia Colman’s endlessly fascinating performance in The Lost Daughter for the win. Best actor HIDETOSHI NISHIJIMA – DRIVE MY CAR Joaquin Phoenix – C’mon C’mon Simon Rex – Red Rocket Riz Ahmed – Encounter Benedict Cumberbatch – The Power of the Dog The best acting doesn’t necessarily mean the most acting. In the best actor category, I have found myself drawn to reined-in, introspective performances that seduce the audience rather than assault them with a firework display of emotional range. Joaquin Phoenix in C’mon, C’mon is a rumpled, rueful pleasure. But it’s the rare delicacy of Hidetoshi Nishijima’s work in Drive My Car that has stayed with me. Best supporting actress RUTH NEGGA – PASSING Jessie Buckley – The Lost Daughter Ann Dowd – Mass Ariana DeBose – West Side Story Gaby Hoffman – C’mon, C’mon Ariana DeBose is looking like a frontrunner in this category and deservedly so: she is electrifying in West Side Story. Jessie Buckley, once again demonstrating that she’s one of the most exciting actors of her generation, could take the prize for The Lost Daughter. But I would love to see Ruth Negga win for her magnetic and treacherous charisma in Passing. Best supporting actor KODI SMIT-MCPHEE – THE POWER OF THE DOG Vincent Lindon – Titane Woody Norman – C’mon, C’mon Richard Ayoade – The Souvenir Part II Jason Isaacs – Mass There’s a certain elasticity in the definition of what constitutes a great supporting turn – is it something like Richard Ayoade’s performance in The Souvenir Part II, which leaves an unforgettable impression from just a handful of scenes? Or a performance like Kodi Smit-McPhee’s – my pick this year – in The Power of the Dog, which is an essential component of the film’s slippery sensuality? Best international feature THE WORST PERSON IN THE WORLD Drive My Car Compartment No 6 Prayers for the Stolen Playground The Parasite effect has refocused attention on the international feature category, which can only be a good thing. I hope that smaller titles, such as Laura Wandel’s riveting Playground and Tatiana Huezo’s Prayers for the Stolen reach a wider audience as a result. But my pick for the win is Joachim Trier’s The Worst Person in the World, a joy of a movie that embraces the chaos and charm of its central character. Simran Hans Best picture – my shortlist (my winner first) THE SOUVENIR PART II Dune Licorice Pizza The Lost Daughter Zola The Souvenir Part II deserves international acclaim; it has been criminally overlooked by awarding bodies here in the UK, missing out on Bafta’s best film and best British film longlists. It’s about those first, tentative green shoots of creative confidence, made by a director whose talent and authority are finally in full bloom. The film is heartbreakingly poignant and my clear winner. Best director JANICZA BRAVO – ZOLA Jane Campion – The Power of the Dog Maggie Gyllenhaal – The Lost Daughter Rebecca Hall – Passing Joanna Hogg – The Souvenir Part II Janicza Bravo’s bravura vision transforms a viral Twitter thread into an entire world, bringing visual wit, an arch sense of humour and a distinctly feminine point of view to what might, in the wrong hands, feel like tawdry sleaze. Hollywood can feel like a bit of a desert when it comes to new ideas; Bravo is one of several female directors whose perspective feels like an enlivening, ice-cold glass of water. Best actress ALANA HAIM – LICORICE PIZZA Olivia Colman – The Lost Daughter Jodie Comer – The Last Duel Taylour Paige – Zola Honor Swinton Byrne – The Souvenir Part II I hope Alana Haim goes on to have a long and successful career. Paul Thomas Anderson has a way of bringing out the best in his actors, which feels even more miraculous given this is the pop star’s film debut. She’s endearingly gawky and naturally intelligent, with a flirtatious quality that translates beautifully on screen. An Oscar nomination would certainly put her on more film-makers’ radars. Best actor HIDETOSHI NISHIJIMA – DRIVE MY CAR Anders Danielsen Lie – The Worst Person in the World Andrew Garfield – Tick, Tick… Boom! Cooper Hoffman – Licorice Pizza Denzel Washington – Macbeth Not a vintage year in the best actor category, which will probably see a familiar Hollywood face collect another gong to add to their collection. The Academy’s bias towards English-language films doesn’t help Hidetoshi Nishijima’s case, but he’s a cut above the rest in Ryusuke Hamaguchi’s Drive My Car. He’s subtly brilliant as a man whose placid exterior hides stinging grief. Best supporting actress RUTH NEGGA – PASSING Jessie Buckley – The Lost Daughter Kathryn Hunter – The Tragedy of Macbeth Ariana DeBose – West Side Story Tôko Miura – Drive My Car All five of these actors outshine their co-stars, despite the smaller size of their roles. Forget West Side Story’s main character, Maria – she’s a charisma vacuum compared to Ariana DeBose’s Anita. Kathryn Hunter is an obvious frontrunner for her memorably twisted turn as the witches in The Tragedy of Macbeth, but for sheer star wattage I have to champion Ruth Negga’s luminous performance in Passing. Best supporting actor MIKE FAIST – WEST SIDE STORY Richard Ayoade – The Souvenir Part II Colman Domingo – Zola Kodi Smit-McPhee – The Power of the Dog Woody Norman – C’mon C’mon I’m crossing my fingers for Mike Faist, whose ferocious bad-boy bite gives him the edge in the otherwise respectable West Side Story. Equally deserving, though, would be the giddying, sharply tuned comic performances given by Richard Ayoade and Colman Domingo, Kodi Smith-McPhee’s slinking intelligence, on display in The Power of the Dog or the emotionally translucent 11-year-old Woody Norman in C’mon C’mon. Best documentary PROCESSION Ascension Billie Eilish: The World’s a Little Blurry Faya Dayi Flee This category is voted for by a specialist documentary branch; its shortlist of 15 has been announced, and happily, some of their more leftfield choices overlap with my own. I’d love to see something formally experimental rewarded, like Faya Dayi, Jessica Beshir’s trancelike exploration of the stimulant khat, or Procession, Robert Greene’s creative collaboration with six survivors of child abuse in the Catholic church. Guy Lodge Best picture – my shortlist (my winner first) DRIVE MY CAR The Green Knight Moffie Procession The Souvenir Part II After a surprise sweep of the major US critics’ awards, Drive My Car, Ryusuke Hamaguchi’s languid, longing meditation on grief, companionship and Chekhov is now a dark horse for a best picture nomination, potentially disrupting what otherwise looks to be an all-English-language lineup. With bland titles such as Belfast and Coda seen as sure things, there’s really no excuse for it not to make the cut. Best director TATIANA HUEZO – PRAYERS FOR THE STOLEN Janicza Bravo– Zola Jane Campion – The Power of the Dog Julia Ducournau – Titane Maggie Gyllenhaal – The Lost Daughter Having struggled to limit my best picture selections to five in a strong and diverse year, I opted to pick five completely different films for best director. All are distinctive visions from female film-makers working at a high level of risk and formal daring, none more so than Salvadoran-Mexican doc-maker Tatiana Huezo, whose devastating first fiction film blends socially conscious realism with earthy poetry. Best actress RUTH NEGGA – PASSING Olivia Colman – The Lost Daughter Rebecca Hall – The Night House Tôko Miura – Drive My Car Tessa Thompson – Passing Ruth Negga has been categorised as a supporting actress in Rebecca Hall’s exquisite directorial debut, but I disagree: even if she has less screen time than the excellent Tessa Thompson, her magnetic performance as a white-passing black woman in 1920s New York City is the film’s thematic linchpin. Hall, meanwhile, makes the cut for her film-elevating turn in the underrated horror The Night House. Best actor BRADLEY COOPER – NIGHTMARE ALLEY Yuriy Borisov – Compartment No 6 Hidetoshi Nishijima – Drive My Car Simon Rex – Red Rocket Kodi Smit-McPhee – The Power of the Dog Bradley Cooper has quietly racked up eight Oscar nominations in various categories, without winning any of them. This isn’t looking like his year either, despite a pair of superb performances in very different registers. His all-American slickness is subverted to intense, dark-souled effect in Nightmare Alley, while his brief, delightfully gonzo turn in Licorice Pizza (see below) provides impressive contrast. Best supporting actress JESSIE BUCKLEY – THE LOST DAUGHTER Ana De Armas – No Time to Die Gaby Hoffmann – C’mon C’mon Charlotte Rampling – Benedetta Suzanna Son – Red Rocket Only twice in Oscar history have two actors been nominated for playing the same character in one film: both times, Kate Winslet (in Titanic and Iris) was one of the beneficiaries. Buckley deserves to muscle in on that stat: playing the younger version of a peak-form Olivia Colman, she subtly but uncannily echoes the physical and unravelling psychological presence of her older counterpart. Best supporting actor ANDERS DANIELSEN LIE – THE WORST PERSON IN THE WORLD Richard Ayoade – The Souvenir Part II Bradley Cooper – Licorice Pizza Colman Domingo – Zola Jared Leto – House of Gucci Last year, Minari’s Youn Yuh-jung became the first actor since Marion Cotillard in 2007 to win an Oscar for a wholly non-English-language performance; even as the Academy diversifies, Anglocentric bias is the norm. As the broken heart of Joachim Trier’s lovely reflection on millennial ennui, Norwegian actor Danielsen Lie — who maintains a career as a medical doctor between films — deserves to buck the trend. Best original screenplay JOANNA HOGG – THE SOUVENIR PART II Amalia Ulman – El Planeta Paul Thomas Anderson – Licorice Pizza Sean Baker and Chris Bergoch – Red Rocket Joachim Trier and Eskil Vogt – The Worst Person in the World Dubiously, Academy rules define all sequels as adaptations, though Joanna Hogg isn’t drawing on anything other than her own experience and imagination in her dazzling self-portrait of the artist as a young woman. Bafta absurdly left The Souvenir Part II off a 20-title longlist for best British film; I’m not expecting the Academy to notice it either, though it’s a masterwork just the same.Fifteen-year-old Maria (Rihane Khalil Alio) is pregnant and in desperate need of an abortion. The procedure is taboo in Chad, where she lives. It’s up to her single mother, Amina (Achouackh Abakar Souleymane), to find a solution, aided by a secret network of women. “I don’t want to be like you, Mum. They think you’re a loose woman,” says Maria, face turned away from the camera, to her mother. Amina, on the other hand, meets the film-maker’s gaze head-on. In this compelling though not exactly subtle drama from Chadian writer-director Mahamat-Saleh Haroun, Amina is a beacon of hope in brightly coloured robes. Her grit and determination are apparent from the opening scene, in which she breaks down a tyre for scrap metal.One hundred years ago, the leader of the last great expedition of the heroic age of polar exploration died from a heart attack as his ship, Quest, headed for Antarctica. The announcement of the death of Ernest Shackleton on 30 January 1922 was greeted with an outpouring of national grief. This was the man, after all, who had saved the entire crew of his ship Endurance – which had been crushed and sunk by ice in 1915 – by making a daring trip in a tiny open boat over 750 miles of polar sea to raise the alarm at a whaling station in South Georgia. It remains one of the greatest rescue stories of modern history and led to the lionising of Shackleton in the United Kingdom, a reputation that survived intact for the rest of the century. As his contemporary Raymond Priestley, the geologist and Antarctic explorer, later put it: “When disaster strikes and all hope is gone, get down on your knees and pray for Shackleton.” Now the centenary of his death is being marked with a lavishly illustrated exhibition – Shackleton’s legacy and the power of early Antarctic photography – which opens at the Royal Geographical Society (RGS), in London on Monday and which includes a range of images and artefacts from his expeditions. In addition, a digitally remastered version of South, a documentary film – one of the first ever made – of Shackleton’s 1914-16 Endurance expedition is being screened at the British Film Institute in London. The film and most of the exhibition’s finest images are the handiwork of Frank Hurley, who sailed with Shackleton and who was one of the 20th century’s greatest photographers and film-makers. Both film and exhibition feature striking camera work and provide vivid accounts of the privations that Shackleton and his men endured as they headed off to explore Antarctica. Born in Ireland and raised in south London, Shackleton first visited the south pole when he served on the 1901-03 Discovery expedition led by Robert Scott. Shackleton later returned with his own expedition, on the Nimrod, and led a four-man party that got within 100 miles of the pole in January 1909. And here, poised on the threshold of greatness, Shackleton turned back his party as his calculations suggested his men had insufficient rations to ensure a safe return. He was right. As they staggered back towards their base camp, over the Beardmore glacier, they began to suffer from bitter cold, endured near starvation and were left with their clothes in tatters. “It is neck or nothing with us now … Our food lies ahead and death stalks us from behind,” Shackleton wrote in his diary. His men just made it but would certainly have perished had they ploughed on to reach the pole that had been only a short distance away. As the RGS exhibition notes, Shackleton’s decision was courageous. Two years later, two expeditions reached the south pole. The first party to arrive was led by the Norwegian explorer Roald Amundsen. The second was directed by Scott – whose party perished as they tried to get back to base camp. Not to be outdone, Shackleton devised an even more ambitious reason for returning to Antarctica. He would lead an expedition that would traverse the entire continent, a proposal that was derided by Winston Churchill, then first lord of the Admiralty. “Enough money has been spent on this sterile quest,” he told Shackleton, in an exchange highlighted in the RGS exhibition. “The pole has already been discovered.” Shackleton replied that “death is a very little thing and knowledge very great … and really Regents [sic] Street holds more dangers than the 5 million square miles that constitute the Antarctic continent”. His confidence was misplaced as events transpired although his argument prevailed. Endurance set off, in August 1914, from West India Docks in London, just as war was declared with Germany. (Shackleton offered to turn back to help Britain’s war effort but was allowed to proceed.) By January 1915, the ship had reached the Weddell Sea where some of the worst pack ice ever recorded began to slow down the Endurance until, on the 19th, she could go no further. The ship and her crew were trapped. Shackleton set up a camp on the ice and for months he and his men waited in the hope that it might melt and eventually free the Endurance. At the same time, Hurley set about taking some of the most dramatic photographs in the history of 20th-century polar exploration, including stunning backlit images of the imprisoned, ice-covered Endurance. “It was pitch dark and Hurley was allowed to set up flares around the ship,” said Alasdair MacLeod, curator of the RGS exhibition. “These flares were sequenced to go off at exactly the same moment that Hurley pressed his camera shutter. But when they went off he was temporarily blinded by the light and stumbled into the ice. “However, the depictions he produced are probably among the most iconic in the history of photography.” Looming out of the ice, its masts and rigging glowing against the black Antarctic night, the images also provide the RGS exhibition with its most dramatic highlights. Then, in October, the ice eventually cracked the Endurance’s hull and she began to sink. Shackleton abandoned ship and he and his 27 men piled on to the ice. The sled dogs that the crew had lovingly tended for more than a year, and the ship’s cat, Mrs Chippy, were shot and the men took to their ship’s three lifeboats, eventually reaching the uninhabited Elephant Island on 15 April, more than a year since they had last stood on dry land. The party were far from safety, however. Elephant Island is bleak and inhospitable and was far from shipping routes. So Shackleton and five others, including the Endurance’s captain Frank Worsley, took to the sea again in one of its lifeboats – the James Caird – and set sail for the whaling station at Stromness on South Georgia 750 miles away. After 15 days at sea, in the face of hurricane-force winds, their little open boat reached South Georgia – thanks to Worsley’s considerable navigation skills. All that separated the men – who were suffering from cold or frostbite – from the island’s whaling station were the mountains of South Georgia. With only a 50-yard stretch of rope to link them, Shackleton, Worsley and a third crewman, Tom Crean, traversed the range in 36 hours – and were able to raise the alarm at the whaling station on 20 May 1916. No one had crossed the island before they made that trip. Shackleton returned to Elephant Island on 30 August on the Chilean ocean-going tug Yelcho and evacuated his men – who had survived by eating penguin and seal flesh. Back in England, Shackleton volunteered for the army and later served with the North Russia Expeditionary Force, advising on the training of British forces in Arctic conditions. He still yearned for another trip to Antarctica, however, and after long negotiations set sail in Quest, from England, with the aim of circumnavigating Antarctica. Shackleton was by now very ill and had suffered at least one heart attack. On 2 January 1922, he wrote in his diary: “I grow old and tired but must always lead on.” Three days later he had a major heart attack and died a few hours later. He is buried on South Georgia, scene of his greatest triumph. “Shackleton was an inspirational leader,” added MacLeod. “He had an innate sense of what was possible and achievable. He also had a huge personality but led by example. At the same time, he was sensitive to the needs of the individuals he was leading. For example, after Endurance broke up, his men had lost their protection and shelter. Their social fabric had been destroyed. There would have been dissent. Yet Shackleton succeeded in keeping them together and made sure they survived.”Lata Mangeshkar, one of India’s most influential singers, known as the “nightingale of Bollywood”, has died in Mumbai aged 92, with two days of national mourning declared in her honour. Mangeshkar died on Sunday as a result of complications from Covid-19, which she had contracted a month ago, leading to multiple organ failure, according to doctors. In a career spanning 73 years, almost the whole lifespan of post-independence India, she became the singing voice for hundreds of Bollywood actors, defining music and melody in the Hindi film industry for generations, despite rarely appearing on screen herself. The Indian prime minister, Narendra Modi, led tributes to the cultural icon, whose versatile voice had been the soundtrack to more than 1,000 Bollywood films from the 1950s through to the 2000s and had been a beloved fixture of India’s airwaves. “She leaves a void in our nation that cannot be filled,” said Modi. “The coming generations will remember her as a stalwart of Indian culture, whose melodious voice had an unparalleled ability to mesmerise people.” President Ram Nath Kovind said the news was “heartbreaking” and described Mangeshkar as “an exceptional human being, full of warmth”. The former prime minister Manmohan Singh said: “India has lost a great daughter.” Mangeshkar was admitted to hospital in January after being diagnosed with Covid-19. She had been on a ventilator and died from complications as a result of the virus, said Dr Pratit Samdani, who was treating her at Mumbai’s Breach Candy hospital. In a tribute to her stature in India, Mangeshkar was given a state funeral with full honours in Mumbai on Sunday, attended by Modi who laid flowers on her coffin, as well as Bollywood giants Amitabh Bachchan and Shah Rukh Khan. Two days of national mourning were declared, with the national flag flying at half mast, and the Indian cricket team played with black armbands as a mark of respect. Mangeshkar was born in 1929 in the city of Indore, the eldest of five children. She started her musical training early under the tutelage of her father, Deenanath, who was a classical musician, singing in his theatrical productions when she was just five. She spent much of her childhood on the road, as her father toured the country with his theatre group. But her father’s death when she was 13 forced her to take on the role of breadwinner to support her younger siblings, and the family eventually moved to Mumbai in 1945. There she pursued a brief career on screen but was never comfortable in front of the camera, and eventually began recording tracks to be mimed by other actors. Her break as a playback singer came in 1949 with the film Mahal and from the 1950s onwards, her high-pitched but broad-ranging soprano voice soon became a staple of some of the most famous Bollywood films, where the songs she sang would often become more memorable than the storylines. She became known as the “queen of melody” and composers would often write music with Mangeshkar in mind while producers vied to sign her up for their films. Her most well-known tracks include Pyaar Kiya toh Darna Kya and Chalte Chalte. The Indian composer AR Rahman, who wrote songs for Mangeshkar, said: “Somebody like Lata Ji isn’t just an icon, she’s a part of India’s music and poetry. This void will remain for ever.” Together with her younger sister, Asha Bhosle – now 88 and a superstar in her own right – Mangeshkar dominated Bollywood music for more than half a century, and is considered by many to be the Indian film industry’s greatest playback singer. She also recorded devotional and classical albums, composed her own music for several films and performed for every Indian prime minister during her career. She also toured across the world and in 1974 was the first Indian to play at the Royal Albert Hall in London. Though she was a school dropout, Mangeshkar was fluent in several languages. Her oeuvre spanned about 27,000 songs in dozens of languages including English, Russian, Dutch and Swahili, and she was renowned for her live performances. She was also known for her quirks, such as never singing with her shoes on and always writing out each song by hand before recording it. Mangeshkar never married, saying that she had devoted her life to music. She was also not shy about taking a stand when it came to raising her prices or asking for a share of the royalties earned on her songs, and turned down awards on the grounds that they should be awarded to younger talent. She had continued working well into her 80s, and her longevity saw her lend her voice to teenage actors who were 50 years her junior. Her final recording was in 2019 when she released the song Saugandh Mujhe Is Mitti Ki in tribute to the Indian army. Mangeshkar received several of India’s highest accolades honouring her work, including in 1989 the Dadasaheb Phalke award, India’s highest award in the field of cinema, and in 2001 she was awarded the Bharat Ratna, India’s highest civilian honour. She was awarded the French Legion of Honour in 2009.In June 2021, the American magazine the Atlantic ran a long and admiring profile of Boris Johnson. “To him,” wrote the author, “the point of politics – and life – is not to squabble over facts; it’s to offer people a story they can believe in.” Johnson himself made the same point, in rather more elegant language: “People live by narrative. Human beings are creatures of the imagination.” Back then, those words were intended to capture Johnson’s talent for an unorthodox kind of political communication, and explain his success. But in early 2022 they sound more like an encapsulation of the reasons for his inevitable demise. The simple tale of the people who made the rules arrogantly breaking them is now immeasurably more powerful than any of the narratives he offers in his defence. To say that people tell stories, moreover, is often to associate them with lies, and so it has proved. Johnson’s evasions and untruths now extend into the distance; what he repeatedly – and desperately – said about Keir Starmer and Jimmy Savile is only the latest example. There is one more sense in which his talent for storytelling has deserted him. “Partygate” has cost him credibility and popularity, but it has also had another result that has been overlooked. Johnson’s apparently awful hypocrisy means he can no longer talk about a story all of us have lived through, and which has still not been satisfactorily told: that of the pandemic, the awful suffering and sacrifices it entailed, and what that experience says about us collectively and individually. That is a very strange position for a prime minister to be in. Imagine if next week there was a national Covid memorial service at St Paul’s Cathedral or Westminster Abbey. The Queen would attend and give a reading; past premiers would solemnly take their seats alongside doctors, nurses and other NHS workers. If Johnson was still in office, it would be unusual if he did not speak. But given his indelible association with rule-breaking and recklessness, could he do it? Perhaps his brass neck would lead him to carry on as if nothing had happened, but the moment would be so awkward that it would threaten to render the whole occasion ludicrous. Whatever the weekend’s chatter about a new Downing Street operation and a “return to Tory values”, all he seems to have left is mindless boosterism and a set of props. He puts on hard hats and makes endless claims about the UK’s economic strengths, but they sound increasingly crass; all those habitual boasts about the rollout of vaccines – symbolised by his seemingly daily visits to hospitals – suggest he’s claiming credit for other people’s efforts. He cannot weave a tale about the privations of the pandemic giving way to the benefits of Brexit or the glories of “levelling up”, because both are being revealed as fantasies. Not surprisingly, the current public mood feels almost numb: when all plan B restrictions in England were lifted on 27 January, it was telling that rather than hype about another “freedom day”, there was an overwhelming sense of everything remaining tense and uncertain – a feeling that the spiralling cost of living and evidence of a national mental health crisis are only making things worse. Johnson has promised a “UK commission on Covid commemoration” and a “fitting and permanent” official national Covid memorial, but hardly any details have materialised. Meanwhile, answering the need for a story about what we have all experienced, people and places are beginning to collectively mark the pandemic – both the lives that were lost and the shared spirit that got us through it. Commemorative spaces and artworks are being unveiled all over the country. In London there is the national Covid memorial wall, whose spontaneous origins make it feel all the more authentic and human. The Welsh government is planting two commemorative woodlands. Scotland has a government-funded project called Remembering Together, intended to create occasions and spaces for remembrance, and honour how the country’s communities “continue to come together during the most difficult times”. As Johnson flounders, other politicians have come up with their own versions of that basic narrative – as happened last week, when Starmer responded to Sue Gray’s “update”. He spoke about people who followed the rules and restrictions now being consumed by “rage, by grief and even by guilt”, and the need for them to “feel pride in themselves and their country, because by abiding by those rules they have saved the lives of people they will probably never meet”. But on the political right, the narrative vacuum Johnson has left is being filled by stories that feel toxic and dangerous. In some Tory circles, any idea of a dutiful public making sacrifices for the common good is at risk of being replaced by something very different: the belief that lockdowns and restrictions were simply a failed experiment, and what motivated people to follow what the Conservative backbencher Steve Baker recently called “minute restrictions on their freedom” was not a willing spirit of collective sacrifice, but a state that had decided “to bully, to shame and to terrify them”. On the wilder fringes of the internet, similar ideas are expressed by the irate keyboard warriors who insist that those of us who supported Covid rules were dupes and “bedwetters”. Johnson’s endless disgrace will only fuel those stories. We already know that around £14bn of public money was wasted on fraudulent Covid loan claims and unused personal protective equipment. The apparently imminent public inquiry into Britain’s experience of the pandemic will doubtless unearth more evidence of such misrule and incompetence. As people’s fury about Downing Street parties festers, these things may yet be the perfect raw material for a grimly familiar tale that would perfectly suit Nigel Farage and his ilk: the idea that the pandemic really boiled down to yet another betrayal of the people by a rotten elite, and that most of the restrictions and rules were never really necessary in the first place. Its effects could go well beyond politics, into people’s basic wellbeing: if this story catches on, it may only deepen the sense of torment and confusion that has already pushed many people over the psychological edge. These are the dangers that the nodding-dog Tory supporters of a failed prime minister need to wake up to. People really do live by narratives, and in times of collective crisis those who rule us need to give us at least some sense of where we have been, where we might be going, and what everything means. Johnson’s serial stupidities mean he is simply unable to do that: if the great storyteller has no stories, his own tale has surely reached its end. John Harris is a Guardian columnistPlaying with dolls encourages children to talk more about others’ thoughts and emotions, a study has found. The research suggests that playing imaginary games with dolls could help children develop social skills, theory of mind and empathy. The neuroscientist who led the work said that the educational value of playing with Lego and construction toys was widely accepted, but the benefits of playing with dolls sometimes appeared to have been overlooked. “When children create imaginary worlds and role play with dolls, they communicate at first out loud and then internalise the message about others’ thoughts, emotions and feelings,” said Dr Sarah Gerson, a neuroscientist at Cardiff University and the lead author. “This can have positive long-lasting effects on children, such as driving higher rates of social and emotional processing and building social skills like empathy that can become internalised to build and form lifelong habits.” The study, funded by the manufacturers of Barbie and published in the journal Developmental Science, involved 33 boys and girls, aged between four and eight who were given a collection of Barbie dolls and accessories such as an ambulance or horse to play with. They were left to play spontaneously, but their speech was monitored and they were also fitted with a specialised cap containing a form of brain imaging technology called functional near-infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS). The technique measures changes in blood oxygenation by shining light through the skull, which makes it possible to track brain activity while the subject is freely moving around. The study found that the children talked more about others’ thoughts and emotions, a concept known as internal state language, when playing with the dolls, compared with playing creative games on a computer tablet, such as a hairdressing game or a city-building game with characters. They were also more likely to address the dolls in the second person, talking to them directly, whereas the characters on the computer screen they tended to refer to in the third person. No difference was observed between boys and girls. “Internal state language can indicate that a child is thinking about other people’s thoughts and emotions while playing with dolls,” said Gerson. Benjamin Mardell, who researches the pedagogy of play at Harvard Graduate School of Education and who was not involved in the work, said: “The hypothesis that playing with dolls provides a scaffolding for young children to take the perspective of another, even if that other is inanimate, seems very reasonable. And that they see language use in this regard is good confirmation of the hypothesis.” Mardell added that the findings ought to apply to any kind of role-play toy, rather than being specific to Barbies. “I’d take a broader view of what a doll is,” he said. “[It could be] any object that the child can invest a sense of other into – a stuffed animal, an oven mitt that talks to them, or even an imaginary friend.” Children typically start to show signs of internal state language around the age of four. At this age, they begin to voice their thoughts aloud, indicating that they are considering the thoughts, feelings and desires of themselves and others. “These skills are really important for interacting with other people, learning from other people, and navigating a variety of social situations,” Gerson said. “It becomes important for making and sustaining friendships, and how they learn from their teachers, and parents.” The study also found that the children had increased brain activity in the posterior superior temporal sulcus (pSTS) region when they spoke as though their dolls had thoughts and feelings. The pSTS region is believed to be involved in the development of social and emotional processing skills.What did Vincent van Gogh look like? Only one photograph of the artist exists, and in it he’s unrecognisable. At 19, the beard has not yet appeared; the familiar inverted triangle of his skull still goes incognito beneath the fleshiness of youth. Later, several of his friends would make portraits of him. But if we know him by his bristles in their pictures, he’s still several kinds of man. Toulouse-Lautrec casts him in pastel with the far-off look of the absinthe drinker. In Pissarro’s sketch, in which he sits beside his top-hatted brother, Theo, he is almost (but not quite) the dandy. Gauguin famously has him at his easel, the sunflowers beside him doing nothing whatsoever to ease his mood, which is downcast, shuttered against the world. “It’s me all right, but me gone mad,” he is supposed to have said, on first seeing it. Perhaps the better question, then, is to ask how Van Gogh saw himself – though it’s surely no easier to answer. At the Courtauld’s wondrous new exhibition, where a collection of the artist’s self-portraits are gathered together as if in a family album, the atmosphere is uncanny almost beyond description. A ghostliness is abroad in these rooms: here are the “apparitions” of which Van Gogh writes in his letters, the “modern” portrait having in his eyes more to do with a lingering vitality than with any photographic resemblance. But the eerie mood is cut with a clarity that goes through it like a knife. Have spectres ever been so corporeal, their bones, their flesh and even the colours of their eyes so infinitely varied? Each time Van Gogh looked in the mirror, a different creature rose up before him, with the result that you might be in the company not of one man, but of a small crowd: a band of brothers. Only the fox-red hair gives the game away. That, and the feeling that this work represents some of those rare moments when, for the artist, “the veil of time and fatality of circumstances seemed to be torn apart for an instant”; that you are, in other words, in the presence of greatness. The exhibition’s curator, Karen Serres, is keen to dispel the notion that Van Gogh’s self-portraits are displays of raw emotion. They are, she believes, as much demonstrations of technique as they are depictions of mood; the artist was his own best (and cheapest) model, and beyond this, and the details of where this or that picture was painted, she doesn’t say much. I strongly favour this approach, and not only because one tires of the now highly commercialised mythology, all mutilated ears and laminated coasters. It was Van Gogh’s mental health – a madness that would descend like darkness – that stopped him from working; when he was painting, he was never, he felt, more sane. Nevertheless, these works reveal all sorts of signs of extreme feeling. Van Gogh used a brilliant metaphor to explain the relationship between his art and his illness: knowing it could strike again at any time spurred him on, he said, “to seriousness, as a miner who is always in danger makes haste in what he does”. It’s not feverishness, exactly, that we detect here. He’s too deft for that, and too innovative; he’s a minimalist in the sense that he knows just when to stop. But it is intense, this conviction (in his talent) that sometimes flickers, and sometimes blazes. It’s not only his eyes, as deep-set as boreholes, that bring to mind a sense of excavation. There are 37 surviving self-portraits, all of which were made between the spring of 1886 and the early autumn of 1889 (Van Gogh killed himself, aged 37, in July 1890). This exhibition has 16 of them, as well as two other pictures from 1888: Van Gogh’s Chair, in which the artist is represented by his pipe and tobacco pouch, and Portrait of Eugene Boch, in which he depicts the Belgian painter against a starry sky (“I paint the infinite”), giving his friend the appreciation, the understanding, even the love he must often have craved for himself. For the Courtauld, this is a great coup: here are some stunning loans. This is the first time in more than 130 years that two self-portraits of 1889, made when Van Gogh was in a psychiatric hospital (an asylum, as he would have known it) in Saint-Rémy-de-Provence, have been reunited. Painted only a week apart, the contrast between them is dramatic, completely gob-smacking. In the first, Van Gogh’s skin is yellow-green; there’s something feral about his expression, as if he were a sickly field mouse that has spied a particularly vigorous stoat. In the second, the light has come in. We see his brushes. He’s working, and the luxuriant folds of his smock suggest renewed energy. Art, Van Gogh’s most precious balm (“it fortifies the will and consequently allows these mental weaknesses less hold”), has performed its magic once again. I spent more time with these two works than with all the others combined. Taken together, there is something indomitable about them, and it does the soul good to see it. But there’s fascination at every turn: the colours, the brushstrokes, the magnificent forehead. The earliest painting, Self-Portrait with Felt Hat (1886-87), comes with a whiff of the drawing room: the artist looks so serious, so bourgeois. But in Self-Portrait with Straw Hat (1887), made only a few months later, he appears before us like some old prog rocker decked out for his latest album cover. Thinking about these pictures as a group, the obvious comparison – and the curator makes it – is with Van Gogh’s idol, Rembrandt (though his self-portraits were produced over decades). But I was put in mind of the Finnish artist Helene Schjerfbeck. It’s to do with scale, experimentation and, above all, a certain self-tenderness: a kindly honesty in the matter of what the eyes see. And there’s something else, too. Like the show of Schjerfbeck’s self-portraits at the Royal Academy in 2019, the Courtauld’s exhibition is small, staged over just two rooms. You could not possibly describe it – though there will be crowds – as a blockbuster, and for me this is one of the best things about it. You will want, sometimes, to wrestle these great pictures from their heavy frames, as if releasing a prisoner from a cell. But this is an exhibition that wholly defies the terrible paradox of museum-going, which is that, in the case of very famous artists, it induces a kind of blindness. The eye is unharried, the legs are never weary. You have the time truly to see these pictures. Van Gogh and his inferno of a talent are palpable. For the rest of the day, your heart beats out a rhapsody. Van Gogh: Self-Portraits is at the Courtauld Gallery, London, until 8 MayAfter a decade of ceaseless experimentation and genre hopping, Animal Collective finally struck gold with 2009’s Merriweather Post Pavilion. One of that decade’s finest albums, its dense, complex rhythms were overlaid with psychedelic textures and – crucially – inspired pop nous. But having delivered a masterpiece, they seemed not to know how to follow it: 2012’s Centipede Hz and 2016’s Painting With were an awkward mix of innovation and irritating, self-conscious wackiness. In one respect, Time Skiffs, their first album proper in six years (the less said about 2018’s woeful collaboration with Coral Morphologic the better), is a step forward in that there is nothing to set one’s teeth on edge, the vocals of Panda Bear and Avey Tare working together this time, as opposed to against each other, one of Painting With’s most distressing developments. Equally, however, there is precious little to fall back in love with. The rare kernels of genuine inspiration tend to be buried beneath so many awkwardly assembled layers and stop-start arrangements that they get lost; the disjointed Prester John began life as two songs and it shows; the plodding Royal and Desire is actively dispiriting. Every so often, the disparate parts coalesce into something enjoyable: We Go Back and Dragon Slayer both exhibit a lovely playfulness. Stretched over 48 minutes, though, there’s the sense that for all its undoubted cleverness, Time Skiffs is not terribly easy to warm to.The fourth Jackass movie sees franchise co-creator Johnny Knoxville and his merry men gleefully reunited to document one final array of puerile practical jokes. There are bodily fluids and much bashing between the legs of the cast members, who are now in their 50s. Yet the hit rate of gags is admirably high: a human ramp (exactly what it sounds like) and a set piece involving a pitch-dark room and a snake in a bucket are straightforwardly funny and, for the most part, blissfully low-stakes. There’s no plot, just a string of pranks, but watching them in succession is not quite the same numbing experience as bingeing on TikToks or YouTube videos. The cumulative effect is strangely heartwarming, a touching insight into 20 years of indestructible male friendship.East Side Voices boasts contributions from a dazzling range of east Asian and south-east Asian public figures, from Eternals actor Gemma Chan to model Naomi Shimada. It grew out of a salon convened by the book’s editor – and acting deputy editor of Harper’s Bazaar – Helena Lee in February 2020, just before the pandemic that Donald Trump branded the “China virus” and “Kung flu”, fuelling a wave of racist violence against east and south-east Asian people. The anthology describes instances of racism in all its forms: crude vilification, sexualised exoticism, entitlement, self-righteous ignorance and insularity. But it also reaches back through centuries of colonisation, exploitation and migration and reminds us that in the sweep of human history, there is often no fixed motherland and no fixed resting place. Many pieces reference meagre cultural representation and insulting stereotypes in TV and film, such as the contribution by Katie Leung, the Glaswegian actor cast as Cho Chang in the Harry Potter films. A private school rebel turned art school cool girl, Leung is as far from the cringing, sniffling Cho Chang as it’s possible to be. Yet her success is racialised: “I was not considered [for roles] unless race came into it.” All the anthology contributors are incredibly successful: society’s winners, global third-culture kids. As Chinese-Malaysian novelist Tash Aw writes poetically“: “We revel in the three-dimensional nature of our hybrid cultures and languages, rejoicing in the fact that we have an instinctive understanding of how the south-east Asian archipelago weaves its cultural connections.” Yet many of the testimonials demonstrate that no amount of privilege protects you from the racism of others. The essays are sharpest when various forms of objectification intersect – for example when sexual and racial abuse combine, as with novelist Sharlene Teo’s excellent, self-lacerating piece on exotification: “Once, a man followed me down a platform at Paddington station, chanting ‘ni hao, konnichiwa, sexy sexy’ and I told him to get lost – only for him to start shouting and running after me.” The most powerful and disturbing piece is by novelist Claire Kohda, who describes her philistine English grandmother’s treatment of her: “When my cousins once visited my nan and grandad at the same time as me and my parents, they received little bags of sweets and chocolates, while I sat and watched empty-handed from a corner of the room.” The piece centres on a portrait her grandmother paints, in which Kohda’s features (her mother is Japanese) are whitewashed. The strength of this slim collection is in its nuance. Many essays do not speak just of racist stereotypes or attacks, but also of internal conflicts, self-censorship, self-disavowal, embarrassment and shame, of initially pushing away questions of heritage and identity. East Side Voices is a thoughtful, painful reminder of the grand narratives that get buried under belittling stereotypes, of how progress can also regress and how self-actualisation, self-discovery and personal excellence still grate against the perceptions of strangers. • East Side Voices, edited by Helena Lee, is published by Hodder &amp; Stoughton (£14.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyClimbing, I once thought, was a very manly activity. A pursuit for macho adventurers on a mission to conquer – conquer the mountain, conquer their fear, conquer themselves. That may be the story for some climbers, but as I found my way into this activity, I came to see that something quite different happens on the rock. Like wild swimming, rock climbing immerses you within the landscape. On the rock, I am fully present. Eyes pay close attention, scanning the details of the rock, trying to read the passage up the cliff. Ears are alert, tuned in to the sounds of the stone, my partner and the environment. Hands roam across the surface, feeling for features while the whole body works to stay within balance, coordinating itself around the various forms of the cliff. Unlike walking, where I could happily trundle absent-mindedly through the landscape, in climbing, attentive observation is essential. I started climbing when I was an undergraduate in Liverpool. I did not come from a climbing family. We were outdoorsy in a laidback country kind of way. We swam in rivers and quarry pools, mucked around in fields and went out religiously for Sunday walks in the rolling hills and woods of home. Moving to Liverpool was quite a contrast. Suddenly, I was in a buzzing city environment, surrounded by streetwise kids. It was fun, but I felt out of place. Something was missing. Joining the university mountaineering club, I found a way to escape the city. Every weekend, dressed in a fantastic jumble of borrowed clothing and hand-me-downs, I staggered out of my hangover and on to a minibus to discover the mountains of the UK. With the club I explored Snowdonia, the Peak District, the Lake District and Scotland for the first time. I loved the walking and soon got the hang of scrambling, where hands and feet came into play to safely journey across exposed rocky steps and ridges, such as Crib Goch on Snowdon. Rock climbing was the next step. I began climbing inside an old church in Liverpool and instantly fell for the movement. I loved placing my body on the wall and following the lines of coloured holds up towards the ceiling. Working these sequences required balance, coordination and power. When the climbs went well, everything flowed in a delightful dance. When things went less well, I had something to work on – a problem to solve next week. Indoor climbing was safe, warm, fun and sociable. With those same mountaineering friends, I ventured out on to the gritstone edges of the Peak District at Froggatt, Stanage and the Roaches. But climbing on real rock did not bring the same instant rush of pleasure. Fumbling up routes, following more experienced male leaders, I struggled with moves and was frequently told off for using my knees on ledges (apparently that was bad form). I fell off and dangled on the rope, shouting for help from my partner who would do his best to advise me by bellowing directions down from the top of the crag. This was not a dignified learning process. Outdoor climbing, it turned out, was significantly more complicated than climbing indoors. I had to learn about equipment, various types of knots, how to move on the rock and to read the guidebooks, which had their own coded phrasing (I now know that “exciting” means terrifying and to avoid anything described as “thrutchy”). My climbing apprenticeship was shaped by the many home and job moves of my itinerant 20s. From Liverpool, I moved to Yorkshire, where I became better acquainted with the rock of Brontë country – gritstone. This sedimentary stone is made up of sands and pebbles that once poured off mountains into the Pennine basin. Now, some 320m years later, it is the foundation rock for many British climbers. This interest in geology was new for me. I was an arts student, studying English literature. Climbing outdoors, I discovered a new type of reading. Venturing out on to the crags, I saw how you can learn to read the rocks and, in order to do the climbs, you have to develop a vocabulary of physical movements. Good climbers knew how to map their bodies on to the stone. Watching them, I wanted to possess that dextrous language. From the gritstone, I moved to the volcanic rocks of the Lake District. Working at the Wordsworth Trust in Grasmere, I was immersed in a different landscape. The rocks were everywhere. The local slates and rhyolites appeared in the houses and barns, stonewalls, cairns and footpaths. They burst from the ground in outcrops and boulders and formed towering cliffs and crags. On these rocks, I found an ease of movement I had never had on the gritstone. A flow began to develop. In Grasmere, I fell in with a crew of locals who deepened this sense of connection between body and stone. Unlike previous climbing partners, for whom the activity was a sport or leisure pursuit, climbing meant something else for these guys. They were stonemasons, path-builders and climbers who were out working with the rocks every day and in all weathers. For them, rock was a way of life. On Greek limestone, Welsh slate and the gabbro pinnacles on the Cuillin of Skye, I built a wider climbing vocabulary and became conscious that different rock types demanded particular patterns of movement. Whereas gritstone is all about friction and maximum contact between skin and stone, slate is smooth and requires razor-sharp precision. Gabbro has impeccable grip, but where it is exposed on the crest of the youngest mountains in Britain, it can be loose and treacherous. Handling these diverse rocky places became an exercise in body/mind focus which, like yoga or meditation, dissolves away the self. The next leap on my journey was north again, into granite country. Working for the Cairngorms National Park Authority, I became familiar with another distinctive landscape. In this huge tract of land, with its pine forests and subarctic mountain plateau, I roamed widely, initially finding my feet through walking. Guiding my explorations into this strange new landscape was the local writer Nan Shepherd. In The Living Mountain, Shepherd writes beautifully about the Cairngorms. Unlike the goal-oriented mindset of many mountaineers, she is not concerned with summits or personal bests. Shepherd sees the mountain as a total environment and she celebrates the Cairngorms as a place alive with plants, rocks, animals and elements. The senses are key to Shepherd’s process of understanding the mountains. She writes about going out in all weathers and using her body as an instrument to comprehend the place. She walks barefoot, tastes mountain berries and even directs the reader to move their heads to look at the world through their legs, exclaiming, “How new it has become!” Through her generous spirit and my own wanderings in the upland granites of the Cairngorm plateau, I saw that rock climbing need not be a process of pitting yourself against anything. Rather, the intensity of focus could release you into another way of being. Climbing has taught me to play with risk, understanding my own vulnerability while also developing strengths I never had before. Alongside the enhanced physical and mental dexterity, I have gained an insight into the movements between people and stone. Learning to speak the rock’s language is a movement between body and stone, muscle memory and tactile desire. Looking up at a cliff, an inexpert eye will soon glance away, for all it can see is a barren expanse of dead rocks. But to a climber this is a living face, alive with opportunities, possibilities and intrigue. Spending so much time in high and stony places has altered my view on the world and our place in it. I have come into physical contact with processes that go way beyond the everyday. Widening my perspective to take in the place and its environment, I came to see how particular rocks shape life and landscape. The climber’s eye view is unique. Working with gravity, geology, rhythms of weather and deep time, we gain an embodied relationship with the earth. This connection lies at the heart of my passion for rock climbing. I return to the rocks, because this is where I feel in touch with our land. Time on Rock: A Climber’s Route into the Mountains, by Anna Fleming, is published by Canongate at £16.99. Order a copy for £14.78 from guardianbookshop.comThe Prince of Wales has paid tribute to his “darling wife” the Duchess of Cornwall for her “steadfast support” after the Queen announced that Camilla will be known as “Queen Consort” when Charles becomes king. In a statement released on Sunday, Charles heralded the Queen for the way her “devotion to the welfare of all her people inspires still greater admiration with each passing year”. Elizabeth II, who has become the first British monarch in history to celebrate 70 years on the throne, used her milestone to issue her royal seal of approval for Camilla to become Queen Camilla. The Queen was photographed working from her red boxes in an image released on the day she passed the historic anniversary. The 95-year-old monarch is pictured with her papers of state in front of her; nearby stands a photograph of her father, King George VI, with a family corgi, taken at Buckingham Palace in 1948. On 6 February 1952, the king died, and his daughter, aged 25, became the queen of a nation still recovering from the upheavals of the second world war. In a statement released to mark her platinum jubilee, the Queen said: “It is a day that, even after 70 years, I still remember as much for the death of my father, King George VI, as for the start of my reign. “As we mark this anniversary, it gives me pleasure to renew to you the pledge I gave in 1947 that my life will always be devoted to your service.” In an intervention that shapes the future of the monarchy, the Queen expressed her “sincere wish” that Camilla be known as Queen Consort when the Prince of Wales becomes King, and called on the public to support them both. Charles, in a written message marking the Queen’s accession day anniversary, said he and Camilla were “deeply conscious” of the honour. “On this historic day, my wife and I join you all in congratulating Her Majesty the Queen on the remarkable achievement of serving this nation, the realms and Commonwealth for 70 years,” he said. “We are deeply conscious of the honour represented by my mother’s wish. As we have sought together to serve and support Her Majesty and the people of our communities, my darling wife has been my own steadfast support throughout. “The year of this unprecedented platinum jubilee brings an opportunity for us all to come together in celebrating the service of the Queen, by whose example we will continue to be led in the years to come.” The Queen is paving the way for her daughter-in-law to be crowned at Charles’s side on his coronation day. The Queen, who came to the throne when she was 25, chose to spend her accession day privately on the Sandringham estate in remembrance of her father. National celebrations marking the Queen’s record-breaking service on the throne will be staged during a four-day bank holiday weekend from 2 June to 5 June.The thrill of reality TV has always been its escapism. Lately, though, I have been gobbling up a new crop of BBC reality shows, such as Ibiza Dreams and Inside Dubai: Playground of the Rich, which seem less about escapism than offering British people an exit plan. A similar story will become the basis for the upcoming BBC show Dubai Hustle, in which 20-something Britons compete to sell Dubai real estate. The contestants’ desperation to escape the UK’s “bleak employment prospects” – as the programme’s promotional material puts it – is being deployed to raise the TV stakes. The dream these shows are selling is expatriation: to physically escape (preferably for ever) the UK. Dubbed “aspirational” within the TV industry, the programmes follow UK citizens who swap underpaid jobs in British supermarkets and call centres to pursue glamorous careers in places such as Dubai and Ibiza. In Inside Dubai, the BBC makes no mention of the city state’s well-documented use of slave labour, preferring to paint it as an Oz-like land of milk and honey – a place where you can hire a servant, or drink a cappuccino decorated with a foamy picture of your own face. A place where, if you are a clever expat, you can make tax-free millions doing strange and wonderful things such as selling truffles, or organising birthday parties for dogs. The appetite for this type of programming reflects a very real lack of opportunity for young people in the UK, where 22% of 16- to 24-year-olds live in poverty , and high inflation means real wages are falling. What is striking about these shows is that they repackage that sense of hopelessness about UK employment prospects, and sell it as inspirational lifestyle TV. In Ibiza Dreams, we follow a group of Gen Z-ers as they try to become influencers, or “naked butlers”, or sell pictures of their feet online. This is really a story of economic precarity, about people born too late to experience security or progression in traditional industries, but it is told with a kind of relentless positivity. Even when the naked butler has to tell his own father he has started selling nudes for cash, it is framed as a canny business opportunity: “If you’ve got it, flaunt it.” “Hustle culture” – the conviction that if you flaunt, and sweat, and graft enough, you can pull yourself up by sheer effort of will – is everywhere in these programmes. At points, the “hustle” is elevated into a kind of spiritual practice. In Ibiza Dreams, three would-be digital nomads downward dog at dawn in preparation for a hard day’s graft, and there is a lot of talk about the only barrier to success being “taking that mental block out”. A cursory glance at any ex-Love Islander’s Instagram reveals a similar faith in the power of said Love Islander’s mind to somehow commune with the universe and garner great wealth and happiness. Georgia Louise Harrison, a 2017 alumna of the programme with 1.1m Instagram followers, regularly posts about how “thoughts become things” – an idea popularised by the 2006 self-help book The Secret, which told readers that manifesting a new reality was “exactly like placing an order from a catalogue”. Last week, it was announced that people on universal credit would be given just four weeks (down from three months) to find a job within their preferred sector. After that, claimants would be forced to take any job going – whether or not it’s beneath their qualification – or face having their benefits slashed. This means that unless you have family money or are already a high earner, that fantasy job is just getting further out of reach. Ibiza Dreams was filmed in 2019 but aired more than a year later, and watching the nomads and butlers chase the lives they want from a 2022 vantage point is moving. Daring to dream that you have some control over your circumstances is oddly courageous – particularly as the pandemic has only exacerbated dismal employment prospects for young people, with one in three 18- to 34-year-olds returning to atypical, often insecure work, and the number of economically inactive young men increasing by almost 50,000 since last spring, according to new data from the Resolution Foundation. There have been points over the past two years when it has felt like we were in the grips of an existential reckoning about the role of work in our lives. Resignations and job-to-job moves in the UK were at their highest in 20 years, according to a report by the UK Labour Force Survey (LFS), and there were tenuous hopes that workers – inspired by the experience of furlough – might be abandoning the culture of productivity in favour of a new relationship with work and leisure, one that privileged time over money. But the hunger for shows like Dubai Hustle and Inside Dubai, which drew audiences of more than 2 million a episode, suggests a different story, one in which the spectacle of excess still functions as a bizarre appeasement for inequality, and Britons – crushed by the erosion of the welfare state and the rising cost of living – dream of fleeing the country. Of side-hustling away every spare hour and minute in the hope of a better life. I saw a TikTok video a couple of weeks ago sincerely lamenting the death of the 9-5. In the post, which has received more than 200,000 likes since it was uploaded, @dawnpark rejects the pressure of hustle culture, with its compulsion to “make a living travelling and become financially free by the age of 30 etc”. It is interesting to me that to Gen Z, an eight-hour work day looks like a quaint, cosy relic from a kindlier age. The wheel has turned full circle. Perhaps the best we can hope for is a return to the 9-5. Kitty Drake is a writer and editor based in LondonThe business secretary has been accused of being disrepectful to victims of scammers after he defended Boris Johnson’s claim that crime was falling by 14% – which is only true if fraud is excluded. Speaking to the BBC, Kwasi Kwarteng backed Johnson’s use of the figure, saying the prime minister had been talking about “crime that people experience in their day-to-day lives”, which “in terms of burglary, in terms of physical injury, has gone down”. Johnson was last week rebuked by the statistics watchdog for making the claim, as he had not made clear that this excludes fraud and computer misuse. Including those, crime has in fact increased by 14% between the year ending September 2019 and the year ending September 2021. In a letter to the Lib Dems, who raised the issue, the head of the UK Statistics Authority, Sir David Norgrove, said the government had presented crime figures in a “misleading way”. Speaking on the BBC’s Sunday Morning, Kwarteng said he did not know “what the evidence is” for the prime minister’s claim not being true. “All I know is, certainly on the doorstep, people are saying that there is progress being made,” he said. “I think fraud is really, really important, but people are talking particularly about burglaries, about personal injury, about physical crimes, and I think in that context we’re seeing lower crimes, I think the prime minister was right. “He was referring to personal injury and crime in relation to individuals. The point the prime minister was making is that crime that people experience in their day-to-day lives … in terms of burglary, in terms of physical injury, has gone down and that’s absolutely right.” His comments were rejected by Yvette Cooper, the shadow home secretary, who said suggesting that fraud is a “lesser crime not experienced by people in their day-to-day lives is shamefully out of touch and disrespectful to victims across the country, scammed by dangerous criminals and losing hard-earned life savings”. The senior Labour MP said: “Yet again the Conservatives are downgrading or ignoring criminal fraud – just as Rishi Sunak did when writing off £4.3bn of public money. “Lord Agnew himself said it best – the government has ‘little interest in the consequences of fraud to our society’. “This chaotic and incompetent government is a complete disgrace – they cannot be trusted to take seriously our safety and security.” Alistair Carmichael, the Lib Dem who raised the issue with the statistics authority, said the failure of Conservative ministers to “stand up to Boris Johnson’s dishonesty and lack of decency is doing huge damage to public trust”. “Instead of apologising for misleading the public over rising crime, Kwasi Kwarteng doubled down on this blatant lie,” he said. “This is an insult to every victim of fraud crime. Instead of fighting their corner, this government is ignoring the plight of all those who have been cruelly robbed in their own homes and on their own devices.” He also called on Johnson to come before parliament as soon as possible to correct the record.Wayne Rooney has said he misused alcohol in an effort to cope with the pressure that accompanied his rise to elite level football as a teenager. The former England and Manchester United striker, 36, opened up about two-day “self-binges” in the early days of his career as he struggled with the exposure that accompanied becoming England’s record goalscorer after growing up on a Liverpool council estate. “To go from that to having to deal with becoming a Premier League player at 16 and an international player was something I wasn’t prepared for,” Rooney told the Mail on Sunday before the launch of an Amazon Prime documentary about his life. “I had never even thought about the other side of being a football player. I wasn’t prepared for that part of life. It took a long time for me to get used to that and figure out how to deal with it. It was like being thrown in somewhere where you are just not comfortable. That was tough for me,” he said. Rooney, who appears alongside his wife, Coleen, and parents in the documentary, said his problems with drinking continued until his first son was born in 2009. “There were times you would get a couple of days off from football and I would actually lock myself away and just drink to try to take all that away from my mind,” he said. “It was like a binge. Normally, that’s with a group of lads but this was a self-binge … I would sit in the house and for two days I would just drink. “People might know that I liked a drink at times or went out, but there was a lot more to it than just that. It was what was going on in my head. It was just a buildup of everything ... pressure of playing for your country, for United, some of the stuff which came out in the newspapers about my personal life, just trying to deal with all that pressure which builds up.” Rooney said he had learned different coping mechanisms to manage his anger over the years, by sensing when an “explosion” was coming and that he “needed to sit down and talk to someone”. “Over the last 15 years, I haven’t had very many nights out. I might have had 10 nights out, but the ones I have had ... four or five of them have given people big exclusives,” he said. It would have been impossible to share his feelings in the United dressing room at the time, he said, but players were now “more empowered” to speak about mental health issues. “Growing up on a council estate, you would never actually go and speak to anyone. You would always find a way to deal with it yourself. It was trying to cope with it yourself rather than asking for help.”The healthcare company Johnson &amp; Johnson is facing an attempt to force a shareholder vote to halt its sales of talc-based baby powder across the world, including the UK, amid concerns over alleged links to cancer. Johnson &amp; Johnson (J&amp;J) withdrew its talc-based baby powder from sale in the US and Canada in 2020. Sales of baby powder had dropped after US regulators detected carcinogenic chrysotile fibres, a type of asbestos, in a sample. The company is now facing more than 34,000 lawsuits including many from women who claim they used baby powder and later developed ovarian cancer. The shareholder vote has been proposed by Tulipshare, a London-based investment platform that allows customers to pool shares in order to meet the threshold to submit resolutions for shareholder votes. The proposal has been submitted to the US Securities and Exchange Committee (SEC) to consider if it is eligible ahead of J&amp;J’s annual meeting, expected in April. Talc, the world’s softest mineral, is mined in several countries, with uses across industries as diverse as paper, plastics and pharmaceuticals. Talc’s astringent properties mean it is used to treat nappy rash and for other personal hygiene uses. However, talc deposits can sometimes be contaminated with asbestos, a mineral that can cause cancer if its fibres enter the body. Corn starch can be used as a replacement. J&amp;J strongly denies that its baby powder is harmful and said it only pulled the product in North America after a slump in sales “fuelled by misinformation around the safety of the product”. A spokesperson pointed to a 2020 cohort study that found no statistically significant increased risk of ovarian cancer with talc use. A spokesperson said: “We stand behind the ingredients we use in our products, and Johnson &amp; Johnson has a rigorous testing standard in place to ensure our cosmetic talc is safe. Not only is our talc routinely tested to ensure it does not contain asbestos, but our talc has also been tested and confirmed to be asbestos-free by a range of independent laboratories, universities, and global health authorities.” The barrage of legal claims “have no valid scientific basis”, the spokesperson said. J&amp;J’s lawyers, Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher &amp; Flom, have written to the SEC asking that it exclude the shareholder resolution as ineligible because it would affect pending lawsuits in state and federal courts in the US and in other countries, including “thousands of personal injury claims alleging that talc causes cancer”. J&amp;J has already spent billions on costs and settlements, including a $2bn (£1.5bn) judgment by a Missouri appeals court in favour of 22 plaintiffs who suffered from ovarian cancer. In October, J&amp;J moved the potential liabilities for talc products into a separate company, which then entered bankruptcy in a highly controversial move that could limit its financial exposure. Ian Lavery, a Labour MP, last year sponsored an early-day motion in parliament condemning the “hypercritical and unjustifiable” decision by J&amp;J to continue to sell talcum powder products outside North America. Lavery said he welcomed the attempt to force a shareholder vote. “It is shocking that products that we know can cause serious illness through contamination with asbestos are still available to buy in the UK, or anywhere else in the world for that matter,” he said. “Any action taken against Johnson &amp; Johnson, who continue to profit handsomely from the sale of this harmful substance despite knowing its potential effects, is welcome in my book.”Is there a better calendar we could use or invent? Evie Sutton, Manchester Send new questions to nq@theguardian.com. Readers reply One with a small chocolate behind the little door every day of the year please. SignificantOther Composers/artists La Monte Young and Marian Zazeela live in “extended time”. I believe each “day” for them is 35 hours long, with 8 hours for sleep; if one wants to interview or meet them, one has to fit in to this extended day; for example arriving at 3am to find them having lunch. Reedist There is a fixed ratio of Earth rotations to orbits of the sun. So whatever calendar we use would have 365¼ days in a year. Division into some convenient blocks like weeks and months falls down on there not being convenient factors. If we were starting again, then 366 might be an approximation to start with. Weeks of six days and months of 61 could work – other than one arbitrary “leap” day skipped most years. It would still leave unaligned weeks each month, unless we decided to have the first week of every new month being “new Monday” to “new Saturday”. That would involve “intercalary” days (“new Sunday”?) inserted at the end of six (or five) of the 61 (or 60) day months. We could of course allow for more intercalary days, something like the calendar the Romans used before Julius Caesar, where they had most years of 355 days, but some of 377 or 378 with an extra short month. The answer to the question, then, is whatever calendar you choose has some arbitrary fudging. Producing a worldwide consensus on an alternative is way too large a hurdle for minimal advantage, so extremely unlikely to happen. leadballoon There’s no intrinsic need to tie a calendar to solar, terrestrial or lunar cycles. It made sense to do that when those were among your most readily available periodic observables. Dorkalicious How about 10 months of 36 days each (four weeks of nine days with three- or four-day weekends), with the other five or six leftover days as a very long bank holiday at the end of each year. OhReallyFFS If you mean “accurate”, then the Persian Hijri calendar used in Iran is far better than the Gregorian calendar. It starts and ends a year on the actual observation of the spring (vernal) equinox. Years are either 365 or 366 days long with 12 months. The first six months are each 31 days long; months 7 to 11 are 30 days each, with the final month being either 30 or 31 days long. Unlike the Gregorian calendar, leap years are not regularly distributed according to a simple mathematical rule, but are instead inserted based on astronomical observations. The result is that the calendar only accumulates a one-day error in every 110,000 years compared with the one day every 3,236 years in the Gregorian calendar. Of course all calendars assume the Earth’s orbit around the sun and the length of the day are constant – which they aren’t. MikeRichards Arguably, that is not better than the Gregorian calendar. For the Gregorian calendar, (as you said) there is a simple formula that can be used in computer systems, including for future dates. For the Hijri calendar, it would be not just difficult, but impossible to work accurately with future dates where they depend on observations which have not yet taken place. In other words, a larger, predictable amount of “wrong” is better than “less wrong but unpredictable”. I worked in IT for 35 years and I have no idea how you would go about handling the future date case in the Hijri calendar, but I doubt that there is any very satisfactory method. mikecee A printer I once knew had printed his own calendar with two Fridays in every week. When I spotted it on his office wall he explained that it was the only way he had a cat in hell’s chance of fitting in all the jobs that customers wanted before the weekend. Nowadays, though, I don’t think calendars of any kind will survive for much longer – anyone can see that their days are numbered. ThereisnoOwl In June 1972, Isaac Asimov wrote an essay in the Magazine of Fantasy &amp; Science Fiction that described a very easy to understand calendar system. Basically, there are four periods of 90 days plus a few holidays in between the 90-day periods to make the year come out to the right number of days. Rick Bergman Much of modern computing already does: it’s called Unix time, which began at midnight on 1 Jan 1970 [UTC] and increments in seconds. The switchover likely wouldn’t be all that hard in practice as it’s so well embedded today, albeit not too many people would immediately recognise that. It would lead to significant simplification in a connected world, as well as being easily distributed using protocols designed to do so while maintaining accuracy. As things stand, the clock can accommodate many multiples of the current age of the universe – but hold that thought, because in a few years (2038) there’s going to be a spot of trouble when older 32-bit technology can’t handle the latest standard (64-bit Unix time) runs into a bit of a problem at the end of the “first Unix epoch”. Dorkalicious I quite liked the idea of the Shire calendar, as described in Tolkien’s works. There were 12 30-day months, with an additional day at the end of the year and one at the beginning. These were at midwinter and called the Yule days. At midsummer, there were three additional days (four in leap years) called Lithe days. Mid-lithe day and the additional leap-year day were not given weekday names, and were kept out of the cycle of seven-day weeks. In this way the year always started with a Sterday (Saturday). Yule actually lasted six days, as the last two days of Foreyule (the last month of the year) and the first two days of Afteryule (the first month of the year) also counted as part of the Yule festival. Given the regular cycle of 30-day months, the adoption of a six-day weeks would make sense (abandon weekday names for all of the Yule and Lithe days), and give us the opportunity to ditch Mondays, because in common with most people, I don’t like Mondays. HiFiAlan We need it to be decimal, based on days. No hours, just decidays centidays and millidays and so on. No weeks months or years, just dekadays, hectodays, kilodays. No weekends, just a rolling three days off every dekaday, life expectancy about 25 kilodays. No annual reports, kiloday reports, which would encourage longer-term thinking, kiloday election cycles. We would get 2.74 summers every kiloday, and the same number of winters, but we would escape the tyranny of religious festivals and suchlike. Fewer birthday presents to buy. Easier payroll software. Let’s backdate it to 2000 so 01/01/2000 is day one of the Modern Decimal Era (MDE). Meet you in the coffee shop at 8072.052 MDE (half past 12, Sunday 6 Feb in old time), but in everyday speak you would probably say “see you at 72.05” unless you were planning well ahead. RichardCC A non-leap year consists of 52 weeks + 1 day. Converting to days: one year = 52x7 + 1 = 13x4x7 + 1 = 13x28 + 1 If we are ever able to overcome our superstitious attachment to number 12 and revulsion to 13, we could have a nifty 14-month calendar, with 13 months of equal length, 28 days, and a special month of length one day, the latter which will double in leap years. This way we don’t need to worry about those irritatingly irregularly alternating 30/31-day months, where July/August and December/January all have 31 days even though they are pairwise adjacent. Where’s the logic in that? When the superintelligent AI takes over the world as the universal philosopher-king in 2046, I might work up the courage to suggest this calendar design to its royal highness. trp981 Weeks are five days, with a working week of three days out of five. Months are six of these weeks. The year starts at the winter solstice. There are additional days at the equinoxes and solstices to bring the total to 365 (with leap years having six of these extra days). These additional days are holidays and aren’t part of the main weeks/months (eg the last day of the sixth month and 36th week is followed by the summer solstice holiday, which is then followed by the first day of the seventh month and 37th week). The system is natural and secular. It has no need to remember different lengths of months, and gets rid of financial difficulties that can happen for those with weekly wages and monthly bills. It makes a compromise in the proportion of time spent in the working week between what we have now and proposals sometimes made for a four-day week. Tom LloydHow do you conquer your Fomo (fear of missing out)? Richard Orlando, Quebec Post your answers (and new questions) below or send them to nq@theguardian.com. A selection will be published on Sunday.Jürgen Klopp has scripted many a story with a happy ending in his seven seasons at Liverpool. Less than five months on, what he thought was a horror film – what he called one of the worst moments of his footballing life – turned into “a proper fairytale.” The fear was that Harvey Elliott’s career was over before it had really begun, but here he returned in style, the 18-year-old scoring 18 minutes into his comeback. The dislocated ankle he sustained at Leeds 147 days earlier, when he was taken off on a stretcher and rushed to hospital, was consigned to history amid the euphoria of his first goal for Liverpool. The ugliest of goals would still have made it a beautiful moment. Instead, it was a strike to illustrate his promise, Elliott taking a touch to control Andy Robertson’s cross and swivelling to dispatch a half‑volley. “He is still an incredible footballer,” Klopp said. Elliott’s introduction came in a double change that brought a fresh start and a new beginning. It was a moot point if the rapturous reception Anfield afforded Luis Díaz and Elliott was attributable more to the January buy or the emerging talent. Either way, the majority present soon had reasons to celebrate both. This was a welcome glimpse into Liverpool’s future. The most expensive attacker in their history endeared himself to Klopp in the best way possible; not even by scoring as much as by doing his best Roberto Firmino impression, 10 minutes into his debut. He capitalised on a moment of confusion in the Cardiff defence, robbed a dozing Perry Ng and set up Takumi Minamino for Liverpool’s second goal. “Incredible high press,” beamed Klopp, with his famous fondness for gegenpressing. “I love it.” His expression changed when he saw his £50m signing writhing in pain. “A scary moment,” he said, before realising the supersized centre-back Aden Flint was inadvertently responsible. “I saw the big fellow of Cardiff standing on his knee,” he added. “He has a bruise and we all said: ‘Welcome to England.’ Now he has his first assist and his first scar.” The substitutes took the spotlight but, as Klopp’s side booked a date with Norwich and reached the fifth round for just the second time in his reign, Liverpool had evidence of their manager’s forward planning even before Diaz’s entrance. The previous attacker they recruited with Porto on his CV had already underlined his catalytic qualities. Diogo Jota cushioned Liverpool’s passage into the last 16 just as he propelled them into the Carabao Cup final. He has ensured they navigated a month without Mohamed Salah and Sadio Mané while progressing in the knockout competitions. “In these games you need an opener,” Klopp reflected, and Jota pierced Cardiff’s admirable resistance, showing again that he has the spring to make him a menace. He outjumped Mark McGuinness, a giant defender who is six inches taller than him, to glance in a header from Trent Alexander-Arnold’s free kick. It was Jota’s 15th goal of the season and Alexander-Arnold’s 15th assist. “He jumps high, he has timing and he is a very skilled boy,” Klopp said. “He has a nose for these situations.” Jota’s game is defined by elusiveness and irrepressibility in the penalty box; when he hooked a volley wide from a corner, he had contrived to be unmarked again. He had been Liverpool’s liveliest individual in a first half when they mustered a solitary shot on target. While Klopp has been accused of taking the FA Cup insufficiently seriously in previous years, this time the manager press-ganging youngsters into service in a makeshift side was Steve Morison. Injuries and January sales meant the teenagers Oliver Denham and Eli King, handed the first starts of their careers at Anfield, had daunting assignments. Denham was befuddled by a deft turn from Jota, who stung Dillon Phillips’s palms with his shot, but excelled thereafter. Liverpool had 82% of the possession in the first half but their wastefulness was summed up when Alexander-Arnold’s volley went out for a throw. Naby Keïta was responsible for a couple of particularly wayward efforts while Curtis Jones skied a shot over. A “proud but frustrated” Morison was left ruing the manner of Cardiff’s eventual defeat. “Three poor goals from our point of view,” he said. He was frustrated that Mark Harris, a roving presence in attack, was denied a first-half penalty when Ibrahima Konaté nudged him in the back and in the box. But, with commendable honesty, he supported the referee Andy Madley’s decision to only book Caoimhin Kelleher when, some 45 yards from goal, he scythed down Harris. “I don’t think it was a sending off,” he said. “There were too many players around.” That incident came when the game was still goalless. It was over by the time Cardiff struck. The 19-year-old substitute Ruben Colwill got the consolation goal Morison’s spirited side deserved, but, on an afternoon of teenage scorers, Elliott’s strike had more resonance.Right then, I’m off. Here’s Richard Jolly’s match report. Bye! A rapturous reception greeted the double change, laced with excitement and relief. It was a new signing and a new beginning and if the Anfield public were happy simply to see Luis Diaz and Harvey Elliott on the pitch, they had further reasons to celebrate Jurgen Klopp’s substitutions. The January buy made an encouraging debut, the teenager made the ideal comeback and a day that threatened to be awkward for Liverpool started to assume a near-perfect look. For Diaz, an assist 11 minutes into his Anfield career was perhaps all the more auspicious given Jurgen Klopp’s indelible association with pressing. He harried a dozing Perry Ng out of possession to tee up Takumi Minamino for Liverpool’s second goal. For Elliott, their third was his first for the club and while it was taken beautifully — the winger taking a touch to control Andy Robertson’s cross and swivelling to dispatch a half-volley — perhaps his presence on the pitch was a greater achievement. It was 147 days since he dislocated his ankle against Leeds, when the immediate reaction was to fear for his future. A swift return had a stylish conclusion. Much more here: Steve Morrison has a chat. He also notably doesn’t seem aggrieved about the Kelleher incident. Really proud of them. We conceded a set piece and then it was two really poor goals to give them the other two, so coming away from Anfield frustrated that we’ve given them three poor goals from our point of view is still tough. First half I thought we did well, had a couple of moments, could have had a pen. And then we had the moment right at the start of the second half. I personally think my striker’s got to get there first and go round him and put the ball in the back of the net. I’m really proud of them, but we’ve lost to three poor goals. On ITV, Ian Wright says Kelleher should have been sent off in the first minute of the second half for serious foul play. I don’t see it myself - it was a poor attempt to win the ball, absolutely, but I’ve seen a slow-motion zoomed-in replay and I still can’t be sure he even touched Harris. It wasn’t a clear goalscoring opportunity, and a yellow card seems as much punishment as the foul deserved. There were four goals, and only seven shots on target. Liverpool were clearly the better side but Cardiff, away from home and with a much-changed side, played pretty well and were in the contest until a defensive error allowed Liverpool a second. 90+4 mins: It’s all over! Liverpool take their place in Round Five, where they will return to Anfield to play Norwich City. 90+3 mins: Cardiff sneak in one last substitution, and Semenyo will get 30 seconds on the Anfield turf. Ng comes off. 90+1 mins: There will be three minutes of stoppage time, give or take. 90 mins: Luis Diaz is one of only two outfield players on either side wearing gloves (the other is Konate). 89 mins: The ball is prodded through for Davies to run onto, but the immaculate Van Dijk comes across to steal it away from him. 88 mins: And just after I type that three of them combine to win the ball on the left. It’s played inside to Jota, but he can’t conjure a shot on goal. 87 mins: Perhaps unsurprisingly Liverpool look happy to settle for the current scoreline. 84 mins: Luis Dias is back on his feet and raises a thumb towards his bench. 83 mins: Replays suggest it’s going to be fine - his knee was accidentally scraped by Flint’s studs after both went up for a header, so it’s not a potentially nastier internal injury. 83 mins: Luis Diaz is down, holding his right knee and looking in genuine pain. Another cracking finish! Cardiff snaffle the ball on halfway and break, Davies plays in Colwill on the edge of the area and he doesn’t hang about, snapping a low drive past Kelleher! 78 mins: Yet another substitution, Liverpool bringing Thiago on and taking Henderson off. I appreciate that for some readers this will be the second time I’ve said Henderson has been taken off. The first time it was actually Minamino. That’s a cracker! The ball comes in from the left and Elliott, in a worrying amount of space after McGuinness slips, takes a lovely first touch before hammering a volley inside the near post! 75 mins: A good stat that I would comment on more widely but can’t because something else has happened: 73 mins: Liverpool play through midfield really beautifully, Luis Diaz plays wide to Elliott when he might have shot, and from his lay-off Henderson shoots wide from 20 yards. 72 mins: It’s suddenly raining on Anfield so heavily it looks like fog. 71 mins: An absolute horrorshow: 69 mins: Cardiff take off King and Vaulks and bring on Doyle and Colwill. Meanwhile Liverpool take off Tsimikas and Minamino and bring on Robertson and Milner. Calamity for Cardiff! Ng tries to usher the ball back to his keeper, but Phillips makes no attempt to claim it, Luis Dias steals it instead, and his pull-back is hammered into the net by Minamino! 68 mins: Tsimikas crosses from the left, and Jota goes to ground in the middle. He seemed quite keen on doing so, and the referee is unimpressed. 66 mins: Since Harris nearly ran clear in the first minute of the half, Cardiff have done very little. They did just send another long throw into the area, but it didn’t stay there long. 63 mins: Elliott has looked bright since coming on, and he cuts in from the right before having a decent-looking shot, which deflects wide. 60 mins: It goes for a corner, from which Jota volleys wide at the back post! His marker, Ng, had gone to ground claiming a push, so had it gone in VAR would have got involved. 59 mins: Jota exchanges passes with Minamino on the edge of the area, but the return is a little strong and Jota can’t bring it under control. 58 mins: Jordan Hugill comes on for Cardiff, replacing James Collins. 57 mins: A significant double substitution for Liverpool, who bring Curtis Jones and Naby Keita off, and bring on Harvey Elliott, injured since September, and Luis Diaz, who arrived on Friday. 56 mins: Another headed chance for Liverpool, but Phillips’ positioning is excellent and Firmino can’t find a way past him. 54 mins: That is an absolutely super header. Given Jota’s distance from goal the direction had to be perfect, and that it was. The cross had the pace, and Jota had it nestling just inside the far post. Alexander-Arnold curls the free-kick into the box, and Jota heads past Phillips! 52 mins: Minamino wins the ball from Vaulks, is pulled back as he attempts to scamper away with it, and the Cardiff player is booked. 52 mins: Curtis Jones blasts over the bar from 30 yards. 50 mins: Then Ng brings down Tsimikas and then clambers all over him as he tries to get to what is now a loose ball. The referee stops this silly behaviour and the players have a few words with each other. The atmosphere has turned a little testy. 48 mins: Play eventually continues, with no further action. Harris had outpaced Konate to reach the ball but was running away from it when the challenge came in, and though the keeper was then out of action the Liverpool defender might still have beaten him to it, so there was no clear goalscoring opportunity. 47 mins: It looked like a wild challenge, but I’m not sure he made much contact with the Cardiff forward. 46 mins: They’re back under way, and within 45 seconds Kelleher hares out to stop Harris reaching the ball, misses the ball and brings down Harris! The referee gives only a yellow card, but VAR is having another look... The players are on their way back out. Second half imminent! Not a bad half, but there has been only two clear chances - one each from Jota and Jones - plus a decent penalty appeal from Cardiff. If you want some halftimely football liveblog action, Tom Davies is available for you here: 45+2 mins: That’s the end of the first half, and there have been no goals. Liverpool have had 82% of possession, 100% of the corners and 11 of the 13 shots, but when it comes to shots on target it’s 1-1. 45+1 mins: Henderson’s 20-yarder floats wide as we coast into stoppage time, which should last for just one minute. 43 mins: Jota plays Tsimikas into the area with a lovely pass, but Minamino misses his cross, and Alexander-Arnold sends it back into the area, out the other side and away for a throw-in. 42 mins: Flint prepares to clear the ball with his left foot, completely misses it and falls over, but Denham gets to it before Jota. 40 mins: This time Alexander-Arnold shoots over the wall, but also over the goal. 38 mins: Another set piece shooting chance for Liverpool, after Minamino is fouled ... 36 mins: Now Firmino heads wide from Tsimikas’ cross. Liverpool are knocking on the door, and the door is creaking on its hinges. 35 mins: Chance for Liverpool! Minamino’s pull-back runs to Jones, who has time to pick a spot and set himself. The spot he picks is in approximately Row P. 34 mins: Tsimikas gives the ball away, Cardiff pass it straight to Konate, who gives it straight back to Cardiff, who give it straight back again. Not one for the highlights reel. 32 mins: Cardiff win a throw-in on the right, which Vaulks flings into the area. Van Dijk heads it back out again. 31 mins: A couple of good balls into the box, from Henderson and then Tsimikas. The second is headed to the edge of the area where Keita volleys wildly over the bar. 29 mins: Alexander-Arnold has a go, but it hits Collins in the wall. He then goes down holding his head, forcing the referee to stop the game, and then hops up, completely fine. 28 mins: Vaulks fouls Firmino, a bit more than 25 yards from goal. It would take a good shot to score from here, but surely someone will have a go. 26 mins: Keita has a pop now, but it’s not a great shot, and goes well wide. This is blossoming into a bright game being played in a good atmosphere. 24 mins: Cardiff survive a handball appeal in their own area, break, and Vaulks sends a dipping 25-yarder across goal and wide. 23 mins: Another Liverpool corner is headed away. 22 mins: Liverpool win a couple of corners. The first is OK, but Tsimikas’s delivery from the second is rubbish. 21 mins: Harris was actually offside, so any goal would have been disallowed. 20 mins: Now Harris gets down the right, three blue shirts burst into the box, and the low, hard cross somehow gets through the area and comes out the other side without any of them getting a touch! 19 mins: Penalty appeal! Harris comes in from the left, gets in front of Kounate and goes down. The referee waves away his claim, and VAR agrees, but I’ve seen ’em given. 18 mins: Cardiff settle into a deep 5-3-2 without the ball, which Liverpool haven’t worked a way around quite yet. 16 mins: Henderson is down and receiving treatment having fallen heavily after jumping over Harris’s challenge. 15 mins: Liverpool work the ball out of defence really nicely, finally releasing Minamino down the right, but he pumps his cross into the stands. 12 mins: Liverpool are pressuring the visitors’ defence now. In other news, I’m not sure who the away fans are accusing of being a really bad Sol Bamba but his is not a name I expected to be ringing around Anfield this afternoon. 9 mins: Minamino pops the ball into the net but Tsimikas was well offside in the build-up, and the lino raises his flag. 7 mins: Collins catches Van Dijk with his arm. There was no real force to it, and though he might at worst have made a little contact with the defender’s chin the Dutchman goes down clutching his head. Behave. 5 mins: Keita passed it into Jota, who had his back to goal a couple of yards inside the penalty area. He spun, backheeled it through the legs of Denham and released himself for a free strike from near enough the penalty spot, but it was too close to the keeper. 4 mins: Liverpool wake up and should lead, but Jota’s shot is well saved by Phillips! 2 mins: A bit of a pell-mell opening, which Cardiff have dominated in a slightly uncontrolled way. 1 min: Go! A minute’s applause for Peter Robinson, and we’re ready to go. Back to Anfield, where Cardiff’s players have gathered in the tunnel and seem to have plenty to chat about. So long as Leicester don’t lose to Nottingham Forest later today there will be at least one Premier League side in every fifth-round tie - there is only one entirely top-flight encounter - so we could have an entirely Premier League round six. Looks like this: Crystal Palace v Stoke City Everton v Bournemouth/Boreham Wood Liverpool/Cardiff v Norwich City Luton Town v Chelsea Middlesbrough v Tottenham Nottingham Forest/Leicester City v Huddersfield Town Peterborough United v Manchester City Southampton v West Ham United And finally Everton are at home to Bournemouth or Boreham Wood. Nottingham Forest or Leicester City will be at home to Huddersfield. Middlesbrough are at home to Tottenham An all-Premier League tie at Southampton, who host West Ham. Another home draw for Liverpool (or Cardiff), who will host Norwich. Peterborough United are at home to Manchester City! Crystal Palace host Stoke... First out of the tombola are Luton Town, who are at home to Chelsea! The balls are about to be plucked to decide the fifth round ties in the Football Association Challenge Cup. Andy Cole is at Wembley in a snazzy cardigan and is going to do the draw all by himself. Inside the Liverpool dressing room. Comfortable, but not too over-the-top as these things go. Jurgen Klopp has a chat about his line-up: Look if I change the team it’s only because of the intensity of the season. Now we’ve had no game, so everyone who is available, this is the squad and this is the team. And about Luis Diaz: Very nice fellow, but we don’t have a common language at the moment. He can speak very well to my assistants. It’s a good signing, a very important signing, and we’ll see, if it’s possible he’ll have a few minutes. He runs through the upsets and nearly-upsets of this Cup weekend, interrupted only by briefly forgetting the name of Kidderminster. “If you needed any warning signs, it was perfect.” And here is the Cardiff team. Liverpool make five changes from their last outing before the international break with goalkeeper Caoimhin Kelleher, Ibrahima Konate, Kostas Tsimikas, Naby Keita and Takumi Minamino coming in, plus Havey Elliott is on the bench after five months out, and Luis Diaz is alongside him. No sign of Joe Gomez or Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain, who have both recently had covid. Liverpool have already announced their starting XI. Cardiff will announce theirs in a few minutes. Fifteen long seasons have passed since Liverpool last won the FA Cup, courtesy of a Steven Gerrard wondergoal-rescuing penalty-secured Rafael Benitez-led victory over West Ham in 2006, in which time they have won the League Cup, the Champions League, the actual league, the Community Shield, the European Super Cup and the Club World Cup, and generally had a rollicking good time. They may feel another chance to get their hands on the old pot is way beyond due, but first they’ve got to get past Cardiff. And then three other teams. And then win the final. Intrigue for Liverpool comes in the shape of new signing Luis Diaz, who might make an appearance here if only off the bench having eventually arrived in Liverpool on Friday afternoon, and the return of Harvey Elliott, who dislocated an ankle in September and hasn’t played since. Intrigue for Cardiff comes in coming up against a side they last beat in 1959 (during the 1950s Cardiff beat Liverpool 1-0, 2-1, 3-2, 3-1, 3-0, 4-0, 4-0 again and 6-1 while losing only twice), a player in Luis Diaz who they came close to signing themselves in 2019, and in seeing if Mark Harris can live up to his own pre-match billing. “I used to look up to Luis Suarez as a kid. One season he scored 30-odd goals and that was a big inspiration to me,” the 23-year-old said, recalling the times his Liverpool-supporting dad used to drag him to Anfield. “This is a big chance to showcase what I can do and express myself.” Harris has scored two league goals this season, three times in all competitions.Long-awaited government proposals to reform gambling laws are now unlikely to to be published until May, the Guardian understands, in a fresh delay that prompted a Labour MP to urge that turmoil within the Tory party must not disrupt the process. The department for digital, culture, media and sport (DCMS) launched a review of gambling laws in December 2020, amid mounting concern over addiction and children’s exposure through advertising and football sponsorship. A white paper was originally due to be published before the end of 2021 but was postponed until early 2022 after a cabinet reshuffle that saw John Whittingdale replaced as gambling minister by Chris Philp. The proposals are now not expected until May, three sources with knowledge of the process told the Guardian, fuelling renewed concern among gambling addiction campaigners demanding urgent reform. Carolyn Harris, who chairs a cross-party group of MPs examining gambling-related harm, voiced fears that the uncertainty surrounding the future of Boris Johnson, who is understood to be supportive of gambling reform, could disrupt the review. “Of course time must be taken to gather the evidence to ensure the right reforms are put in place, but the gambling review was announced over two years ago,” the Labour MP said. “Every day of delay leads to further gambling-related harm while the industry rakes in profits. The government must not let its own internal problems stand in the way of much needed reforms for this country – it is time for action.” Liz Ritchie co-founded the charity Gambling With Lives with husband Charles after the suicide of their son Jack, who had become addicted to gambling while at school. “Someone takes their life every day in the UK because of gambling, so we simply cannot wait until May to see this white paper,” she said. “How many more families need to be shattered by highly addictive gambling products and predatory gambling industry practices before the government acts?” Ministers and officials at DCMS have been working closely with the industry regulator, the Gambling Commission, on potential reforms to improve protection for addicts and other vulnerable people. But the regulator is under-resourced, according to reports by the Public Accounts Committee and the National Audit Office, while it is also overseeing the decision on which company will win the next 10-year licence to operate the National Lottery. A decision is expected this month or in early March. Matt Zarb-Cousin, a former adviser to Jeremy Corbyn and recovering gambling addict who runs the campaign group Clean Up Gambling, said the review was urgently required “before more people are harmed as a result of regulation that is not fit for purpose”. The government’s review of gambling laws has prompted a flurry of lobbying activity. Campaigners for reform, helped by funding from the former casino and poker industry veteran Derek Webb, highlighted stories of addiction and transgressions by major industry operators. The gambling industry’s links to MPs have come under scrutiny, including lucrative second jobs and hospitality lavished on politicians, some of whom were members of a group that wrote a controversial report criticising the Gambling Commission for trying to reduce gambling addiction. The DCMS declined to comment.Here is Suzanne Wrack’s report. Well that was an absorbing and high-quality match that, while its fluency was slightly hobbled by the windy conditions, remained in the balance until the end. Chelsea’s defensive resilience and early assertiveness just about merited victory against a City side who were outthought and outfought early on but improved as the game went on and asked a lot of questions of Chelsea’s rearguard. It all sets up an absolute humdinger of a match on Friday night, when Arsenal visit Kingsmeadow. Momentum is undoubtedly with second-placed Chelsea now and it’ll be one not to miss. Today’s match also tees up next month’s League Cup final nicely. It’ll probably be a bit less blustery then too. Suzanne Wrack’s match report will be up on the site imminently. Thanks for reading. Bye. Gareth Taylor speaks: “It was a game of two halves,” says the City manager, “both teams struggled into the wind and I’m just proud of the second-half performance. I thought we really dominated. We did evertything but score but credit to Chelsea they put bodies on the line and did really well. “I told them to be patient at half-time, and our pressing was better, we created real good half-chances but had opportunities to create more than that but got to give credit to Chelsea, a team resolite at the back like that. We prpobaly did enough, poor go al to give away, we completely dominated and chelsea were hanging on y the skin of their teeth. Emma Hayes: “It is the tightest league campaign and I’ve said before that league titles are decided in the second half of the season. We’re three points closer to where we want to get to be through. And that Arsenal derby game [this Friday night] before a packed crowd will be as big as it gets.” And a word with Chelsea’s Erin Cuthbert, the BBC’s player of the match: “We’re absolutely delighted, from back to front we worked our absolute socks off. Me and Lucy [Bronze] always have a bit of a fight and I always enjoy those battles. I don’t think City had a lot of chances and I was disappointed not to get a penalty. Am really happy for [goalscorer Guro Reiten] - she’s been working so hard and happy for her to get the goal today.” That’s a massively significant win for Chelsea, putting another league title firmly in their hands, two points behind the leaders Arsenal with a game in hand. They defended with tenacity and intelligence against a City side who grew in menace as the game went on. It ends the visitors’ impressive unbeaten run and, probably, any outside chance of the title. Chelsea have held on! 90+3 mins: I say that, but City have one last chance when Weir wriggles clear in the box and has a shot clear. But only to Hemp who sends a swirling cross into a danger area but Berger gathers 90+2 mins: it looks as if Chelsea have weathered the storm now. Three added minutes will be played. 90 mins: Chelsea break and a long ball has James through on goal and forces Roebuck out of her box. The keeper just gets there first and now City charge forward again and Weir puts an angled cross-shot way over. A waste. 89 mins: Those substitutions have really galvanised the visitors, but it’s Chelsea who now make one more: Drew Spence for Reiten. 87 mins: Another City chance! A fine cross from Bronze down the right is headed out to Hemp whose acrobatic half-volley is excellently headed away by Bright with Berger beaten. 86 mins: Chelsea chance this time, James’s low shot needing to be parried aside by a diving Roebuck. This is a hell of a finish. 85 mins: White comes close to dispossessing Berger with a characteristically enthusiastic challenge forcing the keeper to slice into the stands. From the throw there’s more scrambling inside the box as three shots in a row are blocked. Good defending but these are nervy moments for Chelsea. 83 mins: Another menacing cross into the Chelsea box drops for Weir but she can’t quite bring it under control and Chelsea clear. 82 mins: City sub: White for Stanway, Chelsea sub: James for Kerr. 81 mins: Losada brings some more space and range to City’s game and gives Hemp room to roam down the right for a dangerous low cross that Chelsea clear. 79 mins: Some neat passing between Hemp, Losada and Weir ends with Hemp curling over. We haven’t seen enough of that sort of linked-up fluency from City but they’re finding more space now. 78 mins: Blakstad leads an attack down the City left but Carter gets in front of her and wins a foul after the sub pulls her back. She’s had a fine game, Carter. 76 mins: A rare break for Chelsea through Kerr but her left wing cross is cleared and City now attack again before Carter holds off Weir. Chelsea are having to dig in now. 75 mins: That corner is repelled too but City are coming on strong now, Blakstad having had an impact. 73 mins: … but that’s headed clear too after a raking delivery into the box. It comes out to Hemp who drives down the right this time and wins a corner. That’s worked out to Losada then Hemp, whose shot is deflected for another corner. 72 mins: City continue to press and Hemp wins them another attacking throw, but Chelsea smother them and deny space once again and they have to go back to go forward, as so often today. The visitors eventually win a free-kick on the left … 70 mins: City win a corner on the left through Weir. Losada takes it, but it’s low and poor but bounces off for another one. Greenwood delivers this one, which is better, but still nodded clear. 69 mins: Chelsea’s press continues to do its job, this time squeezing Bronze in the inside-right channel and winning back possession. 67 mins: Chelsea subs: Kirby and Fleming for Harder and Charles. Some handy bench options there, though Harder was excellent. 66 mins: City win a free-kick on the left. It’s floated straight to Berger 65 mins: A battle royale in centre mid between Blakstad and Cuthbert ends with the latter coming out on top, forging forward and winning a free-kick. Cuthbert’s swirling delivery is headed clear from the edge of the area and the danger passes for now. 63 mins: Weir gets a rare run and sight at goal but her low shot is easily saved by Berger. 62 mins: Handball shout as Harder’s cross from the left byline smacks off Greenwood’s arm. Nothing given. 60 mins: The battle between Hemp and Carter on City’s left is developing nicely, this time Carter holding off the City wide player’s run. 58 mins: City subs: Losada and Blakstad, on her WSL debut, come on for Shaw and Park 56 mins: Cuthbert drives into the area and has a decent penalty shout turned down after being bundled over by Mace, but it looks as if the defender got the right side of her opponent. Nothing given 53 mins: Bronze does show some attacking smarts, winning a throw on the right near the cornner. It’s worked out to Stanway who feeds Stokes then Hemp, whose awkward cross billows over to the far post where a stretching Park can only volley into the stand. 52 mins: City have had a greater share of possession since half-time but it’s Chelsea who look more like scoring on the break, with Kerr now more prominent. 50 mins: Another Chelsea chance. Reiten has a clear sight at go al after Harder dummies Kerr’s cross but her shot is well blocked by Bronze, who’s had a quiet game in attack but defended excellently there. 49 mins: Another Kerr break and this time Ruby Mace holds her up, forcing her wide and winning the ball back. 47 mins: Chelsea chance! A swift breakaway with Harder sliding in Sam Kerr who gets ahead of the two centre backs on the inside left channel but just slides the one-on-one opportunity wide. 46 mins: What can City do with the wind in their favour? They have a decent spell of possession that ends with a loose ball from Mace on halfway. Peep! We go again, Chelsea kicking off. Emma Hayes has found a hair bobble and the players are back out. In the men’s FA Cup, Liverpool are 2-0 up against Cardiff. Scott Murray is describing it here: And in the WSL, Everton lead Reading 1-0 Here’s the goal, if you fancy another look: Chelsea just about deserve that lead, having mastered the conditions quicker and dominating the first 25 minutes but Man City found a bit more rhythm and menace in the later stages of the half. Still hard to call. Don’t go anywhere! Walsh plays in Hemp down the left but Chelsea keep them back and their press keeps them at bay until half-time whistle blows. One minute to be added on 44 mins: almost a clanger from Roebuck who spills a high ball in the wind but thankfully for her there’s no one able to capitalise. 43 mins: Chelsea get a spell of territorial dominance but City doing a better pressing job now with Fleming dispossessed by Stokes. 41 mins: Shaw is becoming more bothersome to the Chelsea defence and almost exploits the swirling wind to get a clear shot at goal inside the area but Chelsea clear. City are having their best spell at the moment 39 mins: Chances for Man City! City win a free-kick on the left this time after the lively Hemp is again impeded. It’s whipped across the entire area before being knocked back to Park whose left-foot effort has to be pushed behind by Berger. City’s best chance so far. 37 mins: A more promising spell from City, who win a free-kick on the right when Cuthbert fouls Hemp. Greenwood’s delivery is headed back out to Mace, who can’t quite get on top of the bouncing ball and spears it over with the keeper Berger prostrate on the floor. 34 mins: Kerr wins a header in the middle of the park and nods it out right to Harder to build another attack but this time City’s rearguard smothers. Chelsea have been quieter in attack in the past 10 minutes or so. 32 mins: Having bigged up Carter, I should add that City are finding more opportunity down their left, with Stokes prominent. Again Chelsea crowd them out though. 30 mins: Hemp forges forward and reaches the edge of the box before being brilliantly dispossessed by Carter’s sliding challenge. The Chelsea right-back has impressed so far. 29 mins: A chance for Shaw who gets in front of the defender from Park’s neat nudge forward but Berger rushes out to save. Better from City though. 28 mins: An attacking chance for City! Hemp does brilliantly on the left, skins Carter and skims a dangerous low cross across the six-yard box but there’s no one following in. 27 mins: Park does well to win City an attacking throw on the right but they just can’t find room with the ensuing possession and every time Chelsea counter with greater speed and incision. Though this attack comes to nowt. 23 mins: Now City attack down the left, winning a throw in a promising position but again they lose possession when Bronze is robbed. Stanway wins it back and begins another spell of possession but Chelsea are pressing brilliantly and win it back and are immediately on the attack with Harder having a low cross-shot blocked on the left by Roebuck. 21 mins: Harder is running this game and she threads another diagonal ball across the area for Kerr whose effort is blocked but Reiten pulls it back for Ingle who has a firm shot blocked. 20 mins: City can’t find the final ball at the moment and are in the unusual position of struggling for possession, most of which Chelsea have. 18 mins: A scare for Chelsea as Fleming’s back pass buts Berger under pressure from Shaw, but she lacks support from the rebound and Chelsea clear. 16 mins: Chelsea threaten another as Harder crosses from the left byline for Kerr whose header isn’t quite powerful enough. It was a lovely cross from the right by Carter that Reiten rose brilliantly to meet and angle across Roebuck, who didn’t know whether to come or stay. Chelsea have settled the better in these conditions and deserve to be ahead. A lovely deft header gives the Blues the lead. 13 mins: Kerr tries a header from distance after another good Chelsea move instigated by Harder but it’s easily gathered by Roebuck. 12 mins: Cuthbert robs Greenwood as she tries to play it out and feeds Kerr whose ball in is cleared. Chelsea come again on the left this time but Bronze clears. 10 mins: The wind is blowing brutally in the direction of City’s goal, with a blootered clearance barely travelling 10 yards and from the ensuing scramble Chelsea win a free-kick just inside City’s half. It’s belted into the first defender, Cuthbert tries to forge a shooting opportunity from the rebound but her effort is blocked too. 7 mins: City could do with a calmer spell of possession and they get one, knocking it from left to right and back before winning an attacking throw, from which Stokes forges down the left and delivers a decent cross that is cleared by Nouren. 6 mins: Harder wants a free-kick when upended by Walsh just outside the box on the inside left but no dice. They win a corner from Cuthbert that swirls and curls and has to be nodded off the line. 4 mins: A bit of risky defending from City almost lets Kerr in before the visitors break but the cross from the left is easily gathered by Berger in goal. 2 mins: City have most of the early possession but Chelsea hold them at arm’s length, and threaten a move themselves when Andersson and Kerr combine down the left but City clear. Peep! And City get us under way, attacking the covered home terrace Chelsea are lined up in what looks a 4-3-3, Man City likewise with Park, Shaw and Hemp the front trident. Out come the players at a sunny but windy Kingsmeadow, to the refrain of Liquidator … The managers have been speaking at a blustery Kingsmeadow. Emma Hayes is pleased to be welcoming back Sam Kerr. “She’s a big boost, with her personality and is a livewire in the dressing room. I love watching her movement, which is outstanding and brings us a lot even though team have done well in her absence.” Of the conditions she adds: “I wonder wether I’ve got any hairbands because it’s’ really swirling around. Set pieces will be key.” Gareth Taylor says Manchester City still consider themselves to be in the title race. “There’s a lot of movement between fixtures at the moment and we’re just hanging on in there making sure we can take advantage when the opportunity arises.” Alex Greenwood had a good old chinwag with our Louise Taylor earlier in the week, about City’s uneven season, England under Sarina Wiegman and more: The more competitive nature of the WSL this season has prompted calls for it to expand, not least from today’s two managers, Emma Hayes and Gareth Taylor. “I want it to go to 14 teams. I want more games, that’s the next step for our league,” Hayes says. Hard to disagree, though the gap between top and bottom in the division still needs addressing. Chelsea line up thusly: And here’s the City lineup: Greetings everyone, and welcome to another pivotal fixture in a WSL title race of proper intrigue, twists and turns. A fixture that at one point looked like a mere tussle over the runners-up spot behind Arsenal now has real significance, with Chelsea able to catch the leaders with their games in hand and Manchester City renascent after their dreadful start. They may be fifth but they’re not completely out of this, especially as they are unbeaten since mid-November, when a still injury-ravaged side were hammered 4-0 by the opponents they face today. City are in ruder health now as they go into a game that will also serve as a prequel to the League Cup final, both sides having won semi-finals in midweek. And with Arsenal next up for Chelsea in the WSL, Emma Hayes may be inclined to rotate her squad a little. City’s squad is of course formidable, and their attack in particular is purring at the moment. They dazzled against Spurs on Thursday, while Georgia Stanway became the club’s record scorer with her FA Cup hat-trick at Nottingham Forest last weekend – at the age of only 23. We should be set up for a cracker. Kick-off: 12.30pm GMT.Emma Hayes praised the “champion-like performance” in the stifling 1-0 win against Manchester City that ensured Chelsea moved to within two points of the league leaders Arsenal, having played a game less. “Our defensive strategy was brilliant,” Hayes said. “Our ability in the first half to take Man City to the spaces we wanted them to be in worked really, really well. It was a controlled, measured, calm, champion-like performance.” Hayes’s squad continued to show strength in depth, with Jess Carter providing the assist for Guro Reiten’s glancing header, after the manager had praised the performance of players who have stepped up when called upon after the 3-1 defeat of Manchester United on Wednesday. “I’ve seen this coming, this group is growing,” she said. “I’m so happy that we’ve got another generation of players coming through, that’s so pleasing when you’ve had a team that has been at the top for a while.” City were on a nine-game unbeaten run in all competitions before the trip south, with the team’s only dropped points coming in a 1-1 draw with league leaders Arsenal. Hayes had arrested Chelsea’s struggles at the end of the year, when they were knocked out of the Champions League, but a scoreless draw with Brighton put Arsenal in the driving seat. No WSL season has provided quite as many twists, turns and upsets at the top, though, and – with Arsenal having dropped two points in a 1-1 draw with United on Saturday – suddenly the prize on offer here was all the sweeter. Chelsea welcome the Gunners to Kingsmeadow on Friday night for a likely title decider under the lights, and the chance to avenge the 3-2 defeat at the Emirates Stadium on the opening day of the season. With a whippy wind behind them, Chelsea weathered a short spell of City possession before taking control and in the 14th minute they had the lead when a swooping cross from Carter was glanced over Alex Greenwood and past the goalkeeper Ellie Roebuck into the far corner by the Norwegian forward Reiten. “I will tell Sarina [Wiegman, the England manager] this, I think Jess should be given more opportunities for England. She’s one of the best one-v-one defenders. She’s growing in stature,” Hayes said. City struggled to find the rhythm that has powered the team through their recent run of games. The impressive forward Jess Park, who had been named player of the match in back‑to‑back games, was kept quiet until the 39th minute when she popped up with City’s best chance of the half, meeting a free-kick with her left foot and forcing a fine save from the Chelsea goalkeeper Ann‑Katrin Berger. Having pulled the strings of the Chelsea attack recently in the absence of Sam Kerr and Fran Kirby, with the latter only deemed fit enough for the bench, Pernille Harder showed no signs of relinquishing the reins despite the staggered return of the duo and the home team pressed forward with Harder at the crux of all their positive play. More impressive, though, was the back four of Carter, Millie Bright, Aniek Nouwen and Jonna Andersson, of which only Bright has been a regular starter in recent years. “It shows the versatility and adaptability of the players,” Hayes said. “I thought tactically it was a great game from that perspective, even if I thought both teams were really tired.” City had scored 37 goals in their nine-game unbeaten run with the wingers Lauren Hemp and Park particularly potent. But at Kingsmeadow both struggled to impose themselves on the game and the centre-forward Khadija Shaw and her second‑half replacement Ellen White, lacked the service they have become accustomed to when flanked by the duo. Despite a late City charge, boosted by the introduction of Julie Blakstad, Vicky Losada and White, Chelsea held firm and extended their unbeaten run against City to 10 games – four wins and six draws. “What this team does really well is what they’re doing at the business end of the season, producing performance after performance. It’s dogged,” Hayes said. For City, the 10-point gap from the top could be too big to close now. “It’s a gap, a big gap,” Taylor said. “We just need to keep chipping away at it. It starts next week. We’re unfortunate not to come away with at least a point today, I feel.”Wedged between Let’s Make A Deal and General Hospital in the US daytime TV ratings is the The View, a venerable, sometimes contentious forum for gossip, banter and political debate. To some, it’s an inspired cultural phenomenon; to others a blundering mess. Sometimes both. Either way, it has been on since 1997 after being created by expert guest tear-inducer and news legend Barbara Walters around the premise of women of different generations – ‘the ladies” – debating headlines of the day. Last week, it – again – veered into contentious turf when Academy Award winner Whoopi Goldberg – a Black cast member since 2007 when Rosie O’Donnell stormed out after an explosive confrontation with co-host Elizabeth Hasselbeck about the Iraq war – voiced her opinion that the Holocaust was “not about race”. “This is white people doing it to white people, so y’all going to fight amongst yourselves,” she continued after being challenged that it was precisely about race and ethnicity. The show’s producers faded to mood music and cut to a commercial break. The conversation had its own controversial origins: a recent decision by a school district in Tennessee to remove Art Spiegelman’s Maus, the graphic novel about the Holocaust, from its curriculum. Goldberg provoked outcry from Jewish groups and others, proceeded to repeat her thoughts on late-night TV, subsequently apologized twice and was then handed a two-week unpaid suspension and advised by the ABC News president, Kim Godwin, “to take time and reflect on the impact of her comments”. In one sense, last week’s spat was the kind of hot interaction in which The View excels and it generated a slew of headlines and talking points. On the other hand, no one in their right mind wants a host accused of antisemitism and the headlines were largely the sort that any network head would prefer to avoid. But The View has long been a source of trouble – both good and bad – and a huge national platform. In its original format, The View counted Walters, broadcast journalist Meredith Viera, lawyer Star Jones, TV host Debbie Matenopoulos and comedian Joy Behar among its number. “We started with them because we liked them the best,” recalled producer Bill Geddie in Ramin Setoodah’s account of the show, Ladies Who Punch. “A comedian in her fifties, a journalist mom in her forties, a professional lawyer in her thirties, and someone in her twenties.” Three weeks into the show’s start, Princess Diana was killed in a car crash. Debbie wept. “By going all in on feelings, The View embodied a moment,” Setoodah wrote. Five months on from that, the Monica Lewinsky scandal broke with its hot-button characters: a philandering president who claimed to be a feminist, a young woman, a vindictive friend in the form of Linda Tripp who Behar christened “Mrs Ronald Macdonald”, and a devastated wife. “The Europeans are laughing at us,” Behar continued. “You cannot bring a country down to its knees because a girl is on her knees.” The show quickly became a political go-to for its direct access to stay-at-home moms. “The politicians want to go on the view because it gives them a national audience and also gives them access to the individual groups that watch the particular panels,” political strategist Hank Sheinkopf told the Guardian. In 2010, Barack Obama became the first sitting president to appear on this or any daytime chatshow. His successor appeared 18 times before he took office, including one in which he said his daughter was so pretty he might date her. Former secretary of state Hillary Clinton used the show as a warm-up act for her 2008 and 2106 presidential runs. Most recently, last October, she warned “the ladies” that Donald Trump continued to perpetuate a ‘full constitutional crisis” But in recent years, The View has slipped in the ratings. Barbara Walters retired, and the show took on a more contentious political edge when it hired Meghan McCain, daughter of the late center-right senator John McCain. She left last year, saying she had enjoyed her four years in what she described as an “anthropological experiment in left-wing media”. McCain wrote in a subsequent memoir, Bad Republican, that The View was a “toxic” workplace environment. She quit the show, she wrote, because she felt her colleagues mistreated her for having conservative views. “As the country got worse under Trump, the treatment from Whoopi, Joy and some of the staff grew meaner and less forgiving. “It felt like the co-hosts and staff only knew one Republican – me – and took out all their anger on me, even though I didn’t even vote for Trump,” McCain added. The latest blow-up with Goldberg could have been better handled, many commentators believe. Sheinkopf says ABC’s parent, Disney, could have taken Goldberg in the corporate jet to Poland “to show what actually happened” and to “look at the information instead of shaming her in public”. Instead, the exchange has been left “controversial and unresolved”. According to Chanda Prescod-Weinstein, an African American Jew and professor of theoretical physics who studies the history of race in science, the comments reflected a contextual disagreement. “I think Whoopi Goldberg is wrong and the Holocaust was a genocide rooted in racialization. But I think we have a framework disagreement, and there’s nothing antisemitic about her words.” To Maiysha Kai, lifestyle editor at theGrio.com, the exchange reflects “the weird sort of comparative dialogs that aren’t always as helpful as we intend to be”. “I don’t think Whoopi’s intention was to be offensive, but I think there was an error in how it was responded to. This is a forum created for these women to have free speech and often very lively dialogue about certain things.” Shutting the conversation down, Kai says, came off as abrupt, especially after what Black progressives had witnessed for years with Meghan McCain on the same panel. “I feel like we were deprived of a necessary dialogue and probably a really long-overdue one. If there’s an education that needs to happen, which clearly there is, I don’t think it’s an education that she needs alone.” The show’s remit is all about keeping a public conversation going: The View’s epic, 25-years-and-running TV innovation that has centered the views and opinions of outspoken women. In an exchange reported in Ladies Who Punch, Hillary Clinton had gone on the show the day Rosie O’Donnell roasted Donald Trump for his infidelities and money issues, beginning a long feud that made it into two presidential debates. Clinton told Behar she was laughing so hard backstage she was worried she wouldn’t make it on to the set. “Every day we’re in trouble on this show,” Behar responded. Clinton expressed curiosity, wondering why that might happen. “I don’t know,” Behar responded. “We’re just women.”The key question comes towards the end of this fine investigation into why we are taking more children into care than since records began in the 1990s, exercising draconian powers, including forced adoption, to break up more families than any other western country. “Is the system so corrupted by 30 years of distrust that it is beyond repair?” asks journalist Polly Curtis. The answer has to be yes, if her meticulous investigation, conducted over many months, is any guide. The reasons why are not so complex. If you are a poor white, Asian, black and/or disabled person, your family is much more likely to be split apart by a system that can appear ferociously unfair to a growing group of parents and carers who see social workers and other professionals as nothing more than “baby snatchers”. Hence the mistrust. Curtis excavates the truth via interviews with social workers, judges, fathers who are invisible in the system, mothers who have doubly lost their children – because they are victims of domestic abuse and deemed unable to protect them and because the abuser may be given parental access by the secretive family courts – and survivors of care (often marked in adult life by homelessness, addiction, prison and other rotten outcomes). The truth comes camouflaged by red tape and a growing professional fear that to risk giving a family the benefit of the doubt is to potentially endure a bloody trial by the tabloid press. The facts are stark. More than 80,000 children are in care at a cost of more than £9bn a year. A third could have stayed with their parents if there had been early intervention, sustained support for the family as a whole and a recognition that however many challenges parents and carers face – including the “toxic trio” of substance abuse, domestic abuse and mental illness – they have a strong desire to do the best they can by their children. Austerity, Curtis says, has stripped away that infrastructure. In affluent Kingston upon Thames in south-west London, 33 out of 10,000 children are in care. In Blackpool, that statistic soars to 210 in 10,000. “We are missing a chance to prevent fires,” says one social worker, “so there are more fires to put out later.” Under the 1989 Children Act, proceedings are undertaken when a child is “suffering or is likely to suffer significant harm”. Since the recognition, in 2015, that coercive control should be an offence punishable by up to five years in prison, calculating harm has an added onus. It has to be “interpreted, understood and disentangled from a social worker’s own expectations of what parenting should look like”. A process, Curtis says, that is riddled with “class bias and prejudice”. Only 20% of a social worker’s time is spent with families: the remainder is absorbed by bureaucracy. Josh MacAlister, whose independent review into children’s social care is published in the spring, describes it as “a doom loop”. “More rules mean less responsibility for individual judgment [and] when people don’t have agency the job becomes less attractive… that leaves bigger gaps, so you need more rules.” The deaths of children haunt this book. In 2020, six-year-old Arthur Labinjo-Hughes was killed by his father and stepmother and 16-month-old Star Hobson was punched to death by Savannah Brockhill, her mother’s girlfriend. The extended family had asked for help but went unheard. Before that were the horrific killings of Victoria Climbié and Baby P. Every time it’s promised that lessons will be learned, but a child dies still every week in the UK at the hands of someone they love and trust. What this book reminds us is that intervention early enough to salvage a young life is inextricably part of an ethos and training that also understands when a family can be rebuilt again. Of course, there are outstanding social workers, teachers, lawyers and other professionals who can and do work miracles, but it’s a jalopy of a system. Curtis suggests splitting social work into a smaller team of child protection officers who investigate abuse and neglect and a larger fleet of community workers who provide early support to the extended family, offering “kindness, candour and rigour”. A strong society, Curtis points out, builds families instead of tearing them apart. Tragically, for too many children and those who love them, this is a society profoundly scarred by weakness. • Behind Closed Doors: Why We Break Up Families and How to Mend Them by Polly Curtis is published by Virago (£16.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyThings rarely associated with fun: 1) free jazz, 2) math rock, 3) Black Country, New Road. On the London band’s second album there is less of the “fire in a pet shop” jazz than on their 2021 debut For the First Time, but there are still whiplash changes of time signature and songs that take forever to get going. Thankfully, music isn’t just about fun: it can be about creating remarkable soundworlds of baroque pop fantasias, and this band are outstanding at those. Like Arcade Fire, BC,NR’s playfulness and humour is unfairly overlooked, smothered by an intensity that seems utterly inimical to fun. Maybe it’s not quite TV Burp, but Isaac Wood’s voice, heavy like a father’s frown, solemnly obsessing over Billie Eilish, Concorde and “the clamp”, is a hoot. Shame that he unexpectedly left the band last week, as he’s often the best thing about it. He kills on the long-awaited Basketball Shoes, which performs the same task here as it does at their gigs: a slippery, shifting set closer that partly reprises what you’ve just heard, and spurs the band on to a startling, vicious crescendo. To get the full effect, listen to the album from start to finish, over and over again. It’s a blast.British citizens who want to return permanently visa-free to the UK with EU families post-Brexit will not be penalised by Home Office delays as long as they apply for their paperwork within the next two months, the government has said. The confirmation will come as a relief to British citizens suffering anxiety and distress over Home Office delays because of the looming 29 March deadline to apply for the EU settlement scheme (EUSS). It is too late, however, for a 67-year-old British woman and her 80-year-old French husband who have been waiting 10 months for a Home Office decision. After their case made headlines in the UK, their hopes were raised when they received communication from the Home Office hours later that a decision was close. “To be honest I was shocked. We got a refusal,” said Carmel, who asked that her real name not be used. The couple, who are artists, sold their house near Perpignan last summer and planned to move to Cornwall for what they hoped would be a re-energising post-retirement relocation. They were refused on the grounds that Carmel had not provided a translation of their marriage certificate and tax statement, and had given insufficient proof that she had lived in France for 30 years. “It’s not what we hoped,” she said, adding that when they applied there was no evident requirement to translate documents. “My sister and I scoured the application form for what proof we needed. We provided passports, marriage certificate, joint bank statements and my tax certificates. There was nothing back then asking for translations,” she said. The Home Office said Carmel had the option of making any other application free of charge or appealing within 28 days. But the couple have now decided they don’t want to deal with more Home Office stress. “It’s been a fiasco and we’ve decided not to move back now but to buy a place in Paris,” said Carmel. Ben Bramich is among those relieved to hear they can still apply for settled status even if the permit arrives after the deadline for non-UK spouses of Britons living in Europe before Brexit. He has also been waiting 10 months and he and his wife Valerie are now on their eighth Airbnb in Brussels while they wait for the Home Office permit. Asked whether spouses could apply for EU settled status if they missed the deadline because of Home Office delays, the Home Office issued this statement. “Where an application for an EUSS family permit is made on this basis by 29 March 2022 but is not decided by that date, it will continue to be processed and an EUSS family permit will be issued where the applicant meets the requirements. “Family members of returning British citizens who are granted an EUSS family permit, which they applied for by 29 March 2022, will be considered to have ‘reasonable grounds’ for applying in the UK to the EUSS after that deadline. They should apply to the EUSS as soon as they reasonably can after their return to the UK.” The Bramiches had planned to move back to the UK last summer but had their first application for a family permit refused on the grounds of insufficient paperwork. His wife had to delay a transfer from her work to the UK and the father of two separated from his children after taking a job and a rental house in Cheshire. He also contacted the Brexit-supporting MP Esther McVey but her office said they were unable to get an answer from the Home Office. An assistant in her office told him in an email that she empathised but was powerless. “Esther is in agreement that delays such as this are plainly unacceptable. Unfortunately, unlike other government departments, the Home Office is not open to MPs approaching ministers concerning individual cases,” she said. The parliamentary ombudsman is now looking into a complaint by Bramich on the grounds that the Home Office offers “unclear guidelines” and has no service level agreement on response times, “long delays in processing” and “rejection without giving the chance to applicants to provide missing documentation”. Bramich said he was hopeful they would be approved but could not understand why it was such a nightmare to get the permit in the first place. “We ended up submitting about 200 pages of documents. We just threw the sink at it,” he said. “Is it really so complex to process these applications? My wife and I have been married for 15 years. We actually met when we were in England and both lived in England, but we moved away from England and now we can’t come back. “We are married, we have two kids. It is very straightforward but they make it so difficult,” he said. “Everyone’s really worried and anxious and angry about what is to happen in. If you read some of the forums online, the distress and anxiety is immense.” A Home Office spokesperson said applications for EUSS family permits were “decided as soon as possible, but waiting times can vary depending on the volume of applications received and the complexity of the case being considered. As a result, customers may experience a longer wait than usual for their decision”.The buzzer has finally put Switzerland out of their misery in the women’s ice hockey. They’ve gone down 8-0 to the US in the final sporting action of day two in Beijing. The US only had the mere 66 shots on goal during the match. Join us here on the live blog again tomorrow for day three, which promises the conclusion of the team figure skating, the semi-finals in the mixed doubles curling, the rescheduled men’s downhill and the women’s giant slalom Alpine skiing, a 15km biathlon for the women, men’s snowboard slopestyle, speed skating and much, much more. It should be fun. Sign up to get my daily Beijing Briefing by email, and I will see you again here soon. Zoe Sadowski-Synnott became the first ever New Zealand athlete to win a Winter Olympic gold with victory in the women’s snowboard slopestyle. Jakara Anthony became Australia’s first Winter Olympics gold medallist since 2010, winning the freestyle skiing women’s moguls. Nils van der Poel of Sweden won the 5,000m men’s speed skating, smashing the Olympic record that had earlier been broken by Patrick Roest of the Netherlands who had to be content with a silver medal. Johannes Ludwig of Germany won the men’s singles luge, while Ryoyu Kobayashi of Japan won the men’s normal hill ski jumping. Cross-country skier Alexander Bolshunov secured gold in the men’s 30km skiathlon for the athletes of the Russian Olympic Committee (ROC), and later hit out at reporters “hinting at doping” by querying his dominant performance. The British curling mixed doubles pair of Jen Dodds and Bruce Mouat are guaranteed a semi-final spot despite defeat to Norway, who also progress. The Australian curling mixed doubles pair packed their backs this morning after a positive Covid test, then were reprieved and allowed to compete, then secured back-to-back victories including over Canada. ROC lead the figure skating mixed team event going into the final day. Their fifteen-year-old competitor Kamila Yulieva blew the competition away, scoring the highest marks ever recorded in the women’s short program. Japan will progress to the women’s ice hockey quarter-finals with the point secured during their shootout defeat to China in Group B. The men’s downhill Alpine skiing was postponed due to adverse weather conditions. They will try again tomorrow. The second period of that ice hockey contest between the US and Switzerland has just come to a conclusion. The US are leading 7-0. That means that Switzerland’s record after two-and-two-thirds games is no wins, three goals scored, and 24 conceded. Ouch. They are still guaranteed a quarter-final spot though. In Group B, where only three teams progress, Japan may have lost in a shootout against China today, but that leaves them on seven points after three matches which is enough to ensure that they will progress. Tomorrow’s matches in Group B pit winless Denmark against the Czech Republic, and hosts China against Sweden, who are also yet to win a match. Victories for the Czech Republic and the Chinese would secure their quarter-final spots. I got so over-excited with my abacus of curling permutations earlier than when Australia pulled off that shock result against Canada, I hadn’t realised that the knock-on effect is that both Great Britain and Norway will definitely advance alongside Italy into the semi-finals. Canada can join them with a win tomorrow – although they are playing unbeaten Italy. But if Canada lose that, then I think Sweden sneak through on tie-breaking criteria. Jakara Anthony became an Australian hero with her gold medal today. She has spoken to the Seven Network about the experience, saying “It’s really incredible to know that all the hard work that I have been putting into my whole skiing career is really paying off. I’m just lost for words.” She added that being able to handle the pressure “is a a real testament to myself and the team around me in the last four years and the really solid processes we follow. It really hasn’t been easy. I think that I am a much better athlete and person because of it.” Anthony becomes Australia’s first Winter Olympics champion since Torah Bright (snowboard halfpipe) and Lydia Lassila (women’s aerials) both won at the 2010 Vancouver Games. We have a lovely interactive medal table for these Games, which allows you not only to see which countries have won the most medals, but also allows you to drill down to see what events they won them in, and who did the winning. It is a thing of wonder. But to save you a click for the moment I can tell you that Norway are topping it, with two golds and one bronze. Sweden are second now, with their two golds. The Russian Olympic Committee actually have the most medals overall – one gold, two silver and two bronze – and that places them third. Germany and the Netherlands are joint fourth with one gold and one silver apiece. Australia, Japan, Slovenia, China and New Zealand are the other countries to so far have secured a gold medal in Beijing. That is almost the end of our live action for day two. I’ve really enjoyed it. I must admit I did an involuntary gasp out loud when Sweden’s Nils van der Poel powered through to smash the Olympic record and take it from Patrick Roest of the Netherlands, who had been sitting in gold medal position for most of the contest in the speed skating earlier. The women’s moguls was great fun too. The only thing left going at the moment is this Group A women’s ice hockey game, where the US are currently leading Switzerland 6-0 with 15 minutes of the second period remaining. But stay tuned, because I’ll have the updated medal table, curling qualification permutations and more while we wait to see how many the US can score here. So the one-two-three at the end of run 4 of the luge is the one-two-three that went into it. Johannes Ludwig, who won the test event here, has triumphed again, and imporved on the bronze medal he won in Pyeongchang in 2018. Austria’s Wolfgang Kindl finished 0.160 seconds behind for silver. Dominik Fischnaller of Italy secures his bronze – 0.951 seconds off the pace. Australia’s Alex Ferlazzo came in 16th. The US were represented in the final by Chris Mazdzer (8th), Tucker West (13th) and Jonathan Gustafson (19th). The British luger, Rupert Staudinger, ended up 23rd, meaning he didn’t progress to the final twenty-man run. Wolfgang Kindl is the penultimate luge to go for Austria. He’s only been a whisker off first place all contest. He’s gone first again, but Johannes Ludwig has just launched himself. Can he secure gold? He absolutely can! Australia are going to have the last stone in the extra end of this tense curling match against Canada – but they don’t need it! Canada failed to clear out the stone they needed, and it is a 10-8 win for the Australians. A huge upset, and it leaves Canada’s semi-final qualification still unconfirmed. Dominik Fischnaller of Italy has just gone in the luge. He had been sitting in bronze medal position going into it. After his run he is guaranteed a medal. He leads with just two men to go. It is just a question of whether it will end up being better than a bronze. There are just four men left to go in the final run of the luge. Felix Loch of Germany is leading, but I suspect he hasn’t done enough to remain in the medal places by the end. Kristers Aparjods of Latvia goes next. Canada have only gone and tied that curling match with Australia up at 8-8 and forced the extra end. Incredible stuff. They were 6-0 down at one point. I think we can safely file this US-Switzerland ice hockey game under ‘mismatch’. The US have ended the first period with a 5-0 lead. Goals have gone to Jesse Compher, Kelly Pannek, Amanda Kessel and Hilary Knight has contributed two. The luge is getting down to the sharp end. Chris Mazdzer of the US has just gone temporarily into first place in run 4. There are seven men left to go. Norway have emerged victorious against Team GB in the mixed doubles curling. The British pair needed to score four points in the final end to try and overturn a 6-2 deficit, and it proved beyond them. The final round robin game for Team GB is against the US. They can qualify for the semi-final with a victory there. That match is on at 1am tonight UK time, if you fancy an all-nighter. Norway will also hope to progress if they can win their final match, against Switzerland. The momentum has really swung in that match between Canada and Australia in the curling. From being 6-0 down at one point, Canada have gone into the final end trailing Australia by just one point at 8-7. A win for Canada would put them through to the semi-finals if they can pull off the comeback. Regular readers of this live blog or my daily Beijing Breifing will know that I have a very low opinion of the format of the women’s ice hockey group stage. Every team in Group A is guaranteed a place in the quarter-finals, which to my eyes makes these group games not much more than glorified friendlies. Anyway, with that said, the US are currently in action against Switzerland, and with six minutes remaining in the first period, the US lead 1-0. Norway have just extended their curling lead over Great Britain to 6-2. There is one end to go. Dodds and Mouat need to score four to force the match into an extra end now. Tomorrow’s games are Great Britain v the US, Canada v Italy, Switzerland v Norway and the Czech Republic v China. I’ve got my abacus out here for the curling permutations, because by my reckoning, as things stand across today’s matches, we’ll go into tomorrow’s final round of games with Canada, Sweden, Norway and Great Britain all on five victories. Only three of them can progress and join Italy in the semi-finals. In the mixed doubles curling, Norway still lead Great Britain 4-2 as we are approaching the conclusion of the 7th end. Canada, meanwhile, are having a nightmare against Australia, and are currently 8-4 down after six ends. We are back in action over at the luge, where twenty men are going for gold. The aim of nineteen of them is to dislodge Germany’s Johannes Ludwig, who has been in top spot throughout the whole competition so far. He goes into the last round leading Austria’s Wolfgang Kindl by 0.113. In bronze position after three runs is Italy’s Dominik Fischnaller. As is the way with these things, those three men will be the last three to go. There are some quotes from Turkish ski jumper Fatih Arda İpcioğlu that have dropped on the newswires. He has declined to elaborate on whether the crescent and star on his blue skis was a statement in support of China’s Uyghur community. “I don’t want to answer about those questions. I’m a sportsman. I do just my job. The other things, I don’t care about. It’s not my job,” he said. The design on the skis he used on Saturday seemed to some observers to indicate a recognition of East Turkestan, the region that is home to Uyghurs. İpcioğlu used different skis in todays competition. That gold medal for Jakara Anthony has ended a 12-year Winter Olympics gold-medal drought for Australia. The 23-year-old Anthony scored 83.09 points in the six-woman super final. It also marked the first time in Winter Olympics history that Australia had won more than one medal on a single day after Tess Coady claimed bronze in the women’s snowboard slopestyle earlier today. While there is a slight lull in proceedings after the frenzy of the moguls, let me gently point you in the direction of our gallery of the best pictures of the day so far, kindly assembled for your enjoyment by John Windmill on our picture desk. That moguls final was great fun and great quality. At a somewhat slower pace, here is what is happening in the curling, after four ends. Norway are leading Great Britain 3-1 Switzerland are 4-2 ahead of the US Italy have edged 3-2 in front against Sweden Australia are hammering Canada 7-0 Here are the final results of the women’s moguls freestyle skiing, with a gold for Jakara Anthony of Australia. Jaelin Kauf of the US gets silver. Anastasia Smirnova of the Russian Olympic Committee is a slightly surprising bronze medallist, out-performing the outgoing Olympic champion Perrine Laffont who finished fourth. Makayla Gerken Schofield finished 8th for Team GB – the highest ever moguls position for any British athlete, male or female. Jakara Anthony makes the final run of the contest. It is a great run, she does nothing wrong, it is not the quickest, but she is placed first. Gold for Australia! Jaelin Kauf of the US has made the penultimate moguls run in the super-final. 26.37 is her time, the fastest run of the night despite bouncing around a bit at the top of run. She’s been placed first. Only Jakara Anthony of Australia can stop her winning gold. Japan’s Anri Kawamura is the fourth skiier to go in the women’s moguls. She’s 17, and she’s gone into third place. There are two women left to go. Will that be enough for Kawamura to medal, or can Jaelin Kauf or Jakara Anthony do anything about it? This women’s moguls contest is a tense affair. Anastasia Smirnova of ROC went third and has taken the lead. We are halfway through the final run. It means that Perrine Laffont, currently second, has lost her title from 2018. Perrine Laffont of France is up next in the moguls. Again there were a couple of minor mistakes, but she was faster than Giaccio and goes into the lead with 77.36. I should add, as someone who can barely stand up on snow, I do feel a bit churlish being a bit picky about these freestyle skiing performances. The women’s mogul super-final is go! Olivia Giaccio of the US goes first of the six – and delivers a 720 as her final jump. At 29.6 it wasn’t super-quick. Let us check in on the latest scores in the mixed doubles curling. That vital Great Britain v Norway match is tightly poised at 2-1 to Norway after three ends. Elsewhere Italy and Sweden are tied 2-2, Switzerland are leading the US 3-2, and after their Covid scare earlier, Australia suddenly cannot stop winning – they are 6-0 up against Canada. It is Japan’s first gold of these Games, and there are wild scenes of celebration here. Ryoyu Kobayashi scored 275 overall, with jumps of 104.5m and 99.5m. Austria’s Manuel Fettner earned silver, with 270.8. Bronze went to Poland’s Dawid Kubacki. The lead has changed hands in the ski jumping again, and with only one man left to jump, Manuel Fettner of Austria is in pole position … but Ryoyu Kobayashi has won it for Japan with his last jump! Here are your six super-finalists for the women’s moguls who will make one more run: 1. Jakara Anthony (AUS) 81.29 2. Jaelin Kauf (USA) 80.12 3. Anri Kawamura (JPN) 78.84 4. Anastasia Smirnova (ROC) 78.64 5. Perrine Laffont (FRA) 77.62 6. Olivia Giaccio (USA) 77.57 Perrine Laffont has just qualified for France in the women’s moguls, which means it is the end of the road for Team GB’s Makayla Gerken Schofield who has been pushed into seventh place. Dawid Kubacki has just taken the lead in the ski jumping for Poland. It’s all happening at the moment! Olivia Giaccio has guaranteed her place in the final moguls runs for the US, as has Jaelin Kauf. That has pushed Kai Owens out of the top six, and GB’s Makayla Gerken Schofield is just clinging on to fifth place with the top three athletes from the last round yet to go. It was a quick run from Kai Owens of the US in the women’s moguls, but she made a couple of mistakes on the jumps and ends up placed fifth. Hannah Soar of the US has placed second. Anastasia Smirnova from ROC is the first woman to definitely qualify. The women are back out doing the next run of the final in the moguls. The top six in this round progress for a final shot at the gold. Team GB’s Makayla Gerken Schofield has had a decent run and is placed third out of the six runs so far with 73.04. It won’t be good enough to medal though. Canada’s Sofiane Gagnon got a DNF. We are about to get the trio of Americans going. Marius Lindvik of Norway is leading at this stage in the men’s normal hill ski jumping. He has jumped 102.5m for an overall total of 260.7 points in changeable wind conditions that are proving to be a bit of a nuisance. Prior to jumping on the live blog, I was putting together today’s Beijing Briefing, summing up the day so far and giving you a few pointers as to what to look out for next. You can catch up with that here. You can sign up to get it every day in your email too. I mentioned that the curling between Norway and Team GB could be potentially decisive in the hunt for semi-final places. Italy are assured to go through. Four other teams are fighting for the remaining three places. Sweden, Canada … and these two. Jen Dodds has just missed a huge chance with the last stone in the first end, so Norway get a steal to immediately go 1-0 up. It was a bit of a delayed start but they are underway now in the men’s normal hill ski jumping. I’m absolutely mesmerised by this fish-eye lens view of it. We know the twelve women who will progress in the women’s moguls. A very strong US field of Jaelin Kauf, Olivia Giaccio and Kai Owens are bunched up at the top of the standings, all in the top six. Anri Kawamura of Japan qualified second, Perrine Laffont of France in third. Team GB’s Makayla Gerken Schofield also progresses. However Brittany Cox and Sophie Ash of Australia ended up being pushed just out of the qualification places, but it was Jakara Anthony of Australia who qualified first with the final run of the round. Hello, it is Martin Belam taking over from Niall. I will be here for the next few hours as the day’s events gradually draw to a close. We should get the medals in the women’s moguls and the men’s singles luge before the end of the day. There’s also a potentially decisive set of round robin matches in the mixed doubles curling, plus the US take on Switzerland in the women’s ice hockey. At the moment there are just a couple of more women to go in the moguls qualifying – Anri Kawamura of Japan has gone into the lead There are three runs in the final; after this first round, the top 12 advance to a second run before the top six compete in the final stage. Japan’s Anri Kawamura has just stormed into first place, posting 80.72 to Owens’ 75.26 – but the scores are reset after each run. Time to hand over to Martin Belam, who will guide you through the rest of day two’s ice-cold action. Women’s moguls: Twelve of the 20 finalists have completed their first run, with Makalya Gerken Schofield still in fourth, and now guaranteed a place in the second round of the final. Chloé Dufour-Lapointe is in sixth while her sister, 2014 champion Justine, goes down early in her run and can’t recover, leaving the competition in tears. Slovenia’s Peter Prevc is the current leader, ahead of the evergreen Kamil Stoch. Kobayashi produces a spectacular jump, however, getting plenty of style points. He takes over at the top and Karl Geiger can’t match him, delivering a seriously underwhelming effort. The German is in 21st place; there’s still another round to go, but his medal hopes look over. Top three: 1. Ryoyu Kobayashi (Jpn) 145.4 2. Peter Prevc (Svn) 139.2 3. Kamil Stoch (Pol) 136.3 Only six men left to go in the men’s ski jumping first round – they’ve been going in reverse order, based on the World Cup standings – Karl Geiger (Germany) and Ryoyu Kobayashi (Japan) are the final two. The wind is proving to be a big factor, though, and some of the favourites are struggling to trouble the podium places. Marius Lindvik of Norway, the strongest qualifier, can only make 16th place. In the men’s luge, sport’s bravest souls are flying down the ice in pursuit of gold. It’s their third run of four, with leader Johannes Ludwig going first. None of his nearest rivals can overtake him or even keep pace – he has the fastest third run so far and looks likely to begin the final run in the lead. Women’s moguls final: Makayla Gerken Schofield goes for Team GB, and is more aggressive than in her qualifying run, finishing with a backflip-cross off the final ramp. She posts an improved 73.99, and is in third place but there are 16 other athletes to go; her main aim will be to make the top 12 and get a final run. The USA’s Kai Owens is the early leader. We’ve seen 30 of the 50 jumpers make their first attempt. Three-time Olympic champion Kamil Stoch of Poland, now 34 and returning from injury problems, shows he’s still got it with a score of 136.3 to take the lead. Most of the heavy hitters are still to come, though. There has been a bit of a lull in the action, but that’s all about to change. In the next two hours, we’ll see three golds won – in the ski jumping, moguls and luge. We’re also approaching the business end of the mixed doubles curling group stage – Team GB face Norway in a match that could be pivotal for their medal hopes. This is almost too on the nose ... The men’s ski jumping (normal hill) final is under way, with Finland’s Antti Aalto taking an early lead. He’s from Kuopio, a town where I once massively over-indulged at a pizza buffet. A bit of local colour for you there. China and Japan go to a shootout in their women’s ice hockey group game. Each player carries the puck forward from halfway and try to beat the goaltender, rather than take a static shot. After three failed attempts each, Mi Le – otherwise known as Hannah Miller – scores to earn victory for China. Before we continue with the sport, this comment piece from Labour MP David Lammy is well worth a read. In Group B of the women’s ice hockey tournament, China and Japan are playing overtime after a 1-1 tie in their game. Another one for the Winter Olympics playlist ... Earlier, we saw cross-country skier Alexander Bolshunov secure gold in the 30km skiathlon. In his press conference, the Russian athlete hit back at reporters “hinting at doping” by querying his dominant performance. “We have clean sportsmen, clean athletes who are at the Olympics who do doping tests almost every day,” Bolshunov said. “I believe it’s wrong to ask us these questions – you don’t achieve these results all of a sudden, you don’t become an Olympic champion, because it takes years and years of training.” The ROC cross-country skiing coach, Yuri Borodavko, was banned by the Russian ski federation for two years in 2010 for being “involved in doping cases”. He has always denied any involvement, and maintains that his suspension was a formality. Here comes Leonie Gerken Schofield, who opts to sacrifice some pace here after falling in her first run. Her technique in the turns is good, but she doesn’t have the speed to really impress off the ramps, and ends up 16th and outside the final. Her sister Mikaela is through, along with 2018 bronze winner Yulia Galysheva and Chloé Dufour-Lapointe, who joins her sister Justine in the final. We’ll have coverage of that in about an hour. And if you’re thinking “that’s all very well, but what on earth are moguls?” – this video should help. Today, the remaining 20 contenders get the chance to win one of the 10 remaining places in the final, which begins in about an hour. Among them are Team GB siblings Makayla and Leonie Gerken Schofield. Makayla has posted a score of 67.96 today, but her Q1 total of 70.18 will be enough for her to sneak into the final. Leonie did not complete her first run, and will be among the last to go. Up now is 2018 bronze winner Yulia Galysheva, who produces some heavyweight aerial moves but can only take eighth place. Time to head over to the Zhangjiakou Zone for women’s moguls. This is the second qualifying run, after 10 skiers booked their place in the final in Q1 earlier this week. Those already through include 2018 gold medallist Perrine Laffont of France, and runner-up Justine Dufour-Lapointe, who beat her sister Chloé to the final qualifying spot, ensuring an awkward evening at the Dufour-Lapointe residence back in Montréal. That’s the second gold of the Games for Sweden, and they join neighbours Norway at the top of the medal table. Engebråten’s bronze at least keeps Norway ahead on total medals won. At the bell, Van der Poel is up to second, 0.99s behind and switching to the inside lane. He has really found an extra gear here – and crosses the line half a second ahead! He adds Olympic gold to his world title, and a visibly devastated Patrick Roest (Netherlands) has to settle for silver, and also sees his Olympic record improbably overtaken. Norway’s Hallgeir Engebråten takes the bronze. The final pair in the 5,000m speed skating final are Belgium’s Bart Swings and Sweden’s Nils van der Poel, the world champion. Neither man races out of the blocks and both are outside the medals after three laps. At halfway, Swings has drifted but Van der Poel is up to third place – but 1.85sec behind Roest. Does he have anything left in the tank? Sean Ingle reports on Australia’s mixed doubles curling team, who were heading home after a Covid positive only to get a dramatic reprieve – and then win their first game in Beijing. “It has literally been the craziest, craziest 24 hours,” said Tahli Gill, who along with partner Dean Hewitt was given 15 minutes to get to the venue. “My bags are still packed, I only just had time to pull out my uniforms. I played with only one glove on – and it was the wrong one.” The penultimate pair are ROC’s Ruslan Zakharov and Ted-Jan Bloemen. The 2018 silver medallist was born in the Netherlands, but races for Canada, where his father is from. Bloemen leads at the first split, quickly leaving Zakharov behind. He can’t maintain that speed, in third place at halfway – and he falls away badly to end up in eighth place. Leader Patrick Roest is guaranteed a medal, but which colour? Patrick Roest is trying his best to look relaxed, with four skaters left who could take away his gold. Roest is part of the Jumbo-Visma team, one of the franchises that help the Dutch dominate international speed skating – and a very familiar name to any cycling fans. The second day of these Winter Games has seen continued complaints over conditions for athletes, including isolation facilities and on-site catering. Finnish ice hockey player Marko Anttila tested positive 18 days ago, and his coach has raised concerns that he is still in isolation and “not getting good food”. “We know that he’s fully healthy and ready to go,” said the Finland coach, Jukka Jalonen. “That’s why we think that China, for some reason, they won’t respect his human rights and that’s not a great situation.” There have also been complaints about the food provided at the alpine skiing base in Yanqing. “There are no hot meals,” German coach Christian Schwaiger said. “There are crisps, some nuts and chocolate and nothing else. This shows a lack of focus on high-performance sport.” There are six skaters left to go in the men’s 5,000m, with none of the quartet racing since the break able to trouble the podium. There are some heavyweights still to come, though, not least Sweden’s Nils van der Poel, the world champion and world-record holder at this distance. The second qualifying run of the women’s moguls is coming up at 10am (UK time), with the final at 11.30am. The men’s normal hill ski-jumping final begins at 11am, with the closing two runs of the men’s luge at 11.30am and 1.15pm. The curling mixed doubles round-robin stage continues with Team GB taking on Norway and Australia playing Canada. The US play Switzerland, and that’s also the fixture in Group A of the women’s ice hockey. “The break during the speed skating competition is to clean the ice for the next group of skaters,” writes Sander Kuvener. “The ice gets quite a beating during the races, and smooth ice is faster ice. It is to level the playing field.” Adding to our winter playlist, my colleague John Windmill suggests “Cold As Ice” ... ... and Vanilla Ice, on ice! Sign up for our Daily Briefing You can get highlights of each day’s action from Beijing 2022 direct to your inbox. Sign up now! In the fourth leg, neither USA’s Ethan Cepuran or Switzerland’s Livio Wenger can get close to the podium. I’m also disappointed that Wenger didn’t take to the rink in a knee-length padded coat. The final pair before we take a 15-minute break (why, I’m not sure) are Dutchman Patrick Roest and Italy’s Andrea Giovannini. Roest is on track to overtake Engebråten at halfway but looking weary – can he hold on? He certainly can – in fact, he sets a new Olympic record of 6min 9.31s, half a second quicker than his Norwegian rival. That will take some beating. “Songs to listen to during the Winter Olympics?” tweets @OhCanada_uk. “Winnipeg’s finest The Weakerthans’ ‘Tournament of Hearts’ is the ultimate Love/ Curling crossover.” There are 20 competitors in the 5,000m final, racing in 10 different pairs, with the fastest overall time getting the gold. 2018 winner Sven Kramer went in the first leg and set the pace, but he’s just been overtaken by Norway’s Hallgeir Engebråten. Team GB’s Andrew Musgrave, seventh in Pyeongchang and in last year’s worlds, came home 17th in that gruelling 30km skiathlon event. There are two live events going on: China v Japan in women’s ice hockey, and the men’s 5,000m speed skating final, which we’ll focus on next. “What music should I listen to during the Winter Olympics?” asks Kurt Perleberg. How about this for starters? It’s approaching 8.30am in the UK; 4.30pm in Beijing, 7.30pm in Sydney and er, 3.30am in New York – here’s a roundup of day two’s news: Zoi Sadowski-Synnott has won New Zealand’s first ever Winter Games gold after winning the women’s snowboard slopestyle event. Australia’s mixed doubles curling team were cleared to compete despite a Covid positive, and went on to win their match against Switzerland. Britain’s Jennifer Dodds and Bruce Mouat won their game against the hosts 6-5 and go second in the table, while the USA lost 10-8 to Czech Republic. The men’s downhill skiing event has been postponed to Monday due to high winds. ROC lead the figure skating mixed team event after another two events were completed, with the USA second and Japan third. Fifteen-year-old Kamila Yulieva blew the competition away in the women’s short program, while Yuma Kagiyama of Japan was the top performer in the men’s free program. Bolshunov is so far clear, he’s got time to high-five team mates, collect a flag emblazoned with the Russian Olympic Committee logo and wave it around as he swishes over the finish line. His compatriot, Denis Spitsov, takes silver at 1m 11sec behind; Finland’s Iivo Niskanen is the bronze medallist, and there are no Norwegians on the podium after a clean sweep in 2018. Hello everyone, Niall McVeigh here, picking up the baton and skiing up the hill. ROC’s Alexander Bolshunov is cruising to gold, a minute clear of Denis Spitsov (also ROC) with 25km gone. Finland’s Iivo Niskanen is in third. As I prepare to pass the baton, and as the Russian Bolshunov makes mincemeat of the men’s cross country field, a reminder of the highlight of this session - Zoi Sadowski-Synnott becoming New Zealand’s first ever Winter Olympics gold medalist. One minute, they were on the first plane home. Fast forward an hour or two, and they’ve recorded Australia’s first ever Olympic Curling victory. Men’s Cross-Country Skiathlon Well, I talked up the Norwegians and naturally, they’ve barely been sighted. As the field transitions to the freestyle component of the race, Finland’s Iivo Niskanen and Russia’s Alex Bolshunov are careering ahead. The Russian took a tumble in the opening kilometre, but barely bat an eyelid. I’ve shed about half a stone just watching these guys. Curling Mixed Doubles - Australia v Switzerland Scores are tied! 6 apiece. It’s a ringa-ding-dinga, following a roller coaster of an afternoon for the Australians. Curling - Mixed Doubles After five ends, the Swiss have extended their lead by three points. The Aussies now trail 3-6. Men’s Snowboard Slopestyle As expected, no-one came close to 17-year-old Su Yiming, who leads from Canada’s Mark McMorris and American Sean Fitzsimons, with defending champion Redmond Gerard qualifying in fifth. As we mentioned, Australia’s Matt Cox was tracking nicely, but failed to nail his landing. No Snow As we wait the starting gun in the men’s cross country, a reminder that this is the first Olympics to use almost 100% artificial snow, deploying more than 100 snow generators and 300 snow-cannons working flat out to cover the slopes. The hosts, not always convincingly, have vowed to deliver a sustainable and eco-friendly Games. “Snowmaking at some of the Beijing 2022 venues is anything but detrimental to the environment,” a spokesperson said. Incidentally, it’s minus ten degrees Celsius. They’ll earn their medals, these fellas. Men’s Snowboard Slopestyle Australia’s Matt Cox has come a cropper. He was travelling well in his second and final run in the Qualifiers, but came unstuck on the final landing. Rotten luck for the 23 year old. On the topic of Curling, the British pair Bruce and Jen are zeroing in on a medal. They overcame a tardy start to finish all over the Chinese pair. Men’s Downhill – Delayed Just to recap, the men’s downhill will not take place today. The last thing you want as a downhill skier is to go hurtling down the mountain with winds up to 40 mph. As the Sopranos Paulie Walnuts told his mother: “Safety First”. Curling - Mixed Doubles The Aussies are back from the brink, and back on the rink. They’re up 2-0 on the Swiss pair after the first end. Men’s 30km Skiathlon Preview This event is similar to the biathlon, except the competitors are not bearing arms. It’s one for the lactic acid masochists. Just for a change, it’s an event dominated by Norway, which can prove challenging for live bloggers endeavouring to transcribe Nordic, heavily hyphenated names. Their 2018 champion Simen Hegstad-Kruger recently tested positive for COVID, so he’s out. In his absence, compatriot Johannes Hoesflot-Klabeo is the hottest of favourites, virtually unbeatable on the world cup circuit, and a chance to bring home multiple medals. Australia has two competitors, both from Melbourne – Phillip Bellingham and Olympic debutant Seve de Campo. Men’s Snowboard Slopestyle Qualifying The tearaway leader is just 17-years-old. China’s Su Yiming unleashed a blistering run, “an absolute shredder – a shred shed beast”, according to the commentators. To the untrained eye, the majority of competitors and broadcasters are remarkably relaxed about proceedings. We’re still waiting on Australia’s Matt Cox. “He’ll be frothin’” we’re assured. I’m not going to tiptoe around this. I don’t know a lot about figure skating. I know a lot about Australian rules football and rescue greyhounds, and a reasonable amount about Russian history and centre-left Australian politics. But there’s a gaping hole in my figure skating knowledge. I’ve never been figure skating. I don’t hang in figure skating circles. I don’t dress like a figure skater. So I’m going to defer to the experts here, as they wrap up Day 2 of the Teams Event. It’s a tight tussle for the medals, with the ROC narrowly on top of the United States and Japan. Late Minute Reprieve for Aussie Curlers Hours after being booted out of the Olympics, Australia’s curling team in the mixed doubles has been given a late reprieve and will compete this afternoon. It follows an urgent meeting of the Medical Expert Panel in Beijing. They take on the Swiss team shortly. Happy Waitangi Day! It’s New Zealand’s national day, and they now have their first Winter Olympics gold medal. In this correspondent’s opinion, the New Zealand national anthem is the best of the bunch, so it’s always worth rooting for the Kiwis. I know I’m deviating from the winter script here, but this, as the locals would say, is a choice rendition. Men’s Downhill – Delayed! The skies are blue, but the winds are wreaking havoc, and what many see as the blue ribband event of the Games has been delayed until tomorrow. Men’s Snowboard Slopestyle Qualifying This course has been described as “arguably the most technically advanced, thoughtfully designed and awe-inspiring slopestyle course ever constructed.” That’s good enough for me. And it’s good enough for Aussie Matt Cox, who’s just watched his compatriot win the bronze medal on the said course. “It’s dreamy snow, he said in the lead up. But the winds are getting nastier.This is his first Olympics, and he’s up shortly. Each athlete gets two qualifying runs, with a dozen spots in the final on offer. With the downhill on hold, the only action at the moment is in the men’s snowboard slopestyle qualifying. Let’s look at what’s happened so far: Snowboarding, women’s slopestyle: New Zealand, USA and Australia break through In the 2011 Women’s World Cup (soccer/football), New Zealand’s women got their first point with two late goals against Mexico. Zoi Sadowski-Synnott is just as clutch. Her gargantuan last two jumps put her over the top and lifted her past the USA’s Julia Marino for gold. Australia’s Tess Coady held off Canada’s Laurie Blouin for bronze. Two-time defending champion Jamie Anderson just never put it together. ROC puts stamp on figure skating team event For the USA to have any shot at gold in the team event, they had to outscore the ROC in the men’s free skate. It didn’t happen. You might as well hand the gold to Not Russia at this point. But the USA has virtually clinched a medal and will duel Japan for silver tomorrow. Team GB up, Australia out in curling The hard-luck story of the Games so far is Australia’s mixed doubles curling team, which really should’ve come up with at least one win by this point but instead has gone winless. They’ll stay that way, departing the Olympics after a positive Covid test. Team GB got its expected win over China, though it went down to the last two shots. The USA did not get its expected win over the Czech Republic and will need some help to make the playoffs. Up next Men’s slopestyle qualifying will go on for a while, though defending gold medalist Red Gerard can surely start sketching out his plans for the final, comfortably outscoring the field so far. We’re still hoping to see the men’s downhill today. We’ll definitely see the men’s cross-county skiathlon and more curling over the next few hours. With that, I’ll pass the baton to Jonathan Horn, reporting from the country with mixed fortunes today, Australia. See you in a couple of days. After two of three days, or five of eight programs ... 1. Not Russia 45 2. USA 42 3. Japan 39 4. Canada 30 5. China 29 You can probably hand the ROC 10 points in the women’s skate. The most drama on the final day will be the battle for silver between the USA and Japan. Canada and China are all but mathematically eliminated from the podium places -- it would take some calamitous Japanese performances to get them into the mix. Underrotations cost Vincent Zhou (USA) It’s hard to top Zhou’s ambition. He put five quads in this free skate. The first landed stiffly. The second turned into a single. He recovered nicely from that point, but the judges kept reviewing all his quads to see if he really got around all four times. In snowboarding terms, he was going for 1440s and landing something closer to a 1420. The reviews knock his technical score down to 85.24, behind Kondratyuk. And there was no way he was catching the ROC skater on the program components that measure the artistry and transitions. Total score: 171.44. He was never going to catch Kagiyama, but turning a quad into a single is leaving a lot of points out there. Yuma Kagiyama (JPN) sticks the landings So nearly flawless. So deceptively effortless. Artistically, it’s meh. Technically, he had one minor bobble, but the rest of the landings looked so routine. Score: 208.94. The bar keeps getting raised. I’m going to quibble, though. His score for “interpretation of the music” was higher than Kondratyuk’s. No way. Still, it’s a textbook performance. Your move, Vincent Zhou. Delayed again, naturally But really, the wind isn’t that bad, they say. Mark Kondratyuk (Not Russia), superstar The ROC’s men aren’t quite at the level of their women, not that anyone is. But I for one enjoyed Kondratyuk’s program, set to music from Jesus Christ Superstar. His technical score is higher than Jin’s by a good margin: 94.85 to 78.26. And artistically? That was at another level. He brought the music to life. If he seemed slightly out of control at times, well, that just added an extra bit of drama. Finally, pounding the ice with your fist after finishing a programme either means you nailed it or you really want to break your hand. Total score is 181.65, blowing away Jin’s 155.04. And the men are the weak link in the ROC’s team. Good luck beating that. Next up: Japan’s Yuma Kagiyama. Jin Boyang (CHN) skates The two-time world bronze medalist, known for barrier-breaking sequences of quads, has a strong start on a quad lutz but fades toward the end, stumbling on some landings and putting his hand on the ice to avoid falling. “Artistry has never come easily or naturally to him,” says NBC’s Tara Lipinski, who goes on to say it’s improved over time. His spins and steps are indeed pretty nice, but if you’re looking for silky-smooth skating, this isn’t your guy. Those who argue that the focus on jumping has overshadowed the beauty of figure skating would have some evidence here. Some of his combinations were impressive feats of athleticism but brought his skating to a screeching halt. But the music, a classical guitar solo seguing into the Bolero, is a winner. His 155.04 is, of course, far ahead of the unfortunate Sadovsky. First up: Roman Sadovsky (CAN) It’s a difficult watch. He lands awkwardly on his first quad and later tumbles on a single axel that was supposed to be a triple. Fellow Canadian Keegan Messing has cleared Covid protocols and is en route to Beijing for the individual competition. And now the crowd goes wild, with Jin Boyang on the ice. Snow Patrol on ice The men’s free skate is the next event in the figure skating team competition. Canadian Roman Sadovsky will get us started with a program set to the Snow Patrol song “Chasing Cars.” Is that the one with the repetitive two-note guitar riff or the one with the repetitive two-note guitar riff? Downhill in the dumps All hail New Zealand’s first gold medalist Zoe Sadowski-Synnott is the first New Zealand athlete to win a Winter Olympic gold. Ever. The deputy prime minister is excited: Let’s update the team event after the women’s short programme, which had the misfortune of running at the same time as the breathtaking slopestyle competition ... No surprise here. Not Russia is producing enough top-level figure skating women to form a conga line on ice. Kamila Valieva won by an absurd 15.45 points, scoring 90.18. Japan’s Higuchi Wakaba was second at 74.73. The margins after that were considerably closer, which means US skater Karen Chen would have finished a couple of places higher if not for her fall on a triple loop late in the programmes. She wound up fifth. But that’s the worst result so far for the USA, so finishing the short programmes in the top five and qualifying for the next phase was no trouble. Canada’s Madeline Schizas finished third, propelling her country into the all-important top five. Standings at the halfway point: 1 Not Russia 36 2 USA 34 3 Japan 29 4 Canada 24 5 China 22, claiming the last spot on tiebreak over Georgia As some observers suggested earlier, the USA will rest Nathan Chen in the free skate, leaving Vincent Zhao to try to keep up with Not Russia. He’ll go last in the free skate with a program that includes as many quads as three bodybuilders. He’s trying five. No one else is trying more than three. Downhill delayed again I might need some caffeine. Curling catchup A devastating blow for the medal hopes of the USA’s Vicky Persinger and Chris Plys, as the Czech Republic took a 10-8 win. The US curlers took their power play in the seventh end, but the Czechs played brilliantly to hold them to one point and head into the last end down one but with hammer. Plys threw a double takeout to clean up a congested house, leaving the USA looking likely to avoid giving up a big number. Persinger’s last shot stopped in the four-foot circle and was outcounting the Czech stones, but it wasn’t buried behind other rocks, and Zuzana Paulova coolly picked out Persinger’s stone to score three for the win. The two teams are now tied at 3-4 and would need some help to overhaul Norway (3-3) and at least one of the teams with only two losses. One of those team is Team GB, which eked out a 6-5 win over China. Down 4-1 at the halfway point, Bruce Mouat and Jennifer Dodds roared back to score three on their power play in the fifth. China called its power play in the sixth and botched the final shot, giving Mouat and Dodds a steal of one. China got one back in the seventh, but that left Team GB with the hammer in the decisive eighth end. Mouat swatted away several Chinese guards, and the game ended on a missed takeout attempt from Fan SuYuan. Three games are coming up at 2:05 p.m. Beijing time, which would’ve been the next game for the now-departing Australian team. (Corrected after originally saying “1:05 a.m. Beijing time,” which seems rather inconvenient. It’s 1:05 a.m. Eastern time and a reasonable 2:05 p.m. in Beijing.) Our long national nightmares are over, thanks to Marino and Coady. New Zealand, on the other hand, is tied for third in the medal table with one gold. The world champion started racking up points early, hopping on a rail with a nifty 270. Off the last rail, she seemed to lose a bit of momentum, but she cleanly landed a 900 on the first jump. Next up: double cork 1080. No problem. She won it on the last jump. To say “double cork 1080” doesn’t do it justice. She flew to the sky, looking like she was going to soar over the Great Wall. Her landing was perfect, and fellow medalists Julia Marino and Tess Coady ran out to celebrate the spectacular trick with her. Final: Gold: Sadowski-Synnott 92.88 Silver: Marino 87.68 Bronze: Coady 84.15 Party in the Southern Hemisphere tonight. Or today. I lost track of time waiting for Sadowski-Synnott to land. USA, New Zealand, Australia medal Julia Marino (USA) and Zoi Sadowski-Synnott (NZL) will medal. The only questions left: Japan’s Murase Kokomo did a series of humdrum maneuvers before trying to make up for it all on her last jump. The landing looked painful. That leaves Tess Coady safe on the podium. Will Zoi Sadowski-Synnott pass Julia Marino for gold? No threepeat for Anderson The US snowboarding legend looked great on the rails but fell after launching from the Twisted Sister feature. The trio of Julia Marino (USA), Zoi Sadowski-Synnott (NZL) and Tess Coady (AUS) will continue to wait through a few more riders. Canada’s Laurie Blouin came up just short. But wait ... Austria’s Anna Gasser, the big air champion, went big with a double cork 1080 and double cork 900. She once again was going a nearly light speed down the hill and barely stayed on her feet on her final landing. Will the judges dock her some points for that last bobble? Yes. Far more than I would’ve thought. She’s sixth. Chen tumbles in team event Putting a triple so late in a programme is a risk, and it didn’t pay off for the USA’s Karen Chen as she took her turn in the figure skating team event. She had a smooth, wonderful performance to that point. More on that in a minute ... Jamie Anderson is coming up for one last shot at her threepeat. Leader Julia Marino face-planted on her last jump on her third run. Here goes Anderson ... Australia’s Tess Coady laid down another great run run ending with a smooth landing on a frontside double cork 1080. She improved her score but not her position. She’s still in third with a nervous wait. Australian curling team leaves after Covid positive The mixed doubles pair of Tahli Gill and Dean Hewitt was out of the running, but they surely would’ve loved a chance to pick up their first win. They won’t get that chance ... Figure skating: Still going No, I haven’t forgotten the team event. It’s just that the most interesting skaters here, the USA’s Karen Chen and Not Russia’s Kamila Valieva are the last two up, and we have a snowboarding barnburner here. Through seven skaters, Canada’s Madeline Schizas has the top score of 69.60. Slopestyle run 2 complete: USA’s Marino leads New Zealand’s Zoi Sadowski-Synnott didn’t look at all comfortable on her second run, teetering on a couple of landings and finally just falling on her face. Standings after run 2: 1 Julia Marino (USA) 87.68 2 Sadowski-Synnott (NZL) 84.51 3 Tess Coady (AUS) 82.68 Reminder: Only the best run of three counts for each rider, so Jamie Anderson is still very much alive. But she just hasn’t seemed to be in great form in the qualifying round yesterday or the final today. The biggest threat to the top three is probably Japan’s Iwabuchi Reira, who has two runs scoring better than 75. Unfortunately for her, scoring isn’t cumulative. Marino takes the lead Not surprising to see a US snowboarder leading the slopestyle, but it’s Julia Marino, not Jamie Anderson. The latter had a rather uninspired second run -- clean, but only good for seventh at the moment. Before that, Marino did the spectacular with a 900, another 900 and a double cork 1080. She put her hands on her helmet in excitement before she stopped at the finish. Austria’s Anna Gasser, the 2018 big air gold medalist, was on pace to beat that but was going so fast that you had to wonder if she would ever land. She did, but she was out of control and wound up on her back. Curling update Big scores in USA-Czech Republic. In the second end (see below), the Czech Republic had a shot for five and wound up with three. The USA took three in the third but gave up four in the fourth on a big double takeout by Zuzana Paulova. The USA piled up red rocks in the fifth to bring it to a 7-7 tie. Team GB and China are also tied, improbably, at 4-4. Not everyone is enthused: I would answer by asking if people who enjoy Netflix know the Scotties (Canadian women’s championships) are also on this week in addition to the Olympics. So there. Downhill delayed The much-feared win hasn’t materialized at the snowboarding venue today, but Alpine skiers have had no such luck. NZ’s Zoi Sadowski-Synnott leads after run 1 The Southern Hemisphere stands 1-2 after the first of three runs in the women’s snowboard slopestyle. Sadowski-Synnott floated gracefully over the features that made so many of her rivals tumble and landed a double cork 1080 as easily as many of us do a warrior pose in yoga. Sadowski-Synnott, born in Sydney, has emerged as Jamie Anderson’s top challenger with two world championships and three X Games wins. After one run: 1 Sadowski-Synnott (NZL) 84.51 2 Coady (AUS) 82.68 3 Laurie Blouin (CAN) 77.96 US favorites hit the snow Julia Marino was in the midst of an effortless-looking run, but the Twisted Sister claimed another victim, and she bailed on the rest of it. Two more chances for her. Two-time defending champion Jamie Anderson was the first rider to use this course’s unique house feature, in which riders travel along the “roof,” and she slipped on the landing. Add Hailey Langland from earlier in the run, and all three US riders fell on this first run. They’ll toss out those scores and hope for better on one of the next two chances. Australia’s Tess Coady nails it A smooth ride ends with a clean landing on a double cork 900. Or, as the official stats put it, “fs-D-UF-9-Wed.” Either way, it’s an 82.68, good for the early lead. Coady went to the 2018 Games at age 17 but tore an ACL in practice and couldn’t compete. That run made up for lost time. Snowboarding lingo As a general rule, curling commentators explain every rule of the game on every shot. Snowboard commentators, on the other hand, will bust out descriptions like “backside 900 switch melon teakettle coffeepot wingdings” with scant details on what that means. So let’s take a crash course, drawing heavily on this excellent video by Snowboard Addiction. Stances Regular means your left foot is leading. Goofy means right. Spin directions Backside: When you’ve gone 90 degrees, your backside is facing down the hill. Frontside: The other way. You’ll also hear terms referring to how many degrees someone has turned. As we might remember from geometry class, a circle has 360 degrees, so a “360” is one revolution. A 720 is two. A 900 is two and a half, and so on. If you prefer figure skating terms, a 1440 is a quad. A 1260 is a triple axel. Got it? Switch means that the rider ends up switching stances when the flippy/spinny is done. In other words, someone might do a 540 starting out regular (see above) and end up goofy (also see above). I’m not sure about this, but I would think “switch” implies a half revolution is involved -- a 180, 540, 900, etc. I’d think that a 720 switch would mean something has gone horribly wrong. Instead of “switch,” you might hear fakie, which means something slightly different to a skateboarder because their feet aren’t bound to the board. Snowboard commentators like to sound cool, so they’ll probably say “fakie.” Spin types Rotation means your body and board rotate the same way. Counterrotation means your body and board rotate in opposite directions. A double cork is more flipping than spinning, inverting one’s shoulder twice in the air. A hospital is where I would go if I tried any of these things. Grabs Judges also like to see cool ways to grab onto the board in the air, even though the bindings make such feats unnecessary. Nose and tail are self-explanatory. Grabs with the front hand include nose, mute (just inside the rider’s toe), melon (just inside the heel) and seatbelt (almost to the tail, so the arm goes across the body like a seatbelt). Grabs with the rear hand include tail, indy (inside the toe), stalefish (inside the heel) and crail (reverse seatbelt). If riders want to reach through their legs, they have all sorts of non-vegetarian terms like chicken salad, roast beef and Canadian bacon. You’ll have to check out this explainer for pictures and all the other oddities. A method grab has to be seen to be described, but just remember that Lindsey Jacobellis did it in 2006 in Torino, unfortunately at the end of a snowboardcross final she was leading. She fell and wound up taking silver. Jacobellis is still chasing that elusive gold in her fifth Olympics, but she can always be happy about her six (6) world championships. Anyway, back to slopestyle … Approach to rails and other terrain Backside and frontside are also used in this context. If your back is closest to the rail, it’s a backside approach. What you do on a rail 50-50 is a straightforward ride along the rail like a train on a … well, on a rail. During a 50-50, a rider may do a nosepress or a tailpress, which aren’t weightlifting terms but references to just one part of the board being in contact with the rail. So, basically, a tailpress is a wheelie, without your mom yelling at you to quit doing tricks on your bike because your mom didn’t foresee the invention of freestyle BMX competition. A boardslide is a perpendicular ride along the rail in which the front of the board goes over the rail first. It can be front or back. A lipslide means the tail goes first. A noseslide or tailslide means the rider is perpendicular to the rail, but only the nose or tail is touching. A bluntslide apparently has nothing to do with passing a drug test. Instead, it means the rider jumped almost all the way over the rail but landed on the tail. Dismounting A pretzel is what happens when you’re dismounting from the rail and spin 270 degrees in the other direction. A sameway, a bagel or a danish is when you land the same way. Ouch is what you say when you land as Switzerland’s Ariane Burri did after looking uncomfortable in the air after taking off from the complex feature known as Twisted Sister. The USA’s Hailey Langland also crashed, overrotating a 720. (Spinning too much.) This competition is three runs, with only the best run counting. One fun way to follow curling, especially if you have your various screen(s) tied up with other events: shot-by-shot diagrams. Check out Team GB v China. These feeds also include live stats on each shot. They’re graded 100%, 75%, 50%, 25% and 0%. The second-end shot in which the USA’s Chris Plys took out his own rock instead of the Czechs’ was a 0%. Vicky Persinger’s freeze attempt that didn’t quite stick was 50%. But the stats don’t always tell the whole story. The Czech Republic’s Zuzana Paulova got 100% with the hammer (last shot) in that second end, but she was disappointed because Plys and Persinger had left an opportunity for the Czechs to take a whopping five points, and they “only” got three. She seemed sad for someone who just scored three points with 100%, but they know the USA won’t give up too many more chances like that. China scored two in the second to go up 2-1. With that, let’s check out some snowboarding ... USA, Team GB steal leads In the first ends of the eight-end mixed doubles games, the USA forced the Czech Republic into a nearly impossible shot that they didn’t come close to making. Team GB forced China into a nearly impossible shot they didn’t even attempt. 1-0 USA, 1-0 Team GB on first-end steals. Figure skating: Music time! Highlights of the evening’s selections for the Women’s Short Programme of the Figure Skating Team Event: Zhu Yi (CHN): Paint It Black Anastasiia Shabotova (UKR): Carol of the Bells. She plans to start with a triple axel. Eliska Brezinova (CZE): Sweet Dreams. Not sure if that’s Eurythmics. Or Yes. Or someone else. Madeline Schizas (CAN): My Sweet and Tender Beast Higuchi Wakaba (JPN): Your Song, by Elton John AND Ellie Goulding. She’s also starting with a triple axel. Karen Chen (USA): Requiem for a Tower, Requiem for a Dream. She has a triple later in her programme than any other competitor -- fifth of her seven elements. Kamila Valieva (Not Russia): In Memoriam by Kirill Richter. Our third triple axel. First up: Curling A quick look at the standings, along with matchups in this first draw of the day: 6-0 Italy (qualified for semifinals) 5-2 Sweden 4-2 Canada 4-2 Team GB v CHN 3-3 Norway 3-3 USA v CZE 2-4 China v Team GB 2-4 Czech Republic v USA 2-4 Switzerland 0-7 Australia (they did almost beat the USA) The Czechs have lost three in a row by at least five points. Medal standings 1 Norway 🥇 2 🥈 0 🥉 0 total: 2 2 Slovenia 🥇 1 🥈 0 🥉 1 total: 2 3= China 🥇 1 🥈 0 🥉 0 total: 1 3= Netherlands 🥇 1 🥈 0 🥉 0 total: 1 3= Sweden 🥇 1 🥈 0 🥉 0 total: 1 6 Italy 🥇 0 🥈 2 🥉 0 total: 2 7= Canada 🥇 0 🥈 1 🥉 1 total: 2 7= Not Russia 🥇 0 🥈 1 🥉 1 total: 2 9= France 🥇 0 🥈 1 🥉 0 total: 1 9= Germany 🥇 0 🥈 1 🥉 0 total: 1 And one bronze each to Austria, Hungary and Japan. But can Norway do this? Hello everyone. Beau Dure here, and I first need to clear up an important point. I am not, despite what you might have read at the end of the first day’s excellent live coverage, Australian. Just your typical boring American living outside our nation’s capital. It’s considerably colder here than it is in Australia, but it’s considerably warmer here than it is at the competition venues in China, which have been cold even by Winter Olympic standards. I prepped for the day’s action by curling for the first time in a couple of weeks. I made a successful draw around a well-placed guard, which is not typical. Perhaps that augurs well for a good day of action. Here’s what we have today. Times are all in local Beijing time. For Sydney it is +3 hours, for London it is -8 hours, for New York it is -13 hours and San Francisco is -16 hours. 9am Curling – two mixed doubles round robin matches: USA (3-3) vs the Czech Republic (2-4) and Great Britain (4-2) vs. China (2-4). As it’s shaping up now, a 5-4 record will likely get a team into the playoffs. Probably. 🥌 9.30am Snowboard – will the USA’s Jamie Anderson three-peat? She’ll have to do better than she did in qualifying. Speaking of qualifying, the men will do that once the women have finished competing. 🥇 9.30am and 11.50am Figure skating – the women show off their short programmes, with Karen Chen taking the US baton, followed by the men. ⛸ 11am Alpine skiing – brave people go fast in cold air in the men’s downhill. 🥇 2.05pm Curling – Sweden (5-2) tries to nail down a semifinal spot and keep Norway (3-3) from winning every gold medal in China. Canada (4-2) faces the busy Czechs, while the unbeaten Italian team celebrates its semifinal qualification with a win, I mean, game, against China. 🥌 3pm Cross-country skiing – the grueling men’s 15km + 15km Skiathlon 🥇 4.30pm Speed skating – the grueling men’s 5,000m.🥇 4.40pm Hockey - China and Japan tangle. 🏒 6pm Freestyle skiing– women get their turns in the test of shock absorption known as moguls. 🥇 7pm Ski jumping – men’s normal hill, with “normal” meaning “the big one rather than the really big one.” 🥇 7.30pm Luge – day two of two in the men’s singles event. 🥇 8.05pm Curling – four more mixed doubles round robin matches. The USA, Team GB, Sweden and Canada will be playing and surely looking around at each other’s progress as they battle for playoff spots. 🥌 9.10pm Hockey - the US women face a team that isn’t Canada; therefore, it shouldn’t be too competitive. Switzerland, in case you need to know. 🏒 Beau will be here shortly, in the meantime here’s Martin Belam’s summary of a thrilling day one: The first gold medal of the Games went to Norway’s Therese Johaug in the women’s 7.5km + 7.5km Skiathlon. She has won 10 world championship titles and it was the fourth Olympic medal of her career, but her first individual Olympic gold. She absolutely bossed it, finishing 30 seconds ahead of Russian Olympic Committee athlete Natalya Nepryayeva in second and Austria’s Teresa Stadlober in third after a gruelling race. The wind played havoc with the shooting in an exciting Biathlon mixed relay race, gusting up to 5.6 metres per second at some points. A gripping three-man finish gave Norway their second gold, France recovered from a dreadful first leg to claim the silver, while the Russian team took bronze. The wind was also buffeting the snowboarders. Great Britain’s Katie Ormerod – who missed out in Pyeongchang in 2018 due to a horrendous injury – failed to qualify for the finals of the women’s slopestyle. New Zealand’s Zoi Sadowski-Synnott leads the pack going into tomorrow’s final. Jamie Anderson and Julia Marino of the US, and Australia’s Tess Coady are all safely through. “It’s cold! It’s hard to keep your core temperature warm and then doing tricks feels a little bit more intimidating as you are just, like, stiff,” said two-time Olympic gold medalist Anderson. The Dutch have been a dominant force at Olympic speed skating for years, and there was no let-up as Irene Schouten claimed the Netherlands’ first gold in the 3,000m speed skating. She broke Germany’s Claudia Pechstein’s Olympic record that had stood since 2002. Incredibly, aged 49, Pechstein herself also broke a record today – becoming the oldest woman to compete at a Winter Olympics. Things you might have missed Shaun White, triple gold medallist and the oldest member of the US team in China has announced that the Beijing Games will be his final snowboarding event. He told a press conference that when he made the decision he was on a chairlift by himself. “I was watching the sun go down and it just hit me,” he said. “It was very sad and a surreal moment but really joyous as well.” A total of 45 new positive Covid tests have been announced, with athletes and officials accounting for 25 of the cases. “In general we think the situation is under control. The cases within the closed loop have not spread and they do not affect the competition” said Huang Chun, the Games’ deputy director-general of the office of pandemic prevention and control. Dutch journalist Sjoerd den Daas was dragged away by Chinese security officials in the middle of making a live broadcast for NOS last night. The IOC has rather blandly described it as “an unfortunate circumstance”. He was eventually able to continue broadcasting from the opening ceremony.Whichever angle this Ireland team are viewed from they are starting to look very impressive. And, boy, do they do angles. The sheer number by which Irish runners came at Wales had the latter’s defence stressed throughout. Four tries ensued in what sounds a comfortable 29-7 win but really the cold stats hardly do justice to the nature of this dismantling. That is nine wins in a row now for Ireland since they underwhelmed in their opening two fixtures of the championship this time a year ago. When the world rankings are refreshed on Monday, they will leapfrog England into third to become the highest placed of the Six Nations. But they remain second favourites to France (world No 5), who will host them in Paris on Saturday. The stage is set for the next Big Match, beyond which none of the contestants will be looking, but the rest of us can speculate to our hearts’ content. Needless to say, if Ireland play like this in Paris there is every chance they can put the championship to bed, with a home fixture against Italy to come in round three. All Ireland’s usual suspects strutted their stuff at the weekend but, as gratifying as any of the performances by Josh van der Flier, the two props, Garry Ringrose and the like was that of the new boy on the wing. Mack Hansen was making his debut and took his cue almost immediately, the key contributor in the build-up to Ireland’s first try in the third minute. His award of man of the match might have gone to any number of players but it clinched a performance that would qualify as fairytale, Hansen having arrived from his native Australia only a few months ago to play for Connacht. “I’m still in shock about everything,” he said, “and I’m just trying to take it all in.” People still get very touchy about the nationality question, which is futile in this multicultural, migratory world in which we live. Hansen’s mum is Irish, so he qualifies. He has extended family in Cork. “To play for such a great rugby nation was definitely an aspiration of mine,” he said. “I consider this place home now, and I think I will for a long time. So to get my first cap for Ireland is something I’ll remember for ever.” His Connacht teammate Bundee Aki got the first try. Andrew Conway (twice) and Ringrose then scored in the third quarter to register the bonus point and a 29-0 lead on the hour, which was in no way flattering to the Irish. Wales did moderately well to restrict them to just that, particularly in the first quarter, when the score was 10-0, but that is faint praise indeed. Just about the only plus for them was the performance of Taine Basham. He was top of Wales’s counts for carries, metres and tackles. He was their top scorer, too. His intercept try five minutes from the end certainly did flatter Wales, if not Basham himself. Next up for them are a buoyant Scotland in Cardiff. The champions did not want to find themselves firefighting as early as this.A prominent journalist has been arrested under terrorism and sedition laws, as a crackdown on the press in Indian-administered Kashmir continues to escalate. Fahad Shah, the founder and editor of the widely read local news website The Kashmir Walla, was arrested on Friday evening when he was summoned to a police station in the southern district of Pulwama. Shah, 33, who has reported about Kashmir for several international publications including the Guardian, had built his blog into a formidable news website. Despite mounting pressure and threats, he and his team of reporters had continued to cover alleged human rights abuses carried out by the military in the region. Kashmir’s police chief, Insp Gen Vijay Kumar, told reporters that Shah “has been arrested on the basis of one of the three FIRs [first information reports] lodged against him for frequently glorifying terrorism, spreading fake news, and instigating people, for the past three to four years”. Police detained Shah under the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act (UAPA), an anti-terrorism law which authorities are frequently accused of misusing, and under the archaic sedition law, in connection with his website’s report of a gunfight between the military and alleged militants in Pulwama. The report had included allegations by the family that the “militant” slain by the Indian military was an innocent civilian. He has been placed in 10-day police custody, according to a statement issued by his website. Under the UAPA, police have the right to detain Shah for up to six months without charges and it is notoriously difficult to get bail under the law. “If convicted, he faces life imprisonment,” the Kashmir Walla statement said. Shah’s lawyer, Umair Ronga, who filed a bail application on his behalf, called the arrest under terrorism laws “shocking” and “the end of the rule of law” in Kashmir. “He is a decorated journalist and a firm believer of the majesty of the law. His arrest is unwarranted,” said Ronga on Twitter. Shah’s arrest comes in the wake of an aggressive crackdown on independent journalists in Kashmir, which is disputed between India and Pakistan and home to a long-running violent militant insurgency. Last month, Sajad Gul, a journalist who had contributed to The Kashmir Walla, was detained under the Public Safety Act, another anti-terror law, and still remains in jail. Other journalists have faced raids and interrogations for their reporting and social media posts or been placed on no-fly lists. The Kashmir Press Club, which had been a home for independent journalists in the region for decades, was also unilaterally shut down last month after a “coup” by reportedly pro-government journalists, escorted by armed police. Speaking to the Guardian in the aftermath of the closure, before his arrest, Shah said that “journalism is being choked in the region.” Shah’s arrest was said to mark a new low in press freedom in Kashmir, which has been subjected to a withering crackdown on civil rights in the last three years, after prime minister Narendra Modi’s government took away Kashmir’s autonomy and brought it fully under central government control. The Editors Guild of India called for the “immediate release” of Shah and the Committee to Protect Journalists (CPJ) issued a strongly worded statement. “The arrest of Fahad Shah shows Jammu and Kashmir authorities’ utter disregard for press freedom and the fundamental right of journalists to report freely and safely,” said Steven Butler, the CPJ’s Asia coordinator in Washington.On the eve of the Winter Olympics, China promised the world a “streamlined, safe and most splendid” Games. But just two days into the event organisers are facing a litany of complaints from athletes and countries on multiple fronts. The Swedes have suggested that the conditions in the mountains are perilously cold. A Polish skater says she was living in fear in a Beijing isolation ward and has “cried until I have no more tears”. The Finns have claimed an ice hockey player is being kept in Covid quarantine for no reason. And the Germans? They are frustrated that there is no hot food at the downhill skiing. Athletes were always going to face difficulties in Beijing, given they are in a “closed loop” system that forbids them from leaving the village except to train, compete or go home. However, a growing number are now expressing frustration and anguish with other aspects of their Winter Olympic experience. Plummeting temperatures are usually a given at the Games, but the Swedish delegation are urging cross-country skiing events to be held earlier in the day after one athlete, Frida Karlsson, was seen shaking and close to collapse at the end of the women’s 7.5km+7.5km skiathlon. Under the rules of the International Ski Federation (FIS), competitions are stopped from taking place when temperatures are below -20c. When Karlsson competed on Saturday, temperatures at the National Cross-Country Centre in the mountains of Zhangjiakou, 130 miles north-west of Beijing, were -13C – but with windchill it was far colder. “We have the cold limits but I do not know if they also measure the wind effect,” the Swedish team boss Anders Bystroem told reporters. “If FIS says it’s -17 degrees and it’s windy, and it’s -35 degrees with the wind chill, what do you do then?” The Swede called for Tuesday’s women’s sprint race to be moved earlier in the day because of the freezing temperatures. “The skiathlon started at 4pm and Frida Karlsson was completely destroyed by the cold. It’s not good that the sprint starts even later,” he added. Meanwhile the Polish speed skater Natalia Maliszewska, who was forced to miss the 500m short track event on Saturday, revealed that she had faced fear and uncertainty in a Beijing isolation ward after testing positive for Covid. “Since a week I have been living in fear and these changes in mood,” she said. “I cry until I have no more tears and make not only the people around me worry but myself too,” she said. Those in an isolation ward are allowed out if they are free of symptoms and have two negative Covid tests 24 hours apart and Maliszewska was eventually released back to the Olympic village – before being told there had been a mistake. “People got me out of my room at 3am,” she said. “This night was a horror, I slept in my clothes in my bed because I was afraid that at any moment someone would take me back to isolation. Then a message that unfortunately they were mistaken, that I am a threat, and should not have been released from isolation. “I have to get back to the Olympic Village as soon as possible,” she added. “I can’t understand this anymore. I no longer believe in any tests, any Olympics. To me this is a big joke, I hope whoever is managing this has a lot of fun. My heart and my mind can’t take this anymore.” More than 350 Games participants, including dozens of athletes, have tested positive upon arrival in the Chinese capital since 23 January. Many are still in isolation, fearing their Games are over. One of those is the Finnish ice hockey player Marko Anttila, whose team believes he is being kept in Covid-19 isolation for no reason. “From a medical perspective we know that a person like this is no longer infectious, no danger to the other team,” Finnish doctor Maarit Valtonen said. “These isolation decisions are not based on medicine or science, it’s more cultural and political decisions.” The Finland head coach Jukka Jalonen said that the situation was affecting Anttila’s mental health. “We know that he’s fully healthy and that’s why we think that China, for some reason, won’t respect his human rights and that’s not a great situation,” he added. The Russian biathlon competitor Valeria Vasnetsova also recently expressed her experiences of being in a quarantine hotel, posting on Instagram: “My stomach hurts, I’m very pale and I have huge black circles around my eyes. I want all this to end. I cry every day. I’m very tired.” Vasnetsova posted a picture of what she said was “breakfast, lunch and dinner for five days already” – a tray with food including plain pasta, an orange sauce, a piece of meat on a bone, a few potatoes and no greens. Meanwhile, after the men’s downhill was postponed until Monday due to high winds, Germany’s coach Christian Schwaiger lamented there was no hot food available for athletes. “The catering is extremely questionable, because really it’s not catering at all,” he said. “I would have expected that the Olympic Committee is capable of providing hot meals. There are crisps, some nuts and chocolate and nothing else.” The IOC said it was aware of the complaint and was working with Beijing 2022 to address the issues. Asked about the situation in the Covid hotels, the IOC added: “We feel for every athlete who cannot compete because of a Covid-19 infection. The protocols have been put in place to ensure safe Olympic Games for everyone.”Thirty-odd years ago everyone was too busy listening to Vivaldi’s concertos to bother about his 90 or so operas. Two decades ago the operas began to appear in earnest on disc; now, with audiences ready to look beyond Handel for a baroque opera fix, they are reaching the stage. Bajazet is the first Vivaldi opera to be staged under the Royal Opera House’s roof, and if anyone needs persuading that this is a good idea then Adele Thomas’s production, a collaboration with Irish National Opera that has already toured Ireland for two weeks, should do the trick. Thomas adds a bit of helpful context with an opening monologue giving the story so far, introducing the title character as “the Thunderbolt of Allah” and his captor, Tamerlano, is a warlord descended from Genghis Khan. The ensuing story mainly milks the baroque opera tropes of love, betrayal and disguise, but it’s a credit to Thomas’s insightful direction and to the six-strong cast that we remain invested in it, rooting for Gianluca Margheri’s noble-sounding Bajazet and wondering what James Laing’s thuggish, volatile Tamerlano will do next. Molly O’Cathain’s set is basically a box made from slabs of glowing sandstone, and it loves the voices, especially that of the sweet-toned countertenor Eric Jurenas as the hapless go-between Andronico. The vocal highlight comes with the arrival of Claire Booth as the jilted Irene, brilliantly flinging off relentless cascades of notes in her first aria. This, in fact, isn’t by Vivaldi, but is one of several arias cherry-picked from other composers’ work, as was normal practice for time-pressed composers of this period; it is by Riccardo Broschi, who originally wrote it as a showpiece for his superstar brother Farinelli. Vivaldi kept the good characters for himself, though, and a contrasting highlight from his own pen is the aria for Bajazet’s daughter Asteria in which Niamh O’Sullivan’s velvety mezzo-soprano is doubled by a grainy solo violin; accompanied only by cello and theorbo, it’s a touching moment of quiet. Otherwise the orchestra, at floor level rather than in a pit, is strongly present. In recitatives, when Peter Whelan’s insistent harpsichord makes things rather opaque, it’s sometimes too present; in arias, when Whelan’s direction keeps energy levels strong and the phrasing purposeful, it’s just right. • At Linbury theatre, London, until 12 February.Tell Me How to Be Neel Patel Trapeze, £14.99, pp336 A fresh take on the split-perspective novel, Patel’s debut is written in short, sharp chapters narrated by Akash and his mother, Renu, both of whom are trying to work out their place in the world. Akash, a wannabe R&amp;B songwriter and heavy drinker, is plagued by shame for being gay, while Renu guiltily searches for her first love after her husband’s death. What this poignant tale lacks in finesse, it makes up for with soulful and convincing Indian-American characters . The Go-Between Osman Yousefzada Canongate, £14.99, pp368 Yousefzada’s journey from son of illiterate immigrant parents to artist and world-famous fashion designer is fascinating in itself. But in concentrating on his early years, he explores something more profound and universal: the search for identity. With a documentarian’s eye, he picks apart life in his devout Pashtun patriarchal community in 1980s Birmingham, taking on racism, gender roles, women’s rights, honour-based violence and so much more. The result is a remarkable insight into multicultural Britain and the pain inherent in following your own path. Time Song: Searching for Doggerland Julia Blackburn Vintage, £14.99, pp304 (paperback) This moving exploration of the huge landmass that once connected the east coast of England to Europe rightly won Blackburn awards nominations a few years ago. The pandemic delayed publication of the paperback, but Time Song is timeless - a beautifully crafted rumination on the strange yet comforting effect the fossils, found objects and vanished peoples have on both her imagination and sense of impermanence. The ethereal, meditative tone is complemented by Blackburn’s simple yet effective narrative poems, illustrated by intricate abstractions from Enrique Brinkmann. • To order Tell Me How to Be, The Go-Between or Time Song go to guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyJürgen Klopp savoured the “proper fairytale” of Harvey Elliott’s Liverpool comeback as the teenager scored his first goal for the club, 21 weeks after suffering a dislocated ankle, in a 3-1 win against Cardiff. Elliott was taken off on a stretcher in Liverpool’s September win at Leeds, prompting fears for his future in an injury of such apparent severity that Klopp declared it was one of his worst moments in the game. But the winger scored a high-class goal, 18 minutes into his return, while the debutant Luis Díaz began his Liverpool career with an assist for Takumi Minamino’s strike. “Coming on is a great step back, scoring the goal makes it a proper fairytale,” Klopp said. “Harvey Elliott’s goal was very touching. I have known him for a while now, I know what an incredible talent he is and an incredible kid he is. When we lost him at Leeds, it was one of the hardest moments of my career.” Klopp praised Elliott, 18, for the attitude he has shown during his comeback, adding: “There are so many things to do in this long period, you can do a lot of wrong things and luckily he did a lot right. He is still a fearless boy and a great footballer. When you are that young you deal with it better. Even on the first day, he was pretty much on the way back. “Probably his biggest talent is how ready he is mentally for all the things out there. He is a kid but on the pitch not so much. He was buzzing and waiting for this moment. When he got the injury, I saw him two days later at the training ground and I was in a worse mood than he was. He was saying, ‘Come on, boss, head up.’ He is an exceptional talent in a lot of departments.” Elliott paid particular tribute to Liverpool’s rehab physio. “The list goes on but one man most important is Joe Lewis, one of the physios,” he said. “He took me in the early hours until late at night and got me strong again.”On the ice Britain’s mixed curlers endured their worst performance of these Beijing Games as they were thumped 6-2 by Norway in their penultimate group match. Off it they discovered they had secured a place in the semi-finals on Monday despite this defeat. Funny old game, curling. Bruce Mouat and Jen Dodds were in the changing rooms when news of their qualification filtered through. Their first reaction was to give each other a hug. The second was to remind themselves that their job is only half done. So far they have played in fits and starts. They know that will no longer suffice in the business end of the tournament. “We found out when we were in the changing room. Jen was looking at her phone when she got a text saying we’d qualified, so we had a wee hug and tried not to get too excited,” said Mouat. Team GB have four potential semi-final opponents – Italy, Canada, Sweden or Norway – depending what happens in the final group games but Dodds insisted they did not mind who was next. The key, she stressed, was finding the highest notes. “I think we still have a wee bit to go until we hit our best,” she said. “We have not yet strung eight ends together. We had a couple of good ends here or there or poor ends. We are pretty confident we will do that. The knockouts are a new competition.” Meanwhile Australia’s curlers won two games back-to-back on Sunday – just a “crazy” few hours after being told they had to leave China due to a positive Covid test. With their bags packed after Tahli Gill returned a series of positive Covid-19 tests, she and her partner Dean Hewitt were given a dramatic reprieve. After racing to the venue they went on to beat Switzerland 9-6 before toppling Canada 10-8 later on Sunday. “It has literally been the craziest, craziest 24 hours,” Gill said. “My bags are still packed. I only just had time to pull out my uniforms. I was ruffling through my bags and ripping clothes out left, right and centre. I played with only one glove on – and it was the wrong one.” The reprieve came after the Chinese public health system changed their minds after determining the CT values in her PCR tests fell into an acceptable range. Gill had been showing no symptoms and the Australian team said medical advice was that it was at the end of the infection cycle, which meant she was free to board a flight later on Sunday and would be permitted through customs in Australia. “It was really devastating, given that I wasn’t infectious, but after review I’m so incredibly grateful to the medical team to get me out on the ice and I’m able to compete and finish off our campaign on a really positive note,” Gill said. “We put our hearts and souls into that game, to be able to come back with the win was really awesome.” Hewitt confirmed that the pair were readmitted to the competition just as they were preparing to leave for the airport. “We had a couple of phone calls that maybe there could be a chance. I was like, ‘Aw, don’t do this to us, please.’ Then we got the official call and we were like, ‘Are you serious?’ We had 15 minutes to get in the taxi. “It was just crazy, mayhem, getting the uniforms on. The excitement in the room was unbelievable. It was so exciting to be able to get back out on the ice and play these last two games. I’m just so proud of Tahli being able to step up in that game, because I don’t know how I would have been able to get through it myself.” Another Australian, Jakara Anthony, was also happy after winning a gold medal in the women’s mogul skiing. But there was joy, too, for Britain’s Makayla Gerken Schofield, who finished in what she called a “mind-blowing” eighth place. “I’m still speechless,” Makayla said. “I can’t really believe it, I don’t know when it’s going to sink in but I think there’s going to be a lot of tears. I wasn’t expecting it to go this well. To say that I’m top eight at the Olympics, I think that is pretty special.” In the men’s 30km skiathlon Andrew Musgrave could finish only 17th in a race won by the Russian Alexander Bolshunov. “It was ridiculous,” he said. “I wasn’t feeling too bad but in the classic section, Livo Niskanen and Bolshunov went so ridiculously fast that I had to push a bit too hard. “In altitude like this and on such abrasive snow, if you push a bit too hard, you’ve got no chance to recover. I didn’t feel too bad but it took me three laps to recover after going too fast in the classic section. I was so far behind.” Musgrave, who will next compete in the 15km Classic on Friday, also admitted: “It’s one of the slowest 30kms I’ve ever done. It felt horrifically hard but I just blew up after three laps there! It was a bit of a wild race.” He also praised the Russian gold medallist: “I wasn’t feeling too bad but the form Bolshunov is in at the moment is absolutely wild. We’re going to have to do something miraculous to beat him.” The final Team GB athlete in competition on Sunday, Rupert Staudinger, in the luge singles, finished 23rd overall. “It was good, I finished on a high,” he said. “I think today was my best run of the whole competition, so I’m really pleased with that.”Turns of phrase like “the role they were born to play” or “no actor could do it better” invariably sound a little twee, but by god they apply to Jack Black’s breathtakingly good performance in Bernie. Playing a Texan mortician in Richard Linklater’s 2011 film seems like the role Black’s entire career had been building towards, offering the actor, singer and comedian a semi-musical acting part that’s both boisterously loud and irresistibly sweet. Bernie, which I haven’t stopped thinking about or periodically rewatching since it arrived more than a decade ago, is a true crime comedy– an uncommon combination, given that true crime hardly screams “hilarity”. But there’s a strange brilliance in this shrewd and emotionally affecting production, for my money among the finest comedy films of the 21st century to date. At its core is an idea that seems rather perverse when distilled into a few words: what if a convicted killer, who really did do it, is actually a swell, big-hearted bloke? The film begins with Black’s real-life character, Bernie Tiede, totally in his element: lovingly preparing corpses while addressing a class of mortuary students. He removes nasal, ear and facial hair, then conceals the dead man’s teeth, explaining that visible chompers can create unintentional humour – and “you cannot have grief tragically become a comedy.” What are we to make of the film itself in those terms: the relationship between tragedy, grief and humour? It’s complicated. Tiede is a real man who committed a crime– as this is both a historical fact and tied to the film’s premise, it is hard to avoid spoilers. But knowing what happened going in – as I did – only heightens the satire of Linklater and Black’s portrayal of a fabulously nice and kind murderer. In 1996, Tiede shot dead 81-year-old widow Marjorie Nugent and stuffed her body into a freezer, where it was found nine months later. He then spent large amounts of her money, mostly on charities and civic activities. Nugent is brilliantly portrayed in the film by Shirley MacLaine as a crusty old bag who makes Ebenezer Scrooge seem magnanimous: a performance so good, so bitterly unlikeable, I imagine the great actor sucking the juice out of a lemon before the cameras rolled. The pair’s oddest-of-odd-couple friendship has a “sugar mumma” vibe about it, Bernie befriending the wealthy and widely loathed Nugent, becoming the heir to her estate, and traveling the world with her in the lap of luxury. Linklater frames the film as a campfire conversation about their relationship, regularly cutting to the townspeople of Carthage – mostly actors, but some playing themselves – who narrativise the couple’s lives, arranging the story to suit their biases, preconceptions and unashamedly pro-Bernie stance. The consensus is that a sweet, decent, giving man one day lost control, regretfully – but not unforgivably – shooting dead a crotchety miser who lived a life of meanness. Out to nab Bernie, and sickened by the community’s support of him, is a yee-haw district attorney, Danny Buck Davidson played by Matthew McConaughey, in another of the film’s pitch-perfect performances. Davidson successfully moved the trial to a different county, telling a journalist, “I’m not sure I can find 12 citizens in Panola County willing to convict Tiede.” In the film, he propels a counter message: Bernie is a killer, pure and simple, and murder can never be excused. To convince the jurors, Davidson amplifies his negative character assessment, and we have two extremes: the conservative townspeople standing by Bernie no matter what (despite him being “a little light in the loafers”, according to one local), and the DA screaming blue murder. The truth, like in most things, is probably somewhere in the middle. And while it’s no secret which side Linklater is on (Tiede even lived in the director’s garage when he was temporarily freed, before being resentenced to life in prison), the extent to which justice should be determined by the community or by the law is ultimately a matter for viewers to decide – if they can ever reach a conclusion, or want to stop rewatching an amazing film. Bernie is available to watch on Stan.A group of surfers riding the break is a quintessential image of Australian summer. I have wished I could be out there on a board with them for as long as I can remember. As a youngster I learned to ride skateboards, boogie boards and to ski. But learning to surf – especially now, on the wrong side of 50 – seemed out of reach. Still, on a four-week break in a seaside town, I decided to try anyway. The man at the Golden Breed store in Noosa Heads suggested a board that was long, wide and light enough to carry. I told myself that the shop was some sort of sign, as my first skateboard, circa 1979, had also been from Golden Breed. A month’s rental cost about $350, but buying a board was about $400. So I left the store with a new, 8ft 4in “foamie” named Darkhorse, and a pamphlet on surf etiquette. A quick internet search after my purchase told me Darkhorse featured reinforced polyethylene to give “stiffness and durability”, and was “designed to withstand heavy Hawaiian conditions”. None of which I really needed. Or so I thought. In the first year of Covid I had done a two-hour surfing lesson at Sydney’s Manly beach. The key messages were fairly simple: try to get from lying down to standing up in one go (the “pop-up”); look to where you want to go; lean on your front foot to accelerate and on your back foot to brake. Simple, right? The swell at Noosa Heads can be beautiful, and great for beginners. With my new rashie (make sure it goes to your elbows or you’ll get “foamie board-burn” on your arms), my freshly waxed Darkhorse (choose the right wax for the conditions – cool, warm, tropical etc), and a leg rope (attach it to whichever foot is at the back of the board), I paddled out. Layne Beachley I was not. Many wipeouts and a few milliseconds standing on the board made for a fairly exhausting first encounter. The pop-up was hard. Very hard. Especially when your upper body strength is not what it used to be. “Put your hands close together, under your body, and push up quickly,” a friendly surf instructor advised me as I wiped out through the middle of his private lesson with a 10-year-old. “And never, ever look down”. At night I Googled learn-to-surf videos and practised my pop-up on the carpet. But a few more days in the water got me pretty much nowhere. And then there was the first of three ocean curveballs. Overnight, the beach’s gentle, small waves were replaced with 8ft monsters, courtesy of Cyclone Seth, which had descended down the Queensland coast. I’d ridden a boogie board after a cyclone here in the 80s, but this was much more intense. Local surfers said the three days of big waves were some of the best they’d ever seen after a cyclone. The power was enough to dump a huge tree trunk on Noosa’s Main Beach. I stayed firmly on dry land. On the fourth or fifth day, the swell was all but gone, and I was back in the water, still struggling with my pop-up. And then, on a single wave I’ll never forget, I stood and surfed all the way to the beach. The glide was almost hypnotic. My brain didn’t really know how it happened, but my body somehow did. The end of week two brought a second curve-ball: another cyclone swell, this time from Cyclone Cody, 2,700km away, off Fiji, pulsing powerful waves and a strong tow. I took refuge in the small foam waves in beginners’ corner at the far end of the beach. Another instructor took pity on me, professing his want to “share the love of surfing”. “Be careful not to push on the rails (sides of the board) as it will tip over,” he said. As far as I can tell, there’s not really any timeline when learning to surf. As a longtime surfer friend told me, the only way you learn to do it is to just keep doing it. Over and over and over. The pop-up somehow becomes instinctive. Your strength improves each time. And if you are prepared to be unceremoniously dumped on a regular basis, things progress. The final ocean curveball was the aftermath of the tsunami caused by the eruption of the Hunga Tonga-Hunga Ha’apai undersea volcano off Tonga. Its impact locally was devastating. And from 3,000km away, its distant power could be felt in the waves and rips on Australia’s eastern seaboard. After the worst had passed, beginners’ corner at high tide was again my refuge. In four weeks I went from barely being able to push up to standing on most waves (admittedly not for very long). I still don’t really know how it happened. Somehow I had developed instincts about where and when to push up, and my feet seemed to know where to go. I did however manage to pop a rib out of place on my last day surfing. But it was just by jumping on the board, not wiping out. The local physio (also a surfer) told me to “work on my pop-up strength” before going out again. And that’s really the best advice I can give anyone wanting to learn to surf. Be as strong and as fit as you can when you try it. It exposes all sorts of muscles you either never knew you had, or hadn’t used in ages.Leigh Jorey was pretty successful in his mid-30s. A panel beater by trade, he’d completed an apprenticeship, owned his own tow truck company, and worked at it hard. His success didn’t stop him becoming homeless. In fact, it may have contributed to the problem. Under pressure, Jorey began to turn to less healthy ways of coping, which led him into a downward spiral. “Ultimately, that led to me being unable to manage tenancies, manage commitments, manage responsibilities – so it was easier to not have them,” Jorey tells Guardian Australia. “It was easier to live in squalid conditions, factories, people’s lounges, parks. I’d fall asleep at train stations. It was just easier not to have a commitment to anything.” Jorey would remain homeless for nearly 20 years. His story overlaps with thousands of others who have experienced homelessness, and a new report from the Australian Alliance to End Homelessness and the Centre for Social Impact has brought them together. Released on Monday, the report, titled Ending Homelessness in Australia: An Evidence and Policy Deep Dive, draws on surveys collected from 20,953 people who have come into contact with homelessness services across Australia over the past 10 years. Prof Paul Flatau, director of the Centre for Social Impact at the University of Western Australia and lead author of the report, says the dataset is the largest of its kind and the report marks the first time it has been analysed. “We have done lots of studies in the past but it’s usually on a relatively small number of people in the inner cities – a single place for one intervention – or it’s using census data, or data from one organisation,” Flatau says. “This is quite unique because it’s very big – a really large, deep and rich database that we can use to understand the circumstances and journeys of people in very precarious situations.” Of the 20,953 respondents experiencing homelessness, 35% were sleeping rough and 44% were in temporary accommodation or short-term accommodation. The average amount of time they reported experiencing homelessness was 3.8 years. For families, it was 1.9 years. Health was a principal issue, with prevalence rates of asthma, liver disease, dehydration, hepatitis, heart disease and diabetes among people who were homeless all higher than the general population. Almost a third of respondents (31%) said they had been taken to a hospital against their will for mental health reasons. More than a quarter (26%) of people said they had been discriminated against by homelessness or housing services due to their age, race, appearance, disabilities, gender identity or sexual orientation. Named after an international movement that aims to end homelessness, the Advance to Zero database also includes a mechanism to track individuals as they move through the system, which researchers say will deepen our understanding of the circumstances that lead someone into homelessness in the first place. For those familiar with the plight of people experiencing homelessness in Australia, the findings merely reinforce the urgency of the issue. “Being homeless takes away your dignity, firstly, so it puts you in a class of person that’s below the rest of society. To get back out is an absolute struggle,” Jorey says. “Without a home you can’t make appointments, you’ve got no way of structuring your life, you’ve got nothing that’s safe. Without a home, you’ve got no connection to a structured community – you’re living day by day with anyone you run into.” Support services for the newly housed is just as essential as the housing itself, Jorey says, as people coming out of homelessness will often struggle to manage medical appointments, engagements with social services, and otherwise keep their heads above water. The report’s authors, meanwhile, are calling for a new national strategy to end homelessness – something they say has been missing since the Rudd government released a white paper in 2008 called The Road Home. New funding is critical to address the massive shortfall in social and public housing, but actual housing needs to be matched with appropriate support services for those people who do finally end up with a secure roof over their heads. “We’ve seen the states and territories increase investment in public and community housing which is great but they’re still way below the actual targets,” Flatau says. “We need a national strategy with national targets, with good target setting and good monitoring. We need a federal government that takes homelessness seriously again.” “No one’s immune from being homeless,” Jorey says. Now 51, he works in a transitional housing organisation, supporting men who are coming out of prison. “It’s hard and you can’t have a one size fits all approach to it. Everyone has different needs.” Once you have a roof over your head, he says, that’s when you can start to work on other things, like mental and physical health, employment, and the kinds of life administration that often feel beyond your capacity when you’re on the street. “I think the main thing is to have the non-judgmental support from organisations to help you navigate the intricacies of maintaining a tenancy and looking after yourself. To help people feel comfortable and to feel they’re in a place that they do deserve to be, and that they’re worthy people – that they are important.”On 12 February 2019 the premier of Western Australia, Mark McGowan, attended a dinner with the board of Woodside – just a few weeks before two highly controversial decisions that would be worth billions for some of the biggest players in the WA gas industry, including Woodside. At the time, WA’s Environmental Protection Agency was finalising an important policy on offsets for the oil and gas industry. It released the policy on 7 March, declaring that large new projects must offset all their carbon emissions. If emissions were to go to net zero, the logical first step was to stop adding to the problem, the EPA argued. Industry opposition was instant and frenzied, led by Woodside’s then chief executive, Peter Coleman, and Kerry Stokes’s The West Australian. A week later, the EPA, which is set up as independent of the government of the day, withdrew the proposal for “further consultation”. Midway through that consultation, the minister for mining, Bill Johnson, announced a new policy – an “aspiration of net zero by 2050” rather than a target, which allowed proponents of major projects to propose their own targets and timeframes. The Australian Financial Review’s report was headlined: “WA moves to muzzle emissions watchdog”. The second decision related to a series of environmental approvals Woodside needed from the EPA to make its $15bn Scarborough/Burrup hub gas project a reality. The project involves opening up the Scarborough gas field off the west coast of the state, with a new pipeline to bring the gas to the Burrup peninsula, near Karratha. It would extend the life of the Pluto LNG terminal, which has been servicing other gas fields. Environmentalists have warned it would be Australia’s most polluting fossil fuel project and would make it almost impossible for WA to meet its stated aim of becoming a net zero emitter. ‘Really alarming’ The Burrup peninsula, which First Nations people refer to as Murujuga, is also home to the most extraordinary gallery of rock art. The petroglyphs carved into the reddish brown rock are thought to be 40,000 years old, but are already showing the effects of acid rain, which is caused by industrial activity at the site, including gas processing. On 1 July 2019, the EPA approved a key part of the project – extensions to the use of the Pluto and Northwest shelf gas terminals. The approvals were made under provisions in the WA Environment Act to deal with minor amendments, and no environmental assessment was required. But the Environmental Defenders Office, which is challenging the decision in the WA supreme court on behalf of the Conservation Council of WA, says the approvals are far from minor and would have the effect of extending the life of the facilities for 50 years. The council’s director, Piers Verstegen, says: “This is the most polluting fossil fuel project ever to be proposed in Australia. “It’s astonishing to think that a project of that level of international significance has been given backdoor approvals by the state government without any consideration or assessment or consultation with stakeholders,” he says. “It’s really alarming.” The case was heard over three days just before Christmas, with a decision to come within weeks. But in November McGowan said he would not let the ruling affect industries if the environment approval was found to be invalid. “We can’t have scores of industries close down because of a court ruling, so the state government will do what it has to do to make sure industries stay open,” the premier said. Asked whether McGowan would be prepared to change the environmental laws or pass special retrospective legislation for Woodside should the environmental groups win the case, a spokesperson for the premier said: “The matter will be handled by the state solicitor. As the matter is before the courts we are unable to comment. “The Environmental Protection Authority is independent, it is not subject to direction by the minister, and its advice to government is public. EPA members are not public servants.” McGowan has declined to comment on his attendance at the Woodside board dinner. “The McGowan government is committed to reaching net zero emissions by 2050 and is developing a credible pathway to get there. An unhealthy history Should we be surprised that the premier of WA was invited to dinner with the Woodside board? Isn’t rubbing shoulders with the state’s biggest employers and wealth creators what premiers do? That perhaps depends on one’s perspective on the role of our elected representatives. When it comes to projects with enormous economic, environmental and social impacts, perceptions of independence and the maintenance of public confidence in government impartiality are critical. In WA, the close relationship between elected representatives and businesses that form the economic engine of the state is so familiar it almost goes without comment. But the chumminess has not always been healthy. Under Labor’s Brian Burke, the WA government in the 1980s became enmeshed with a cohort of businessmen, including Alan Bond, Laurie Connell and John Roberts, who had become major donors to the ALP. The resulting scandal, known as WA Inc, led to a royal commission, which found some practices “were such as to place our governmental system at risk”. “Unfortunately, some of that conduct and some of those practices were peculiar to Western Australia; but there is no reason to believe that many of the fundamental questions raised by our inquiry were unique to this period or to this State,” the commission found. The McGowan government’s interactions do not involve investment of taxpayers’ money in ventures, as Burke’s did, nor is there any suggestion of improper conduct. But the deep connections between the fossil fuel industry and government raise legitimate questions about how relationships with business are managed. Revolving door Four of the past five WA premiers have had staff who worked for the Australian Petroleum Production and Exploration Association (Appea) before or after their positions as advisers to the premier. One of McGowan’s key political advisers, Kieran Murphy, spent nine years at Appea. McGowan’s former chief of staff of nine years, Guy Houston, departed in June 2021 for a job with WA’s dominant media owner, Kerry Stokes. Before working for McGowan, he was corporate communications and media adviser to the US energy company Chevron – a key player in the WA gas industry. At the March 2021 election the state’s treasurer and Aboriginal affairs minister, Ben Wyatt, an ally of McGowan, left politics and joined the boards of Woodside in June 2021 and Rio Tinto in September 2021. Wyatt’s appointments came as the state government prepared to introduce the revised Aboriginal Heritage Act – which Wyatt helped draft as the responsible minister – and ahead of a final decision by the environment minister on the Scarborough LNG project. There is no suggestion that Houston, Murphy or Wyatt have done anything wrong by making such career moves. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning From the companies’ point of view, Wyatt joining their boards was a coup. Rio was under pressure over its destruction of the Juukan Gorge heritage site; Woodside was on the brink of receiving an approval for Scarborough. Wyatt told the ABC at the time his work with Rio Tinto was not likely to cover mining operations, but instead focus on building relationships and making sure the organisation met community expectations. Wyatt acknowledged that the entire board was responsible for decision-making, but said “good governance practices allow directors to declare conflicts of interest and excuse themselves from deliberations on particular matters”. He said he did not make representations to former government colleagues and senior public servants on behalf of the companies, as both employed senior people to undertake government relations. “I decided to become a director of five organisations, all of which have very close and enduring relationships with Aboriginal people in the arts, health, sport and resources sectors. Prior to the tragedy of Juukan Gorge, Rio Tinto had a strong reputation for Indigenous affairs. I am determined that Rio restore their role as industry leaders in respect of relationships with traditional owners of the country on which the company operates.” But both appointments raised questions about whether a minister – or a senior staff member – should be permitted to move into jobs that potentially overlapped with immediate past portfolio responsibilities. The risks around confidential information and managing the relationship with former colleagues in such circumstances are obvious. WA, like NSW and the commonwealth, has restrictions on staff and ministers becoming registered lobbyists, but not on going to work for companies themselves. The 2021 WA ministerial code says only that ministers leaving government “should exercise care in taking up employment or business activities in the period immediately after leaving government”. It warns of accepting employment with companies with “which the departments or branches of government are, as a matter of course, in a special relationship”. It also warns about using confidential information gained during office and taking care to ensure that preferential treatment for the new employer or the business is not obtained by the use of contacts and personal influence by the former minister. A spokesperson for McGowan said: “All state government employees, including ministers, are expected to follow the guidelines and code of conduct provided by the department of premier and cabinet. “This code of conduct requires employees to act with integrity in the performance of official duties and declare any perceived or potential conflict of interests so that it can be managed accordingly.” Wyatt said: “I exercised due caution before I took on all five board roles that I hold. It is important to note that these are not executive roles. As governance roles they do not involve regular interactions with government.” Major donors to both sides Resources companies are regular donors to both main parties in the west, as elsewhere in Australia. The most recent data, for 2020-21, shows that Woodside gave the Liberals $82,000, the Nationals $42,000 and Labor $108,350. The donations, totalling more than $232,000, were spread between the federal and WA branches of the parties. Appea was also a major donor to both sides, contributing $107,00, while Chevron donated $74,650, also spread across the political spectrum. In previous years, the gas industy’s support for the WA ALP has been less direct, with donations going to the Perth Trades Hall Council, which then supported the WA ALP, and to the federal branch of the ALP. The federal ALP then rebated money to the WA branch. Data on the last six months, when several important decisions in relation to Woodside and the gas industry were taken by the McGowan government, won’t become public for another 12 months. A spokesperson for McGowan said: “Political donations are managed separately by the party.” The Waitsia decision In WA few people hold as much sway as Kerry Stokes. As the owner of the only daily newspaper and the highest rating television network, the website Perth Now and a stable of regional and community newspapers, Stokes has an outsized voice in WA politics. He also has substantial business interests beyond media. Seven Group Holdings owns the Australian Caterpillar franchise and Stokes has interests in oil and gas, through Beach Energy, which is developing the Waitsia onshore gas project with Japan’s Mitsui. In 2020 the McGowan government, fearing a shortage of domestic gas and rising prices, moved to tighten its domestic gas reservation policy. It required onshore gas to be sold in the domestic market, but made an exception for the Waitsia stage two project in the state’s midwest. It was permitted to sell some of its gas to the more lucrative LNG export market for a short period. McGowan abruptly ended a press conference in August 2020 when asked if he had discussed the Waitsia exemption with Kerry Stokes or his son, Ryan. Chief executive of Seven Group Holdings, Ryan Stokes, defended the Waitsia exemption as “absolutely” good for WA and employment, and put it down largely to a long-running engagement between Mitsui and the state government. McGowan also defended the exemption. “The Waitsia Gas Project Stage 2 in the midwest provided urgently needed jobs, royalties and economic stimulus for the region and the state, a spokesperson said in a statement to Guardian Australia. “The domestic gas arrangement enabled the project to get off the ground and in the long term deliver large volumes of domestic gas to support the state’s economy, assisting with the Covid-19 economic recovery. “From 2029, all remaining Waitsia reserves will be made available to the domestic market. The next Adani? But it is the Scarborough/Burrup LNG project that threatens to become the biggest focus for opponents of McGowan’s gas plans. The Conservation Council WA was once almost the lone voice of opposition, but since BHP and Woodside formally gave the green light for the massive investment in November, environmental groups around the country have begun mobilising against it. They say it will be Australia’s largest fossil fuel project and more polluting than Adani’s Carmichael coalmine. If CCWA wins its case before the WA supreme court, Woodside would probably be required to resubmit the environmental approvals for the gas terminals via a more comprehensive process involving detailed environmental assessments and public consultation. That could delay the project for a year or more, assuming Woodside gets its approval. That’s why McGowan is hinting at overriding an adverse finding for Woodside with legislation. Because of the project’s size, scale and forecast lifespan it means Australia’s progress toward net zero emissions by 2050 could be undone in a stroke of a pen. For now, McGowan enjoys wildly high support in his home state, thanks to his Covid strategy and a booming economy. But such a move could turn Scarborough into the next Adani, attracting national and international attention.Economics in Australia is frequently reduced to debates around government debt. Claims and counterclaims about profligacy and borrowings overlook several issues. First, the current scale of the debt is unprecedented outside of wars. At the end of 2021, global debt was US$295tn – 350% of everything the world produces in a year, compared with 282% in 2008. The major increase is in government debt, which has reached a record 99% of global output. US, eurozone and Japanese government debt is now at 103%, 98% and 257% of output respectively. Australia’s federal debt is forecast to peak at less than 40% of output by 2025, well below the average for advanced countries. But the number is deceptive. It excludes borrowings by state and local governments, which over the same period will rise to around 20% of output, but could be greater depending on state infrastructure spending. It disregards contingent liabilities, such as New South Wales’ controversial Transport Asset Holding Entity, which holds public transport assets helping improve the state’s finances. It ignores exposure to private-public partnerships used to finance infrastructure, which governments may have to support to ensure essential services. It overlooks implicit government guarantees for Australia’s “too big to fail” banking system, which is heavily exposed to households carrying debt of around 130% of output, among the world’s highest. Australia’s debt levels are also high considering a narrowly based economy, a limited tax base and overreliance on one trading partner – China. Second, rather than financing investments which would generate future income, much of Australia’s government debt has been used to finance recurrent expenditure, transfers and tax cuts – and, during Covid-19 lockdowns, to replace lost earnings. Third, excessive government borrowing limits economic flexibility. Higher rates would raise the commonwealth and state’s interest payments (already forecast to reach 1.4% of output over the next three years), reducing funds for other outlays. Rising debt levels reduce the capacity to deal with crises such as the pandemic and natural disasters. Fourth, individuals and businesses must satisfy lenders as to their income and repayment ability. In contrast, governments increasingly rely on central bank money creation to meet obligations. The Reserve Bank currently holds around a third of all government debt (over $300bn), mostly purchased since 2020. But fiscal deterioration and currency debasement risk loss of confidence among foreign investors who hold roughly two-thirds of federal government bonds, constraining access to overseas capital. Fifth, the options for managing the run-up in debt are limited. “Budget repair” (raising taxes or cutting expenditure) risks weakening already diminishing growth prospects. With economic activity requiring ever higher amounts of new debt, reining in borrowings could setting off a negative spiral damaging activity and government budgets. Other alternatives are equally unappealing. Inflation, effectively covert taxation, can help deleverage by boosting revenues and reducing purchasing power, but would hurt low income groups, exacerbate inequality and raise social tensions. Devaluations reduce the value of Australian government debt held by foreigners but would affect the cost of imports or the ability to borrow overseas. Default or debt restructuring, effectively national bankruptcy or former prime minister Paul Keating’s “banana republic”, is unthinkable. The historical experience of managing excessive debt is not encouraging. Between 1914 and 1939, the first world war and the Great Depression damaged public finances. Countries making up nearly half of global output defaulted or were forced to enter arrangements with creditors resulting in severe social and economic costs. After the second world war, some countries defaulted or experienced hyperinflation. Others resorted to capital controls, loan rationing and mandatory investment in government debt at below inflation rates. Strong growth driven by pent-up demand and post-war reconstruction, conditions not applicable today, helped control borrowing levels. While the now abandoned gold standard restricted policy choices then, substantial debt reduction still remains difficult. The problem is fundamentally behavioural. Voters love the lower taxes and state-provided goods and services funded by government borrowing rather than taxes. Over time, more and more borrowing with diminishing returns must be incurred just to maintain the status quo. Unfortunately, true prosperity cannot be built on excessive cheap credit. Since the 2008 global financial crisis, the world has perversely tried to solve the problems of debt with more borrowing. As philosopher Denis Diderot observed: “we swallow greedily any lie that flatters us, but we sip only little by little at a truth we find bitter.” Australian government debt has increased the most of any major economy this century, more than doubling over two decades. The nation faces perhaps another 10 years of budget deficits. While government borrowing is not yet unsustainable or irretrievable, an informed and considered discussion about the trajectory would not be amiss, preferably before that point is reached. Satyajit Das is a financier and author whose latest books include ‘A Banquet of Consequences – Reloaded (March 2021) and Fortune’s Fool: Australia’s Choices (forthcoming March 2022)The Sex Work Decriminalisation Act 2021 is set to be debated in Victoria’s parliament this week. The bill will repeal offences for consensual sex work, strengthen anti-discrimination protections for workers and allow the industry to be regulated using existing laws that apply to all other Victorian businesses. Here’s a closer look at the legislation. Isn’t sex work already legal in Victoria? Sex work is currently regulated under a legalised model, meaning it is only lawful if it takes place under conditions set out in the Sex Work Act 1994. Providers who operate a brothel or an escort agency, as well as sex workers who work independently, are required to obtain a licence to operate lawfully. All sex work that occurs outside this system, including street-based work, is unlawful. Sex Work Law Reform Victoria said the current model has created a “two-tiered industry”, with about 80% of workers operating outside the law. “The most disadvantaged sex workers, particularly migrant sex workers, gender diverse sex workers, they’re the ones that are usually in that illegal underground area and the consequences of that is many feel they are not able to report unfair work practices and crimes to police,” spokesperson, Matthew Roberts, said. For those workers operating legally, their details are permanently kept on a register, which can affect future employment prospects, show up on police checks and even interfere with custody cases. A 2019 review led by Fiona Patten, a Victorian upper house MP and former sex worker, recommended a full decriminalisation of the industry. “This bill reflects the recommendations of that review and essentially what it does is it treats sex work the same as any other work,” she said. “It is 40 years in the making.” Patten said the bill is “uniquely Victorian” but takes elements from legislation in the Northern Territory and New South Wales, where sex work was decriminalised in 2019 and 1995 respectively. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning How does the bill work? There are two stages. The first stage, which comes into effect in March, removes offences for consensual sex work, including those that relate to street-based work and public health. A new protected attribute of “profession, trade or occupation” is added to the Equal Opportunity Act and a clause making it lawful to refuse accommodation to a sex worker is removed. A new offence prevents street-based sex work from occurring at or near schools, childcare services and places of worship between 6am and 7pm and on holy days. The second stage of the bill, to come into effect in December 2023, dismantles the sex work licensing and registration framework by repealing the Sex Work Act in full. This means the industry will be regulated through standard planning, occupational health and safety and other regulations that apply to all businesses in Victoria. An updated definition of “commercial sexual services” is also inserted into the Crimes Act 1958, as are certain offences relating to children and coercion. The bill also orders the changes be reviewed no later than five years after stage two commences, with findings to be tabled in parliament. What’s been the reaction to the bill? Sex worker groups were consulted throughout the process and are largely supportive. Roberts said the changes to discrimination laws were especially “life changing”. “Sex workers at the moment experience rampant discrimination in all aspects of their life in banking, finance, accommodation, university or education settings, employment settings. If a sex worker wants to move out of the industry and find a job … there’s also discrimination there,” Roberts said. “There’s no mechanism to fight back, there’s no mechanism to dispute it. This particular amendment … will provide sex workers with that option.” Jules Kim, CEO of Scarlet Alliance, the national organisation for sex workers, pointed to a 2020 study conducted with the Centre for Social Research that found 96% of workers had experienced discrimination in the past 12 months. “The bill will go a long way in addressing these issues and improving our access to work health and safety, our access to redress in the same ways that other workers are able to,” she said. Animal Justice party MP Andy Meddick wants several amendments to the legislation, including the new offence preventing street work occurring at certain times or locations scrapped as it “directly contradicts the government’s stated intentions of making sex work safer”. Kim said the offence means sex workers will continue to be “harassed, surveilled, arrested and fined by the police”. Meddick is also seeking to amend the legislation to include a best practice definition of “sex work” and “sex worker”. The only definition in the bill is that being added to the Crimes Act and references drugs as a possible form of payment. Kim said it was “unnecessarily broad” and not a feature of the NT or NSW legislation. Meddick is also calling on the government to specify “sex work” and “sex workers” in the changes to the discrimination laws, ensure that Australia’s national advertising standards applies to sex workers and abolish the register, given it will no longer be used. The state government spokesperson said the register records will be destroyed in accordance with the requirements of the Public Records Act 1973. She said the definition of “commercial sexual services” has been broadened to capture different types of benefit, payment or reward that a person may receive in exchange for sex work and to ensure they are not forced or coerced into undertaking such work. Meddick consulted with Scarlett Alliance and Vixen Collective, Victoria’s peer-only sex worker organisation, in drafting the amendments. “Unfortunately the bill does fall short in some areas,” Vixen Collective acting manager Dylan O’Hara said. “It does need strengthening to ensure that all parts of our sex worker community can enjoy the benefits of decriminalisation. We need this to be full, genuine decriminalisation that extends to all sex workers.” Guardian Australia understands the opposition will move several amendments, as will the Justice Party, who want to prohibit certain individuals from owning and operating a brothel. Will it pass? Meddick, Patten, Greens leader Samantha Ratnam, the two Liberal Democratic MPs and Sustainable Australia’s Clifford Hayes are supporting it, providing the government with more than enough votes for it to pass the upper house.Rapid Covid tests will be made tax deductible for workers and businesses, but the treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, says other economic support measures must wind up as the economy returns to normal. In a major economic speech to the Australian Industry Group on Monday, the treasurer will also announce that he has tasked the Productivity Commission with undertaking another five-yearly review into reforms to enhance productivity. The speech from the treasurer comes ahead of the parliamentary sitting fortnight where the Coalition is expected to come under pressure from Labor over the government’s handling of the pandemic, including on rapid antigen test supplies and the crisis in aged care. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, will also come under fire for divisions within the government after revelations that the deputy prime minister, Barnaby Joyce, branded him a “liar and a hypocrite” in a message sent to the former Liberal staffer Brittany Higgins. On Sunday, Morrison said he “could not care less” about the text messages, as Labor’s shadow treasurer Jim Chalmers labelled the government a “smoking ruin of division and disunity”. In an attempt to recast the political narrative to the government’s economic management in the final sitting fortnight before the budget, Frydenberg will talk up the government’s health and economic response as being among the best in the world. “Our track record shows that we have got the big calls right – protecting lives and livelihoods but also ensuring our fiscal position remains strong,” Frydenberg will say, according to draft excerpts of the speech. Pointing to Australia’s falling unemployment rate, Frydenberg will highlight the increased mobility in the labour market, with government payroll data showing workers who had moved jobs “typically experienced pay increases of between 8 and 10%”. “They also move to more productive firms, helping those firms grow,” Frydenberg will say. “When workers are in high demand, businesses are more likely to invest in capital, making workers more productive and businesses more efficient. Frydenberg describes the movement of workers in the tight labour market as a “great reshuffle”, with the government’s jobkeeper payment avoiding the large number of job losses that had been seen in other economies hit by the Covid pandemic. Treasury figures show more than 1 million workers started new jobs in the three months to November 2021, with Australia’s unemployment rate now sitting at a 13-year low of 4.2%. At a speech to the National Press Club last week, Morrison flagged that an unemployment rate below 4% could be achieved in the second half of 2022, revising down expectations outlined in December’s mid year budget update of an unemployment rate of 4.25% by 2022-23. Frydenberg says the government’s decision to end jobkeeper was “not easy”, but the economic rebound following the end of lockdowns showed the move was necessary. He also says maintaining government spending at pandemic levels would end up doing more economic harm than good, and it is now time to “start confidently moving back towards normalised economic settings”. “The reality is the economy simply cannot be conditioned to the level of unprecedented support that has been required over the last two years,” Frydenberg will say. “This level of government intervention must not become entrenched and become a permanent feature of our system.” The treasurer’s speech will also raise the spectre of higher inflation, saying that workforce shortages and supply chain disruptions are exacerbating inflationary pressures in Australia, where inflation is sitting at 3.5% through the year to December. Inflation is rising faster than at any point in the past decade, with the cost of non-discretionary goods rising faster than discretionary goods, but is subdued compared to the US where inflation is now topping 7%. Morrison last week was unable to answer a question about the cost of a loaf of bread, a litre of petrol or a rapid Covid test, but said the government’s focus was on strong economic management that would keep the cost of living down. Frydenberg said that the “pandemic related challenges” of inflation, workforce shortages and supply chain disruptions would remain for most of the year, and would be the government’s focus in the March budget. RAT write-offs Under the changes to the tax system to allow for Covid tests to be tax deductible, both PCR and rapid antigen tests will be covered, with the scheme to apply from the 2021-22 financial year. This means that someone on a marginal tax rate of 32.5% will receive a refund at tax time of about $6.50 for every dual pack of RAT bought for $20. A small business would reduce its fringe benefit tax liability by about $20 for every dual pack of RATs bought for $20 and provided to employees. While there are limits to how tests can be claimed under current tax laws, the proposed amendments will clarify that all Covid tests bought for work-related purposes will be tax deductible for income earners, and exempt from FBT for businesses. “COVID-19 tests are an important tool being used by businesses to protect their workforce and to ensure they can keep their doors open and our supply chains running,” Frydenberg said. Chalmers said if Labor won the election the party would manage the budget more responsibly than the Liberals and Nationals. “We’ve put lots of thought into the economic conditions that we would inherit; skyrocketing cost of living, real wages going backwards, a trillion dollars of debt in the budget and not enough to show for it,” Chalmers told Sky News. The Productivity Commission review, which comes five years after the Shifting the Dial report completed in 2017, will examine the factors that have affected Australia’s productivity growth and set out a “roadmap” for future reform. The inquiry will undertake a public inquiry process and report within 12 months.This past week has marked five years since the first AFLW game was played. It is still far too easy to identify cracks in the league, including a lack of representation, a truncated season and an ongoing pursuit of pay parity. Equally, though, looking back also serves as a way of counting blessings. In five years, all AFL clubs now have a women’s side. The AFLW has gone from being a largely symbolic league moulded in the shape of the men’s competition to a very distinct and strategic offering for the AFL. Women and girls have signed up to play football in droves. The more remarkable story is what AFLW has come to represent. One cannot underestimate the relationship between women’s sport – and the AFLW specifically – and the rise of gender equity in this country. Thinking back to the lock-out crowd at that inaugural game in 2017, the statement being made by the more than 24,500 people who turned up to watch Carlton v Collingwood, was clear. It was time for women to come to the fore in new and exciting ways. If crowd numbers at subsequent games are an indication, many of the people at Ikon Park that night were not necessarily women’s football fans. Regardless, they flocked to the game, the atmosphere of which felt more like a summer ‘sit-in’ than a game of football. Everyone wanted to be there and make visible their support of what to many seemed like the start of a new herstory. In 2017, while America was reckoning with gender equity through the #MeToo and Time’s Up movements spearheaded by Hollywood and celebrity, Australia was grappling with its own feminism through the prism of sport. Like #MeToo, AFLW crashed onto our screens and into our consciousness. In the way in which #MeToo felt jolting to many, so too did the AFLW – despite the years of pioneering women laying the groundwork for both movements. The sight of women playing this brutish, physical game was perhaps one of the purest disruptions in women’s sport this country had seen. That it is hard to think about it in these terms now is itself a sign of the progress we have made. Similarly, it was not that long ago that the image of Tayla Harris kicking a football was sexualised to alarming degree, sparking a debate and subsequent progress around the sexualisation of women’s bodies in sport and online sexism and bullying. Even in AFL circles, the AFLW has brought gender equity conversations to the fore. Industry networks will know it was not long before the AFLW that the annual AFL Women’s Lunch was accompanied by swag bags for every guest with inclusions from sponsors of laundry powder, wine, make-up and lip gloss. These were at the time seen as significantly tone-deaf and symbolic of an AFL that had no understanding of women, womanhood and the desire of women in the industry to be taken seriously. In the same way that, for a long time, men’s sport was the prism through which we understood masculinity, women’s sport has a similar relationship to a distinctly Australian womanhood. Unlike AFLM’s relationship to masculinity (which is in the midst of its own evolution), AFLW has, it seems, have thrown open the doors of what is possible for many Australian women. As AFLW analyst and broadcaster Gemma Bastiani, who was working in the music industry in 2017 says “... I had spent seven years trying to figure out a way to make my passion for footy a career. That game [in 2017], and the AFLW as a whole, made me realise that there is just as much need for women in off-field roles as there is on”. AFLW has meant more women are not only playing but also broadcasting, coaching and leading. While the gains do not yet come close to equity, the AFLW’s existence over five years has pushed the conversation along. The AFLW is multitasking, in that it both symbolises gender equity and actively seeks it, and that is worthy of celebration. But what does ultimate progress look like? Perhaps it will be realised when the league and the women who play it are not asked to shoulder the representation of all women, feminism and gender equity, but are simply footballers. Earlier in the season, Carlton’s Darcy Vescio pointed to well-meaning commentary opining that improved playing standards were adding to the heavy “load” already carried by players. One wonders if the players themselves would prefer to simply ‘be’, and play without a generation’s expectations of progress and excellence on their shoulders? Still, in years to come, when we reflect on a decade’s worth of progress, we will perhaps talk about the AFLW in the same way we might our first female prime minister and that huge MCG crowd at the Women’s Twenty20 World Cup final on International Women’s Day.The Morrison government will restore ABC funding to 2018 levels, when Malcolm Turnbull imposed an $84m indexation pause, with the public broadcaster to be given $3.3bn for the next three years. The communications minister, Paul Fletcher, has also announced SBS will receive $953.7m, including an additional $37.5m in ongoing funding to support its long-term sustainability. Fletcher’s announcements follow a consultation process that commenced with the release of the government’s media reform green paper in November 2020. The triennium funding package includes $45.8m for the ABC’s enhanced news gathering program to continue public interest journalism in regional communities. “We’ve delivered an increase in funding for both national broadcasters compared to both the 2016-19 and 2019-22 funding period,” Fletcher said. “This funding commitment is designed to provide certainty for both broadcasters and is being announced well in advance of the next funding period to assist the ABC and SBS to develop their forward plans.” While funding remains stable between 2023 and 2026, the government will impose new reporting conditions on both public broadcasters. Statements of expectation will ask them to detail the levels of Australian content, and other key services. The ABC’s managing director David Anderson welcomed what he called “funding certainty”. “The $3.3bn over the next triennium, announced by the Minister Paul Fletcher, sees the resumption of indexation, the continuation of the Enhanced Newsgathering (ENG) program that provides vital services across the country, and ongoing support for audio description services for blind or visually impaired audiences,” he said. “ENG funding has delivered more tailored news to local communities and has seen the ABC invest more in specialist resources that provide vital context and analysis about issues that matter to all Australians.” ABC chair Ita Buttrose said she was “delighted” with the government’s funding decision. “It will allow the national broadcaster to continue doing what it does best – provide information and entertainment to Australians wherever they live,” she said. The Morrison government also announced a number of measures for media reform, including a scheme to make streaming services like Netflix invest at least 5% of their profits in Australian content and an extension of support for regional broadcasters and public interest journalism. Between 4,000 and 5,000 editorial roles have been lost since 2010 and “many regional and remote communities no longer have a local journalist present and do not receive coverage of local issues and events”, the media policy statement said. “This trend of service contractions and job losses accelerated through Covid, with some estimates suggesting that at least 1,000 journalists lost their jobs due to closures of smaller independent publications in 2020.” To support regional journalism a new journalist fund will also provide $10m over two years to support the hiring of cadet journalists in regional newsrooms. Screen Producers Australia has argued for a 20% quota of Australian content on streaming services as audiences have moved away from free-to-air television towards streaming on demand. “Australia is not alone in grappling with the challenge of safeguarding access to content with local cultural relevance in an increasingly globalised marketplace,” the paper on regulating streaming said. “A number of countries have implemented regulations on streaming services to incentivise or require the provision of local programming.” Guardian Australia reported last week that the majority of Australians would support restoring funding to the ABC after new figures showed it had been cut by $526m since the Coalition’s first budget. Despite being elected after promising no cuts to the ABC and SBS, the Abbott government reduced funding to the ABC in the 2014 budget, with a further pause in the indexation of funding imposed in 2018 under Turnbull.Last week I found myself saying: “No, I am telling the truth, I’m not doing a Boris Johnson.” Am I the first person to say this useful self-evident phrase? Richard Dimbleby Northampton • Boris Johnson apparently praised Munira Mirza as a “powerful nonsense detector” (3 February). Rather surprising then that it took her 14 years to detect the “nonsense’” right under her nose. David Cottee Cambridge • Mark Flinn (Letters, 4 February) observes that Simon Parkin did not mention in his long read the sinking of SS Arandora Star. In fact, Parkin writes about it vividly and at length in his book, The Island of Extraordinary Captives, on which the long read was based. Dr Peter Phillips Swansea • In the mining village that I lived in as a child, someone slightly unpopular with my parents was “badly liked” and someone more unpopular was “very badly liked” (Letters, 3 February). John Rippon Durham • Whenever someone asked my father if he would care for another drink, his reply was invariably “a bird never flew on one wing” – a saying that he said originated in his hometown of Dublin. Veronica McGregor Sudbury, Suffolk • You can’t have too many books (Letters, 4 February). The real problem is too few shelves. Jeremy Jago Nottingham • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.There are permanent public health measures that could reduce the Covid-19 worries of vulnerable people as infection-control measures are removed, as highlighted in your article (‘I don’t want to die’: the shielders who fear the end of Covid restrictions, 2 February). A proportion of train carriages could be reserved for people wearing masks, as in the era of smoking and non-smoking carriages. Downstairs on buses could serve passengers with masks, upstairs for those without. At supermarkets some tills could be reserved for queues of customers with masks. Cinemas and theatres could reserve a block of seats for those with masks. And so on. These could be permanent measures that benefit people who are keen to avoid infection and provide a safety option for others at times of heightened infection. This would also benefit the economy, since there are plenty of at-risk people, not least among Britain’s large pensioner population, who will withhold their spending from businesses unless such commonsense safety options are offered. Charles Patmore York • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Your report (4 February) on the rise in mental health problems among children was an incredibly important insight into the challenges they are facing. But for children and young people who have been in care, the situation is even more dire. Looked-after children are already at significantly higher risk of experiencing poor mental health than their peers. Despite there only being 67 children in care for every 10,000, these individuals make up 24% of the prison population and 25% of the homeless population in the UK. What’s more, as stated in a recent report by the children’s rights campaign Hope Instead of Handcuffs, young people who have spent time in care are significantly more likely than their peers to find themselves classified as not in education, employment or training. We have yet to see fully how these statistics will be impacted by the pandemic. But for “care-experienced” children, who often don’t have the same support networks as their peers, the months of isolation are likely to have exacted a heavy toll. Any policies to improve mental health among young people must provide specific provision for those in care. We cannot keep allowing them to slip through the cracks and have poorer life outcomes just because they have spent time in care. Sarah Champion Labour MP, Rotherham • Your report highlights the worrying effects of the Covid lockdowns. But it is also a symptom of 12 years of underfunding of child and adolescent mental health services (Camhs), which have been overwhelmed for many years. This leads to crisis management for life-threatening situations, and leaves many children with worsening symptoms without support. Domestic violence and parental mental illness play a big part in causing children to suffer emotionally. These factors will only increase as the cost-of-living crisis, cuts to universal credit and higher energy bills pile more pressure on struggling, vulnerable families. The government must provide more financial and social support to families if it is serious about protecting children and young people. Steven Walker Former Camhs lead, Anglia Ruskin University • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Amid all the discussion about how to mitigate the cost of energy price rises for households (Report, 3 February), there has been no mention of how to cut energy use in the first place. Rather than offset the cost by discounts, the money would be better used to reduce long-term energy consumption by making buildings as energy-efficient as possible and thereby helping to meet climate change commitments, too. It’s not rocket science. We can go a long way to improve the situation by ensuring lofts are insulated, windows are double-glazed and fit correctly, letterbox holes are plugged and external mailboxes fitted instead, draught excluders are fitted around wooden front doors, curtains have thermal linings etc. There are millions of Victorian terrace houses that have chilly external walls; simple internal battening and insulation can make a huge difference for a loss in internal space of only about 8cm. We need local councils to take the lead in instigating these works in partnership with voluntary organisations and householders and show what can be done. Just making thermal cameras available to borrow would be a good start. Also, building regulations need to be radically updated. We are still building homes with pathetic insulation despite many of them being labelled “sustainable” – what a joke. Diana Wilkins Bristol • Why have we not learned that privatising essential services is the wrong way to go? Energy companies, which have been happily pocketing their profits for decades, are now faced with a situation that they apparently could not anticipate and did not plan for, and suddenly they want to pass on the costs and consequences of their lack of foresight and basic business acumen to us longsuffering consumers. As essential service suppliers, these companies should focus on maintaining and improving their services, not on raking in huge profits while failing to plan for the future and then crying foul and bumping up their tariffs. We should shut the lot of them down and renationalise energy services with immediate effect. Andrew Knowles Manchester • It seems the government’s plan to alleviate the coming financial crisis caused by the massive rise in fuel prices will actually be a way to increase inequality. Everyone will have a £200 rebate, from the poorest to the richest. Council tax receipts for the most cash-strapped councils will reduce the most, as they have the fewest houses in the highest tax brackets. Surely the simplest way to direct help to those who need it most would be to reinstate the £20 uplift that was removed from universal credit in the autumn. In fact, increase it to £25. Hilary Lang Frome, Somerset • Re your report (3 February) on more energy price increases to come in the autumn, compare this with Energy de France (EDF) – around 70% of its energy is nuclear and profits are limited by the government and used to keep prices low. The increase in energy prices is forecast to be 4%. I’m a happy Welsh European, living in an egalitarian state that benefits the people. Dr Christopher Sait St Privat-en-Perigord, Dordogne, France • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.If talk in Edinburgh’s overflowing bars on Saturday evening was turning to thoughts of a long-overdue Six Nations title tilt, those tasked with guiding the next stage of Scotland’s journey were understandably keen to sound a note of caution. It is only 12 months since the Scots enjoyed a similarly giddy opening-day triumph against England at Twickenham – a far more comprehensive win than the 11-6 scoreline suggested. A week later Gregor Townsend’s charges led Wales 17-3 at Murrayfield before a combination of a disallowed try, a red card for Zander Fagerson and Louis Rees-Zammitt’s sensational finishing punctured all that early optimism in an agonising one-point defeat. After the helter-skelter Calcutta Cup victory on Saturday a wounded Wales, thoroughly outclassed by a dominant Ireland in Dublin, again provide the next hurdle to those ambitions of a credible challenge. Scotland may have won at an empty Parc y Scarlets in Llanelli during the Covid-delayed conclusion to the 2020 championship to end an 18-year losing run in Wales, but they have not won on their past 10 visits to the Principality Stadium – including eight in the Six Nations. “It’s one of the best places to play in the world and I hope there are some Scots booking trains and tickets because we could do with a few thousand supporters cheering us on,” said Townsend, who was part of the last Scotland side to win at the Cardiff citadel in 2002. “We know the atmosphere will be immense for the Welsh team, and Ireland haven’t done us any favours by getting them fired up. Wales are a great Six Nations team, they will learn a lot from their first game and they will be up for it, like we will. We just have to deliver a better performance and we know we will need to next week.” Townsend was in the highly unusual position of coming into this championship having all his frontline players available, in contrast to England and Wales, who will again be severely depleted. That has changed in at least one regard with Jamie Ritchie, one of the side’s vice-captains and widely regarded as Stuart Hogg’s most likely long-term successor, expected to miss the trip to Cardiff and possibly further games as he awaits the diagnosis of an injury to his hamstring and groin area. “When you’re on crutches and struggling to walk, it’s not looking great for Jamie just now; he’s in a lot of pain,” Townsend said of a player who has only missed one of Scotland’s 18 Tests since the 2019 World Cup – that home defeat by Wales last year. His absence will be a significant blow, but Townsend does have alternatives, if not a like-for-like replacement. The in-form Magnus Bradbury, who replaced Ritchie for the final quarter on Saturday, would bring extra ball-carrying heft to the party, while Sam Skinner, who came on at lock, has started at blindside for Scotland in the past. Given the loss of Ritchie’s breakdown expertise, though, this might be the time to bring the “exceptional” – Townsend’s description – Glasgow openside Rory Darge into the matchday 23. Despite showing buckets of character and defensive resolve, allied to some clinical moments in attack, this was not one of Scotland’s finest performances, and yet it still proved good enough to beat an England side who enjoyed the lion’s share of possession and territory. Townsend’s charges only really asserted themselves over a sustained period in the final quarter, aided by some forceful contributions from the bench and Finn Russell brilliantly dissecting the weak spots in England’s defence, which led to the momentum-turning penalty try conceded by Luke Cowan-Dickie. “I thought Finn was outstanding,” said Townsend, who assumed the fly-half would be named player of the match, only for the award to go to the No 8 Matt Fagerson, who manned the barricades superbly with 16 tackles in a bruising close-quarters battle. “Matt had a very good game, he was very strong in contact,” the head coach acknowledged. “But to play stand-off up in the heat of the defence, when England were coming up quickly and trying to put a lot of pressure on Finn, in those conditions I thought his decision-making was spot-on, and nailing his goal-kicks was crucial for us.” There were other standout contributions: the wing Darcy Graham was a constant thorn in England’s side, while Hogg again played a reassuring and composed captain’s hand. “If we are brutally honest, we didn’t show exactly what we are about, and I am quite excited about how far this group can go,” the full-back said. “We’re not going to get carried away but it’s definitely an exciting time to be part of this team. When we watch this game back, we will see areas we can improve on, which excites me. Wales are one of the best sides in world rugby and especially at home, so it is going to be one hell of a challenge next week but one we are ready for.”The chairman of Britain’s biggest supermarket chain has warned that “the worst is yet to come” on food price inflation, as he predicted it will soon hit 5%. John Allan, who has chaired Tesco since 2015, told the BBC’s Sunday Morning programme that he was well aware people on very tight budgets were having to choose between food and heating. He said the idea that this was happening was very troubling. Overall inflation currently stands at 5.4%, a 30-year high, and is predicted to top 6% in the spring, just one element of the cost of living crisis facing UK households. Poverty groups have warned about the impending threat to those on the lowest incomes. “In some ways the worst is still to come – because although food price inflation in Tesco last quarter was only 1%, we are impacted by rising energy prices. Our suppliers are impacted by rising energy prices. We’re doing all we can to offset it … but that’s the sort of number we’re talking about. Of course, 5%,” he said. Allan admitted some people would “of course” have less to spend on luxuries, as the price hikes coincide with a rise in national insurance contributions and the £693 increase in the average family’s annual energy bill, to £1,971, both of which come into effect in April. But he said grocers and suppliers were not immune to rising energy costs. A report this week from the British Retail Consortium said food inflation accelerated to 2.7% in January, up from 2.4% in December. Rising prices prompted the Bank of England to raise interest rates to 0.5% on Thursday, the same day the energy bill rise was announced and the chancellor unveiled a support package for households. Allan said: “I think the combination of increasing energy prices, the impact of national insurance increases on people’s incomes, and to a much much lesser extent increasing food prices, is going to squeeze the hardest-up still harder.” The former chair of the CBI also defended Tesco against claims from food poverty activist Jack Monroe that the costs of basic staples were rising faster than other goods. Allan said he could not speak for the rest of the industry, but said it was untrue at Tesco. “Price rises depend on individual products. Coffee is going up, but other things like the cheapest tin of baked beans in Tesco is cheaper than it was five years ago,” he said. In January, Tesco announced booming Christmas sales and said it expected profits could top £2.6bn, higher than predicted in previous guidance.You thought of him as a big-haired, Hawaiian-shirted master of one-liners. But it turns out, or so tonight’s story goes, that Milton Jones once worked as a spy. And maybe that makes sense – as much, at least, as anything else in this hour of brain-warping cartoon-comedy. Jones is clearly some kind of undercover agent in real life, eavesdropping on the English language and its infinite flexibilities while the rest of us merely use it. And exposure to his word and mind-play is as destabilising as anything Le Carré threw at us. Nothing he says can be trusted. Nothing is at it seems. In Milton Impossible, I found the experience – failing to second-guess the punchlines, enjoying the actual punchlines (so much better than I anticipated!) – delightful. The twisty little lexical tricks just keep coming, one figure-of-speech after another (“I don’t know how some people sleep at night”; “Remove cardboard sleeve and film”) plunging into the vacuum left after Jones tugs their foundations out from under them. One begins, dizzily, to doubt that any of our linguistic certainties are secure against his subversion – until Jones changes the rhythm, with an interrogation scene played out with two collapsible legs and a rotating chair, say, or a series of gnomic dialogues between UN member states. The latter enables a rare flash of satire from Jones, as the EU’s simple question about Brexit (“how do you think it’s all going?”) elicits a very testy British response. More often, whatever Jones really thinks about the world is deeply buried in whimsy, as he strings together puns, sound effects and on-screen visual gags into an account of his wayward career in espionage. Before the show’s rather abrupt ending, that Secret Service tale is tenuous in the extreme, even more so than on previous occasions when Jones has jerry-built a narrative framework for his gags. But no matter – the tenuousness is part of the fun. And the fun is abundant in a show that springs surprises from the blandest phrases and parades one bizarre image after another before your mind’s eye. He makes an unlikely spy – but you’ll leave Smiley. • Milton Jones is at the Grand, Lancaster, on 8 February, then touring.The serial killer Levi Bellfield has reportedly penned a letter confessing to the murders of mother and daughter Lin and Megan Russell in 1996. The Sun revealed that lawyers acting for Michael Stone, who has twice been found guilty of the murders of Lin and Megan in Kent, have claimed to have received a statement written by Bellfield detailing the killings. Lin and her daughters, six-year-old Megan and nine-year-old Josie, were attacked in Chillenden before being bound, blindfolded and bludgeoned with a claw hammer. Stone was convicted of two counts of murder and one of attempted murder in 1998, and again in 2001 after the court of appeal quashed his conviction due to doubts over a prosecution witness. An application to the Criminal Cases Review Commission (CCRC), the miscarriage of justice watchdog, was rejected in 2010. But the CCRC is considering an application from Stone after fresh evidence emerged, including a shoelace from the crime scene found in police storage in 2020, which Stone’s lawyers say could provide crucial DNA evidence. In response to reports that Bellfield had confessed to the Russell murders, the CCRC said it was aware that Stone’s lawyers were “planning to send in further information”. A CCRC spokesperson said: “Mr Stone’s current application to the CCRC is being reviewed and we remain in regular contact with his legal representatives. We are aware they are planning to send in further information, and when received, we will thoroughly analyse it and make any appropriate enquiries. We will not be commenting further at this stage.” Bellfield is serving one whole-life order for the murder of 13-year-old Milly Dowler, who in 2002 went missing from Walton-on-Thames, Surrey, and another for the murders of Marsha McDonnell and Amelie Delagrange. He is also convicted of the attempted murder of Kate Sheedy. A comprehensive investigation has previously been carried out by the Metropolitan police into allegations that Bellfield was involved in the Russell murders. It concluded there was no evidence to support the claims. Det Ch Supt Paul Fotheringham of Kent police said: “Following two trials at which Stone was found guilty by a jury on both occasions, and an appeal to the high court, Michael Stone remains convicted of the murders of Lin and Megan Russell, and the attempted murder of Josie Russell in 1996. “Michael Stone made an application to apply for a judicial review in respect of his conviction in September 2012. The honourable Mr Justice Blake ordered that permission for the application should be refused. “The [CCRC] commenced an extensive re-examination of the murder investigation in 2017 and has had access to all forensic evidence, documentation and exhibits from the original investigation, the review by Hampshire constabulary, details of the two crown court trials and appeals to the high court. “The shoelace which was seized as part of the original investigation was made available to the CCRC. All evidence from the examinations on the shoelace were recorded and disclosed to the CCRC.”My friend Andy Ross, who has died aged 65 after treatment for cancer, was a hugely respected music industry executive. He worked with some of the biggest names in the business and was instrumental in the famous Blur vs Oasis chart battle in the 1990s, when the Britpop bands released new singles on the same day in a race for the No 1 slot. The elder son of Ian Ross, a draughtsman in the oil industry, and Marlene (nee Bates, now Williamson), a secretary at the London Management entertainment company, Andy was born in Upper Norwood, south London, and gained a scholarship to Dulwich college. He and I met in 1977 in Leicester, where he was studying social and economic history at the university, while I was at the poly. His band the Disco Zombies were looking for a singer and I was looking for a band. We became enthusiastic sparring partners, champions of sarcasm and irony, Andy utilising his skills as a mimic to amuse. We moved to London and he got a job in a record shop in Forest Hill, quickly followed by a stint as manager of the bookies next door. He launched the indie label South Circular Records with our single Drums Over London in 1978; his lyrics way too clever for our own good. Andy was obsessed with music, always enthusiastic for something new, and could spot a tune from the briefest of listens. He wrote under the pseudonym Andy Hurt and joined me in the mid-80s at Sounds magazine, where he excelled in punning and later invented the phrase “shoegazing” to describe bands who stared at their feet rather than the audience. He was introduced to (the ex-Teardrop Explodes member) Dave Balfe, who recognised Andy’s understanding of how songs work and partnered with him in 1986 in Food Records, which became one of the biggest “indie” labels of its time. They then did a groundbreaking deal with EMI and had huge success with artists such as Jesus Jones, Diesel Park West, Shampoo, Dubstar and Idlewild. Most famously, Andy discovered Blur in March 1990, after seeing them play the Powerhaus in Islington the previous November – he persuaded them to change their name from Seymour to Blur. The band would go on to sell millions of records worldwide. The label released 100 consecutive top 100 singles, an outstanding achievement, and their roster achieved many No 1 records and awards. Andy loved the art of the song, and his advice and pontifications on how they should sound inspired a host of bands. He stayed with Food until EMI/Parlophone took full control in 2000. In the early days of the label he met Helen Potter, and they had a wonderful 30-year relationship, enjoying travelling as well as socialising with their huge circle of friends. The Disco Zombies had reunited in recent years and we played our last show at the Dublin Castle pub in Camden in 2018, a little older, none the wiser. Andy was also involved in band management, enjoyed football and quizzes – he even appeared on Only Connect – and had a show on Boogaloo Radio in north London. He is survived by Helen, whom he married in 2004, his parents, and his brother, Simon.Just like old times; well, a little bit, at least. Adama Traoré is back, Xavi Hernández is back, and Dani Alves is back. Even Luis Suárez was back in front of the Camp Nou fans and scoring, another familiar face to go with the new ones here. It would be a stretch to suggest that FC Barcelona are back – it would be absurd, in fact – but this victory was their first against Atlético Madrid in five meetings, lifting them over Diego Simeone’s side and into a Champions League place they have not looked like occupying all season. Just as importantly, it was as much fun as they have had for a long time. Traoré, the kid who played his last and until now only league game for the club in the 2013-14 season, returned for his second debut and for a while ripped into Atlético, providing an assist as Barcelona came from behind to win 4-2. Alves, who last scored here in 2015, assisted, scored, leapt into Xavi’s arms, and was sent off. And even Jordi Alba got on the scoresheet on an afternoon where fans might have wondered what year it is. Mostly, though, they just enjoyed it, singing their way to the final whistle, wondering if maybe, just maybe, a team may be forming here after all. Because if their vulnerability remains, if they were made to suffer a little in the second half, this was an enjoyable afternoon in the sun, one that perhaps promised more. They had only been out there a hundred seconds when Traoré was dumped on the floor for the first time – and, it would turn out, the last. If that suggested that Atlético were aware of the threat he could pose, it didn’t mean that they were able to stop him. He just got up, dusted himself down, and ran at them over and over again, a storm brewing on the right that Yannick Carrasco momentarily bamboozling him with a nutmeg could not avoid. That even Carrasco scoring to give Atlético an early lead couldn’t, in fact. A neatly weighted pass from Suárez made it. Back in front of the Camp Nou fans for the first time, he bent the ball into the path of Yannick Carrasco to sweep first time beyond Marc Andre ter Stegen from close range. The game was just seven minutes and Simeone’s side had the lead but it didn’t last. And if Carrasco was decisive there, attacking on the right, as time went on, he would appear more often in the opposite corner, trying to help Mario Hermoso’s attempt to hold back the tide. Almost immediately, Barcelona were level. Alves and Alba – combined age, over 70 – connected, he Brazilian clipping a gorgeous ball over to the other full-back to volley an equally gorgeous shot into the net. It looked like that, at last – in truth it might have hit his shin – and Alba was off and running, gesturing for his critics to keep talking. Why would they? Watching this was much more fun. They weren’t even halfway through the first period and it could early have been 2-2 or 3-3. Instead, it was 2-1 to Barcelona. Joâo Felix curled just wide and then scuffed a glorious chance deep inside the Barcelona area. Between those two efforts, Traoré had set off, stopped, set off again and clipped an impeccable cross onto the head of Gavi. Next, Pedri skied his effort. Barcelona had the ball, and they moved it fast. Too fast for Atlético, Jan Oblak and Carrasco almost tying themselves in knots soon after. Traoré tore into Hermoso, especially when Alves came to join him. At 38, the legs and the lungs may not work the way they once did but the head does, the feet too. Nobody reads the game like him, the awareness and intelligence an all-too-overlooked part of his armoury. His filtered pass saw Ferran Torres hit over and just before half-time he provided the free-kick from which Gerard Piqué headed against the bar. Torres could not connect with the rebound, but Ronald Araújo could, smashing in the third. Alves then had a moment of his own, one that was all of theirs. He crashed in the shot after neat work from Gavi, 21 years his junior, and the Camp Nou almost came down. Racing to the touchline, wearing that grin and chased by his teammates, Alves embraced Xavi – a teammate last time he was here, his coach now – and then everyone else, too. They were enjoying this, the volume rising only to be silenced when the man who scored 198 goals for them now scored against them for the second time. He might have got another not long after, but sliced the kind of shot that usually ends up in the net. Atlético, though, were awake now, given hope: all the more so when Alves was sent off with 20 minutes to go after he caught Carrasco high on the calf with a full set of studs. Alves left, shaking his head, the crowd chanting his name but it was a poor challenge, an error that threatened to be costly. Atlético had reacted well and were taking the game to a team that still look vulnerable at the back. The threat never fully materialised, though, and Barcelona saw it out, noise rising around this arena. It seemed it was a match now but then it had been from the start and, boy, was it good. A bit like it used to be.Supposedly this was a question of how many tries France would score; how quickly they would emulate the bonus-point victory achieved by Ireland against Wales on Saturday. As it turned out, a coherent and brave effort by Italy on a sodden afternoon in Paris made it more difficult than expected. For all the talk of a “New England” and despite their 27-point defeat, perhaps it is Kieran Crowley’s Italy who are starting afresh. They were ultimately overwhelmed by the tournament favourites’ intensity and muscle, and Gabin Villière’s hat-trick, but can be proud of how they competed. “I think today’s performance was very, very good in some aspects,” Crowley said. “But there was some consistency in certain areas that let us down. France suffocated us in that second half [but] it’s a good base for us moving forward.” Juan Ignacio Brex’s early charge hinted at Italian intentions before the French full-back Melvyn Jaminet opened the scoring with a penalty. Les Bleus’ first attempt to run the ball looked ominous, Romain Ntamack finding Gaël Fickou in the Italian 22, whose angled grubber narrowly evaded Villière. But when Jaminet failed to gather Stephen Varney’s box kick, Federico Ruzza pounced and carried into the French 22. Paolo Garbisi launched a cross-kick right, where the debutant Tommaso Menoncello did remarkably well to catch and dot down. Garbisi drilled the conversion through the sticks as Italy – and any neutral viewer hoping to witness a contest – rejoiced. Cameron Woki was soon spoiling Italian lineout ball before Varney’s improvised pass was stolen by Anthony Jelonch, who sprinted clear and dived over. Another Garbisi penalty edged the Azzurri back ahead. As the first-half clock turned red France kicked a penalty for the corner and then came a glimmer of vintage French flair, the ball gliding through the hands of Jonathan Danty, Ntamack and wing Damian Penaud. Villière made use of the drenched pitch to dive early and slide in. Another cultured strike off the tee by Jaminet made it 18-10 at half-time. Danty crashed to within inches of the line for France two minutes after the break – Italy escaped – but when Garbisi was turned over, Antoine Dupont displayed his freakish strength before a wondrous offload by Grégory Alldritt had Villière jinking to the line again. It was 23-10 but the floodgates failed to open. Italy remained within two converted scores for nearly 20 minutes but the French bonus point was secured with 12 minutes left, Penaud and Dupont exchanging passes and tearing down the right for Penaud to score. Beyond 80 minutes, Villière sealed an eye-catching hat-trick. Fabien Galthié, absent after testing positive for Covid-19, has seen his team tested before the potentially crucial match against Ireland on Saturday. “It’s a very satisfying victory,” said Galthié’s deputy, Raphaël Ibañez. “Five tries and five points to kick-start the Six Nations.” Dupont, asked if France or Ireland are favourites for next week, grinned and said: “It’s up to you [the media] to answer that question. We just have to focus on the game.”The violinist Julia Fischer is artist-in-residence with the London Philharmonic this spring. Her first group of concerts with the orchestra focusses on Mozart, with all five of his solo-violin concertos spread across three programmes. In the second of them, with Thomas Søndergård conducting, she played the fifth concerto, in A major, K219, as well as the Sinfonia Concertante for violin and viola, K364. There is no doubting the technical security of Fischer’s playing, nor the understated authority of her musicianship. But her account of the concerto was unsmiling and short on charm. With rather curt, peremptory phrasing, emotions kept on the shortest rein and little inclination to relish moments of lyricism even in the central Adagio, it was all oddly joyless. Joined by the violist Nils Mönkemeyer for the Sinfonia Concertante, Fischer did seem more relaxed, though there was still something rather perfunctory about their performance. On this evidence Mönkemeyer isn’t an expansively expressive player either, and there was little of the playful give-and-take one associates with the best performances of this extraordinary work, let alone any obvious attempt to explore the depths of its slow movement, perhaps the most profound music Mozart had written up to that point in his life. It was left to Søndergård to inject a bit of life into the evening. He’d opened the concert with a suitably bright and brash account of the overture to Mozart’s Die Entführung aus dem Serail – tying in nicely with the “Turkish music” episode in the finale of the A major concerto. Then, with the LPO forces almost doubled in size just for this one work, he closed it with a brilliantly coloured romp through Strauss’s tone poem Till Eulenspiegel, depicting each of its picaresque episodes with sardonic vividness. A further concert in the series will be held on 12 February.In July 2018, Tara Joseph, president of the American Chamber of Commerce in Hong Kong, wrote an article in the best-known local English-language newspaper, the South China Morning Post, stressing to Americans the territory’s unique position as an Asian business hub. “The US is forgetting the differences between Hong Kong and China. Let’s remind them,” she wrote. “Hong Kong continues to have a robust and hearty infrastructure of values, practices and institutions that could not contrast more starkly with those of the mainland system.” Now, packing up and leaving the city after more than 20 years there, Joseph listed “dizzying changes” since that op-ed. In 2019, the “anti-extradition bill protests kicked things off … then we had worsening US-China relations … now there’s Covid.” For Joseph, Hong Kong’s stringent zero-Covid rules were the final trigger for her departure. She joins a growing list of American expats who have either left the territory or are pondering going. According to a recent survey by the American Chamber of Commerce, 44% of members were thinking of leaving Hong Kong due to the territory’s strict pandemic rules. Of the companies surveyed, 26% said they were considering relocation. “One of the things that’s really hurting at this point is there seems to be no light at the end of the tunnel,” Joseph said. The administration of Carrie Lam, the territory’s chief executive, has insisted that its coronavirus rules will not affect Hong Kong’s standing as a business hub. But Willie Walsh, director general of the International Air Transport Association, said last month that travel restrictions were leaving the territory “increasingly isolated”. Yet for many Hong Kong-based businesses, the Covid-induced separation is just the latest in a series of complications they have faced. Since Beijing imposed the national security law in the summer of 2020, executives say there has been a growing sense of uncertainty among businesses, both local or foreign. The authorities insist the law brought the territory “back on the right track” following months of street protests in 2019 and was necessary to ensure the national security of China. The law matches a series of crimes including secession, subversion, terrorism and collusion with foreign forces, with penalties as severe as life in prison. Opponents have criticised its broad scope as “draconian”. Alina Smith (not her real name), a senior executive from the US, said that although the law does not directly affect most firms, the aftermath of its passage has created more uncertainties in the operating environment and had left firms facing “a very special conundrum”. Smith has been living and working in Hong Kong for more than a decade. She said that until recently, the business community there did not have to worry too much. “We were able to put our heads down and do business. Now, we have to play all sides,” she said. “But this is a mission impossible, and you also don’t know where the line is these days.” More than three years of protests, the national security law’s imposition and Covid restrictions have had their effect on Hong Kong’s once freewheeling business community, Smith added. “And in particular for those who also operate in China, you have to toe the government line. But the irony is that if you toe the Beijing line, Washington will be unhappy. “So what are you going to do? Well, just don’t say anything … Meanwhile, we are watching more of our friends leave because the territory has changed. As some say, ‘It’s now not a question of whether, but when.’” Political capital vs ‘capital capital’ Not all businesses feel the need to hide their political leanings, however. Some – for example the London-headquartered banking giants HSBC and Standard Chartered – have already articulated their position. “We respect and support laws and regulations that will enable Hong Kong to recover and rebuild the economy and, at the same time, maintain the principle of ‘one country, two systems’,” HSBC said in 2020. Around the same time, Standard Chartered said: “We believe the national security law can help maintain the long-term economic and social stability of Hong Kong.” These public political statements did not go down well in the UK, which had opposed the law. After the HSBC statement, the then foreign secretary, Dominic Raab, said his government “will not sacrifice the people of Hong Kong over the altar of banker bonuses”. “Everyone is walking a fine line here, and I’m afraid things aren’t going to get better,” said Prof Bhaskar Chakravorti, dean of global business at the Fletcher School at Tufts University in Boston. “Businesses these days feel they need to balance between their political capital and their ‘capital capital’.” Perhaps the thorniest issue confronting many China-facing businesses in Hong Kong in the past year is Xinjiang: the far-west Chinese province where UN experts and rights groups estimate that more than 1 million people, mainly Uyghurs and members of other Muslim minorities, are being incarcerated. While Beijing has denied all accusations of human rights abuses in the region, last summer the US Senate passed a bill to ban imports from Xinjiang. This has immediately affected those work in supply chain and sourcing. For decades, Hong Kong has been Asia’s leading sourcing hub, through which materials move in and out of mainland China. Now the increasingly hostile exchanges between Washington and Beijing are forcing the sector to pick a side, analysts say. While many smaller businesses, such as Smith’s, refuse to engage in making public statements on controversial issues, others, in particular big apparel brands, have been caught in the crosshairs. Last March, the Swedish clothing chain H&amp;M was singled out by China’s state media and faced a huge backlash after it expressed concern about Beijing’s alleged use of forced labour in cotton production in Xinjiang. Immediately, some Chinese internet users called for a boycott and e-commerce platforms dropped sales of H&amp;M. The world’s second-largest global clothing retailer saw its revenues drop significantly as a result. It later indirectly addressed the controversy in its 2021 first-quarter earnings report: “We are dedicated to regaining the trust and confidence of our customers, colleagues, and business partners in China.” Such conflicts are not limited to Chinese territory. Late last year, the US short-term holiday rental company Airbnb was found by US media to be listing more than a dozen properties on land owned by the Xinjiang paramilitary corporation, which was sanctioned by Washington over its alleged involvement in mass human rights abuses. The US outlet Axios said the company was at risk of exposure to US regulations preventing business dealings with sanctioned entities. Airbnb, which also sponsors the 2022 Beijing Winter Olympics, said US rules required it to “screen the parties we are transacting with, not the underlying landowners”. “Increasingly, sourcing and supply chain businesses don’t have an option. Yes, they can have their concerns, and some could move to Singapore or South Korea, but their businesses are fixed pipelines. It’d be extremely costly to change that, and Beijing understands it,” Chakravorti said. “To most players, they are just stuck.” Despite the politics and the pandemic, Joseph said the Chinese market was just too lucrative for ambitious Hong Kong-based executives to miss. “The Hong Kong I have known for 20 years has been going, going and gone. A new Hong Kong is emerging. Now it’s a very painful period of time,” she said. “But in many ways Hong Kong is still a big business hub. After all, capital flows don’t have to wear a mask; money doesn’t have to wear a mask.”Here’s Luke McLaughlin’s full match report Italy captain Michele Lamaro is giving his thoughts “Consistency is what changes a game like this. France created a lot, we were pretty good in defence and physically, but we need to improve our consistency. Definitely a better performance than last year and we faced them with all we have, but still lots of things to work on. What we did last week to prepare for this game is clearly not enough, so we need to prepare more and different for England.” Raphael Ibanez has more to say about France. “After 2o minutes you could tell we were lacking game time together, but after a while it was good - five tries and some good moments. We need to step up in every department and we will be working on addressing discipline. Ireland are next and they are not fourth in the rankings for nothing, which their performance yesteday showed.” France lock, Paul Willemse, is here “We are happy with the result even though there’s a few things we need sort out like closing the play and finishing possession in the 22. Italy really brought it in defence and they are tough to play against.” PEEEEEEEEEP! That’s the last play of the match as France in the end win very comfortably. 80+2 mins. One final lineout from France in the Italy 22 is taken into the maul once more. Lucu fires it to Ntamack and he does the same onto Villiere. The scrambling Azzuri defence blocks it off before the ball goes all the way right, but imprecision means there’s no way through for France. All the way left it comes again and this time Villiere has a free run into the corner for his hat-trick. Ntamack adds the two. 78 mins. Italy are having their best period for a while; their scrum is doing a good job and Brex very nearly nicked the ball from Ntamack with his line speed. But, the game is dripping towards the end now. 75 mins. Thomas Ramos replaces Melvyn Jaminet at fullback for France. 74 mins. Some decent possession won from the lineout is completely ruined by Garbisi executing a daft chip left when he only had about 15 metres to work in and France had it completely covered. It was like a cross-kick if the main purpose of it was to make you cross. 72 mins. Italy are in the France 22 (?!), and are doing such a decent job in the phases that they force France offside. They send it to the corner. 70 mins. Subs for France. Alldritt, who has once again been a powerhouse dynamo all game is off for Francois Cros. Dupont is given a break, replaced by Maxime Lucu 69 mins. Ntamack fizzes a pass to Yoram Moefana who pops to Penaud to set him free on the right touchline. The winger looks inside to find Dupont on the support line and the scrum-half pops it back to Penaud to run in and score. Jaminet converts. 64 mins. Penaud, as he is wont to do, drifts off his wing and glides through a gap in the thirteen channel. He bears down on Padovani, chips it forward and is clattered on the chase but the ref rules he more ran into than was run into. Italy have replaced Stephen Varney with Callum Braley. 61 mins. Substitute Pettinelli has a big carry from the base of the scrum in his own 22 to set up some decent possession for Italy. But it comes to nowt as the next pass bounces off Garbisi to Alldritt and France are back into the 22. A cross kick from Ntamack is this close to being gathered by Penaud with the tryline for the taking 58 mins. A mexican wave has started, which tells you everything you need to know about this second half thus far. Might start doing one myself, alternating my arms. 57 mins. The France eight marmalise the Italian scrum but can do nothing on the penalty advantage. More Subs for France: Peato Mauvaka is on or Marchand and Yoram Moefana replaces Danty. Italy sub Toa Halafihi is off for Giovanni Pettinelli 54 mins. Very little to report as Italy huff and puff around halfway and France contain them like a big cousin holding the top of their head at arm’s length so they can’t reach to punch them properly. SUBS: Epalahame Faiva, Ivan Nemer and Giosuè Zilocchi are on for Italy in the front row; replacing Danilo Fishetti, Gianmarco Lucchesi and Tiziano Pasquali. France have brough on Demba Bamba for Uini Atonio 49 mins. Every Italy clearance simply invites another French attack and this one sees Alldritt pick and drive straight through a ruck. The Number 8 carries ten metres before popping to the supporting Villiere whose sevens background is on show as he dummies a chip kick before stepping the fullback and running in. Glorious stuff. Jaminet misses the conversion. 47 mins. Another France lineout, another France maul in the Italy 22. The visiting defence manages to hold this one up and Dupont is forced to use it to not much result other than Italy having a penalty for France holding on. 43 mins. Not only is it not a try, Marchand is also penalised for handling in the ruck in the subsequent melee. Italy clear. On the next possession Garbisi hits and absolutely minging kick that goes 2000ft up and about 28 inches forward on his own 10m line. Fickou grabs it but the France clearout spares Garbisi’s blushes by being penalised for sealing off. 42 mins. France have a lineout on the Italy 22 and it’s straight off the top to a rampaging Danty crash-ball run. The centre is rumbles up to the line and as he tries to ground under a number of Azzuri tacklers it’s not clear he gets it down over the line. The TMO and Ref Adamson is having a long look.. 40 mins. Ntamack sends the ball deep right, Ruzza gathers it and Varney clears it. Half-time musings Italy have surprised a few here (me, mostly) with some decent physicality and a quality try. But, as the half developed France’s superiority started to show and the home side should be able to maul the Azzuri to death in the second forty. This, plus their ability to punch a few bright holes in the cloudy gloom with tries like that from Villiere on the half, should see a comfortable winning margin. PEEP PEEEEP! And that’s the last act of an interesting half. 40 mins. An Itlay scrum in their own 22 crumbles like a cannoli under the power of the French pack. Toa Halafihi digs it out and feeds it to Zanon who carries forward but Italy are penalise for sealing off the ruck. They go to the corner with the kick and it’s an off the top move via Ntamack and Penaud that fizzes the ball to Villiere to score in the corner. Jaminet adds the two. 37 mins. France have a penalty just past halfway after Italy drift offside in the tackle line. The visitors have been great value so far, but there’s a very portentous feel to France’s play in the last five minutes. Les Bleus are using their maul more and in the loose also their physicality is beginning to dominate. Expect this to be the ongoing pattern, especially seeing the rain is honking it down in the stadium now. 34 mins. Jaminet slots this one with little fuss. 32 mins. Off another effective French lineout catch and drive Danty crashes onto the ball in midfield and toes a gentle grubber through for Fickou to chase. The centre is beaten to it on the Italy line by the covering Varney and the Italian pack tidy up and allow a clearing kick. But all this does is invite France back onto the attack and Italy are penalised for not rolling away in the tackle. 29 mins. Italy will be fuming with that as it was completely avoidable. Scruffy ball off their own set piece, compounded by not tightening it up when the ball was loose. However, on their next possession they force France offside and Garbisi steps up and slots it from 25 metres out. They are back in front! 27 mins. Woki gets amongst and Italian lineout and does enough to make the ball scrappy on the Italy side. Varney attempts to tidy it up by shovelling to Ioane but Jelonch reads it, yoinks it and gallops in from 30 metres. Jaminet’s conversion misses off the post. 22 mins. France lose the ball and after a long Garbisi clearance Jaminet creams a 7o metre 50:22 kick. That’s a wonderful strike. But wait! Villiere hit Menoncello off the ball in the chase, so it’s an Italy penalty instead of a France lineout. 20 mins. It’s all gone quiet at the Stade De France as the crowd reel from a fabulous few minutes for Italy, but France are back on the attack with a maul that carries the ball into the opposition half. Fischetti is penalised for entering for the side and France put it in the corner which stirs the spectators a little. 17 mins. Fischetti does a number of Atonio in the scrum to win Italy a welcome penalty. It’s their turn to force and error with a towering Garbisi kick spilled by Jaminet. After couple of carries in the 22, Garbisi sends a cross kick to the teenage Menoncello who is millimetres from the touchline, gathers and scores in the tightest of spaces imaginable. The TMO takes a look and confirms that is an absolutely incredible finish. And then Garbisi caresses the conversion over from way out on the right! Scenes. 14 mins. A lot of France’s attack is coming via repeated carries in the middle of the park, which says something about how Galthie’s side are approaching the wet conditions. Italy are standing up to it pretty well so far, but it’s forcing the visitors into errors. The latest of which give France a scrum just inside the Azzuri half. 11 mins. So far it feels like Italy have had about 7.4 seconds of possession, but Toa Halafihi decides to do something about that by winning a brilliant jackal turnover in midfield. There are some decent carries from the resulting lineout before Varney knocks on at base of the ruck in the France 22. 8 mins. First scrum of the match is a France put in on the the Italy22 and is held solid by both sides. The ball is out snappy and Ntamack sends it left through hands before Fickou tickles an angled grubber that Gabin Villière just fumbles forward. Italy do a decent job of clearing from the scrum very near to their line. 4 mins. Italy are too eager in the tackle line and drift offside. Jaminet calls for the tee and puts his side in front 3 mins. Brex has a run in behind the France tackle line, but the Azzuri forwards are cleared out of the ruck very easily indeed and lose possession. That is a very worrying sign indeed very early for the visitors. 1 min. Paolo Garbisi chips the ball long into the Parisian afternoon and we’re off. Alldritt gathers it tidily and Ntamack executes a regulation clearance containing 0% nonsense. The teams are on their way out... France, led by Dupont in their brilliant white Escape To Victory homage away kit, and Italy in grey hoodies. France 1, Italy 0 in the style-off - which is a surprise, let’s be honest. John Ryan emails in early with a question: “Think the conditions will matter, Lee? Or will France run amuck and get 50 plus?” France scored fifty in Rome on this very weekend a year ago and it’s difficult to see anything significantly different occurring today. Forecast is for rain and some blustery wind which may limit France’s snazz a bit so my money is on a thirty point win. Pre-match viewing If you haven’t seen Dupont in a massive, honey monster style dressing gown yet, then get this in you Pre-match reading Scotland’s win yesterday holds much for them to build on, reckons Bryn Palmer. Read more here.. Why not get in touch and tell me everything? Stream all your consciousness my way by email or on Twitter Squad captain Charles Ollivon is still out for France and so the team today is led by the cubic wonder Antoine Dupont from scrum-half. Other than that it’s largely as-you-were with thirteen of the fifteen that pulverised the All Blacks in the Autumn present here. Italy, in keeping with recent selection policies, have selected teenagers Tommaso Menoncello and Leonardo Marin the squad, while experience in the form of Carlo Canna is nowhere to be seen. Even captain Michele Lamaro is a callow 23 years old with only ten caps. The very low average age in the Azzuri squad will increase at some point in the tournament however, when 137-year-old Sergio Parrisse rocks up for his narcissist extravaganza retirement send off. FRANCE Melvyn Jaminet; Damian Penaud, Gaël Fickou, Jonathan Danty, Gabin Villière; Romain Ntamack, Antoine Dupont (capt); Cyril Baille, Julien Marchand, Uini Atonio, Cameron Woki, Paul Willemse, Anthony Jelonch, Dylan Cretin, Grégory Alldritt. Replacements: 16 Peato Mauvaka, 17 Jean-Baptiste Gros, 18 Demba Bamba, 19 Romain Taofifénua, 20 François Cros, 21 Maxime Lucu, 22 Yoram Moefana, 23 Thomas Ramos. ITALY Edoardo Padovani; Tommaso Menoncello, Juan Ignacio Brex, Marco Zanon, Montanna Ioane; Paolo Garbisi, Stephen Varney; Danilo Fishetti, Gianmarco Lucchesi, Tiziano Pasquali, Niccolò Cannone, Federico Ruzza, Sebastian Negri, Michele Lamaro (capt), Toa Halafihi. Replacements: 16 Epalahame Faiva, 17 Ivan Nemer, 18 Giosuè Zilocchi, 19 Marco Fuser, 20 Giovanni Pettinelli, 21 Manuel Zuliani, 22 Callum Braley, 23 Leonardo Marin. Afternoon all, and welcome our live coverage of France vs Italy from the Stade de France. What a difference twenty-four hours makes. Italy, so long the focus of fan mental arithmetic around exactly how big the margin of loss will be, find themselves no longer alone in this ignominy after the result in Dublin yesterday. Misery loves company so they say (not sure I agree after popping round to see my Grandad yesterday), but keeping the loss below the 21-point margin suffered by Wales would be something of a positive for an Azzuri side that looks to have some potential. A win, their first at the 33rd consecutive attempt against all teams in this tournament, is completely out of the question. Not only is history against the visitors, but also the float like a bomb drone, sting like a planet killing asteroid capability of this present France squad. Even with some Covid-related squad shenanigans in the build up, the home side are very much here and none of us should expect Italy to have any lunch money left by the end of a tough day.The residents of Ramsay Street have survived almost four decades of affairs, disasters and terrible haircuts – but in the end it might be the popularity of a 1930s Yorkshire vet that finally kills off Neighbours. The long-running soap opera that launched the careers of Kylie Minogue, Guy Pearce and Margot Robbie faces the axe after Channel 5 confirmed it would stop airing the series this summer. The broadcaster no longer wants to spend millions of pounds a year on the show and is instead looking to use its programme budget to reach upmarket audiences with original British dramas – driven by the success of All Creatures Great And Small, its hit revival of the series about rural life in the Yorkshire Dales. Neighbours is made in Australia, but its popularity has waned in its homeland. As a result, the cost of making it is largely met by the UK’s Channel 5, which has been the show’s British home since it poached the programme from the BBC in 2008 as part of a £300m deal. “Neighbours will no longer air on Channel 5 beyond this summer,” said a spokesperson. “We recognise that there will be disappointment about this decision, however our current focus is on increasing our investment in original UK drama, which has strong appeal for our viewers.” Unless Neighbours’ production company Fremantle can urgently find a new overseas broadcaster to subsidise it, the longest-running drama in Australian television history will end this summer after 37 years on screen. It is consistently one of Channel 5’s most watched programmes, attracting roughly a million viewers a day, but it is expensive to make and its cancellation appears to be part of the broadcaster’s efforts to shed its reputation as the television home of “films, football and fucking”. Channel 5 has reinvented itself over the past decade under its boss, Ben Frow, often going against industry trends and embracing older regional audiences who still watch broadcast television when its rivals chase younger viewers on streaming services. As a result, it has steadily built its viewing aided by programmes about the royals, steam trains and almost anything with Yorkshire in the title. Channel 5 used to rely on buying up the rights to US dramas, but it decided to return to commissioning its own original British dramas in 2008. Its breakthrough hit was All Creatures Great and Small, a reboot of the much-loved BBC series of the 1970s and 80s, which launched during the pandemic, It attracted the channel’s highest ratings in five years and has been a critical success. The Guardian’s review described it as “a sweet, gentle, deliberately mild remake of a programme you can vaguely recollect watching all those years ago” and “the television equivalent of taking your brain out and dunking it into a bucket of warm tea”. It has also reached large audiences in the US, where viewers saw the appeal of watching a vet drive a vintage car across the English countryside before being kicked by a cow. Although such shows are expensive to make, they can also attract big audiences and the wealthier viewers that advertisers want to reach. Last week Channel 5 aired the original four-part series The Teacher starring Sheridan Smith, which attracted more than 2 million viewers every night – substantially more than were watching Channel 4 in the same time slot. After other hits, including the thriller The Drowning, Channel 5 says it intends to double its spending on original UK drama this year. Frow, an idiosyncratic industry figure, has already canned other longrunning Channel 5 series including Big Brother to free up budget and airtime for his own commissions. A spokesperson declined to comment on the suggestion that the channel might also want to axe Home and Away, another long-running Australia soap opera that it has aired for two decades. As for Neighbours, the show’s cast and crew have been warned that filming could stop in June, leaving them months to wrap up all the existing storylines. There is speculation they could try to persuade previous stars – such as Minogue and Donovan – to return to the programme for one last appearance, in the hope that good Neighbours can become good ends.Just one weekend in and the Six Nations is already stirring powerful emotions. In Scotland, with the Calcutta Cup under lock and key once again, there is renewed optimism and pride after the significant outcome on Saturday. And in England? To say Eddie Jones and his squad headed homewards with much to ponder is a familiar understatement. Even given the tricky conditions at Murrayfield, the visitors’ 20-17 defeat will be a source of acute and prolonged frustration. Apart from anything else, a couple of uneasy trends are emerging. For the third successive year any faint grand slam hopes have vanished within 80 minutes and, for the fourth time in five seasons, Jones has been unable to outflank Scotland’s head coach, Gregor Townsend. If England are going to conquer the world next year, they could do a lot worse than take several leaves from Scotland’s book. Did Townsend whip off his fly-half Finn Russell at the start of the final quarter with his team trailing 17-10? Of course not. The Scots had a clear plan, stayed calm, trusted in their playmaker’s ability and, ultimately, reaped the rewards for doing so. And England? The flawed decision to remove Marcus Smith from the fray neatly symbolised the split personality that remains a feature of Jones’s regime. The young fly-half had done pretty much everything asked of him and put England in front with the kind of smart, excellently taken try that separates a high-class fly-half from a moderate one. But then – boom – he was gone. Rather than being trusted to finish the job off, he was sitting idle in the stand. It felt very much like a conservative move and, even worse, a premeditated one. Had the game been at Twickenham, the boos of English supporters would have rung loudly around the stadium. As it was, English momentum and composure largely disappeared with him. Of course there were other unrelated factors involved. Maybe England did not always enjoy the rub of the green. Russell definitely deserved credit for the two inch-perfect punts that ended up stretching the red rose defence to breaking point. And it was a team decision, in the end, to go for that fateful late lineout rather than the penalty kick at goal that might have yielded a draw. The fact that George Ford’s tentative punt and Sam Skinner’s steal combined to ruin the visitors’ day cannot be entirely laid at the management’s door. Then again, maybe it is time to acknowledge that tight officiating decisions or absent friends are not the primary reason why England are still blowing hot and cold and now stand on the verge of another awkward campaign. Their issue is not a shortage of talented individuals or enviable depth or even increasing captaincy options. They simply lack the collective clarity of thought that Scotland, and others, are exhibiting. The game on Saturday was a perfect example. How did they end up with so little in the way of dynamic gain-line penetration beyond the occasional thrust from their back-rows Sam Simmonds and Lewis Ludlam? How come the home side kicked so much more effectively? Was Joe Marler’s lineout throwing really the way forward? And, if they were truly intent on playing fast and going for it, how did that square with hauling off Smith at the game’s pivotal point? Italy in Rome this Sunday should at least offer the opportunity to smooth away some of that angst. There is no question, either, that England’s rolling maul is starting to look far more effective. Two years ago they also lost their opening fixture and went on to hoist the title. It is far from impossible that they can still defeat Wales and Ireland at Twickenham and then head to Paris with much at stake next month. In that event Jones will be fully entitled to enjoy the moment. No one relishes the constant tactical puzzles of international rugby more than the Australian and he continues to scour the sporting world for the little tweaks that might help him solve the game’s biggest conundrums. That said, Jones tenure of England increasingly feels as if it is being sponsored by Wordle: there seems to be a different problem to solve every day. No one is saying it is a simple task but surely Smith is the five-letter answer, not a question mark? The lack of consistent and absolute faith in people feels like the thing that is arguably disrupting England the most. Either way enough assistant coaches and support staff have already come and gone for this to be a crucial period for the Jones project. The constant changes of tack – both stylistic and selectorially – are in sharp contrast with the largely settled environments of their main rivals and time is no longer on the management’s side. For all the talk of England’s youth and inexperience, Jamie George and Marler are 31, Ben Youngs will be 34 next year and Manu Tuilagi, forever the longed-for saviour, turns 31 in May. Owen Farrell was 30 last September and Jonny May will be 32 in April. Kyle Sinckler, Henry Slade and Elliot Daly will all be on the wrong side of 30 by the 2023 World Cup. For now though, Jones’s priorities are simple enough. Put an arm around Luke Cowan‑Dickie, ensure the Exeter hooker is not put in such an invidious defensive position again, quietly apologise to Smith and instruct his players to take out their irritation on Italy. Marler, Jack Nowell, Alex Dombrandt and Harry Randall will all be hoping for a start in Rome and it already feels as if this Six Nations season has plenty of twists to come. England will not recall their Edinburgh weekend fondly but they remain in charge of their own destiny.My mother, Karen Walton, who has died aged 85, loved art and literature, and was passionate about animal welfare, equality and trees. She was loving, creative, intelligent, infuriating and chaotic. Born in Dulwich, south London, to parents who were also creative – a painter and camouflage artist, Henry Hoyland, and a poet and puppet-maker, Margret (nee Mitchell-Withers) – she had an eccentric childhood with her sister, Rosemary. By the time Karen was 12, both her parents had died of cancer and she was bought up by her aunt. From Sydenham high school, Karen went to the Central School of Arts and Crafts (now the Central School of Art and Design). In 1959, she met the theatrical producer Richard Walton. They married in 1961, and shared their love for theatre, music and art with wonderful friends, spending late nights enjoying good food and plenty of wine. I was born in 1963 and my brother, Charlie, three years later. We grew up to the sounds of Bobbie Gentry and the Rolling Stones, with summers spent in Cornwall, walking the coast paths, sailing, surfing and singing to the seals. After 26 years of marriage, which was later dissolved, Karen struck out alone and retrained as a Tefl teacher. She taught at Chiswick College, west London, as well as tutoring private students for 10 years or more. She made two beautiful homes, the first in Chiswick; the second a flat overlooking Streatham Common, which was flooded with sunlight and filled with colour, paintings and books. Animal welfare was very important to her; her cats were her greatest companions. Another enormous passion was trees, and her home overlooking the common was surrounded by them, which brought her great joy. After discovering she had cancer in early 2021, she chose not to have treatment or share her diagnosis with others. She had enjoyed a wonderful life and wanted to make the most of the time she had left. She lived independently at home until September last year when an unrelated illness led to a respite stay at Birtley House, a care home outside Guildford, in Surrey. It was there, happy and surrounded by beautiful trees, that she chose to spend her last few months. My mother’s life swung from the reserved to the highly emotional; the predictable to the totally unpredictable; from the joy-filled to deep troughs. She treasured strong friendships that she had nurtured across the decades and displayed great empathy. Karen is survived by Charlie and me, her grandchildren, Fin and Orla, and her niece, Katherine.My husband Mike Jackson, who has died aged 73 following a long illness, had a distinguished career as a full-time official of the public sector union Nupe, and later of Unison. He was also active as a councillor in Watford. From 2004 he was Unison’s deputy head of health, in which capacity he acted as the lead negotiator for NHS pay talks. He was involved in annual rounds of negotiations on pay and conditions, including those that led to Agenda for Change, the pay and grading structure for NHS staff, which remains in place today. Mike retired from Unison in 2011 but continued to put his extensive experience and talents to good use as a project manager for NHS East of England, where he was involved in the establishment of the Talent for Care national strategic framework, helping NHS staff to develop a long-term career strategy. Born in Derby, Mike was the eldest of three sons of Peter Jackson, who worked for British Rail, and Kathleen (nee McEvoy), a nurse. She died when Mike was 11 and his father subsequently married Daphne Wakefield, a nursery nurse; they went on to have a daughter. The family had by then moved south with Peter’s job, to the Watford area, and Watford remained Mike’s home almost continuously until his death, with only two short periods living elsewhere. He was a lifelong supporter of Watford FC, and the ability to walk to the ground in under 20 minutes was an essential criterion in his choice of home. After leaving St Albans grammar school, Mike worked for National Carriers, then Rolls-Royce. He went to Warwick University in 1974 and immediately became involved in student politics. He was elected to the national committee of the National Organisation of Labour Students in 1976 and as its national chair in 1977. He became a Nupe regional organiser in Greater London in 1978. He had joined the Labour party in 1972. His ability as an organiser was soon recognised and he took on positions of responsibility, eventually becoming election agent, a role he undertook in every Watford borough and county council election from 1983 to 2019. He also acted as agent for the general and mayoral elections from 1997 to 2019. He was elected to Watford council in 1980, and was leader of the council from 1990 until 1994, a period of great turmoil and challenge. He was a vociferous opponent of the Conservative government’s right-to-buy policy. Watford council avoided implementing it for as long as possible. Mike also initiated numerous progressive policies including declaring Watford a nuclear-free zone, the establishment of the town’s first women’s refuge and many environmental initiatives. He was selected as Watford’s candidate to fight the general elections of 1987 and 1992, and increased Labour’s share of the vote. His dedication to the party was formally recognised in 2020 when he was presented with the Merit Award for Outstanding Contribution by Jeremy Corbyn. After his retirement in 2015, Mike spent time with his grandchildren, also travelling, walking, gardening and supporting his beloved Hornets. He and I first met at Watford council and became a couple in 1994; we married in 2017. He is survived by me, his daughter, Alice, from his first marriage, to Judi, which ended in divorce, by three grandchildren, Ava, Otto and Kit, and his brothers, Guy and John, and sister, Carolyn.There were no travelling fans at Cheltenham last March to see Ireland win all but five of the 28 races but there was a sense here on Sunday of the atmosphere that surely awaits next month, as a string of Ireland’s major contenders prepared for the Festival with effortless victories. Honeysuckle, whose climb to the top of the hurdling division has largely unfolded in front of empty stands, even got a cheer as she cantered to post for the Irish Champion Hurdle and, while few in the crowd would have seen much point in backing her at 1-5, the reception for Rachael Blackmore’s mount after an easy six-and-a-half-length success was long and loud. On this form there is little chance that Honeysuckle will, in the Champion Hurdle on 15 March, surrender what is now a 14-race unbeaten record and every sign she could still be getting better. “They were great again, the pair of them,” Henry de Bromhead, Honeysuckle’s trainer, said. “She jumped well throughout, maybe went a little bit left at one of them but winged the second-last and took off again. She’s brilliant and Rachael’s a brilliant rider and, when you put them together, they’re deadly.” Honeysuckle is unchanged with most bookmakers at around 4-7 for the Champion Hurdle, the feature event on the opening day of the Festival, and her victory here was the third leg of a short-priced four-timer for Cheltenham contenders as Galopin Des Champs, Chacun Pour Soi and Sir Gerhard took the other three Grade One races on the card. All three are trained by Willie Mullins and Chacun Pour Soi will join his stable companion, Energumene, in the line-up for the Queen Mother Champion Chase on 16 March, when Shishkin, who beat Energumene in a memorable duel at Ascot last month, is likely to set off as the odds-on favourite for what promises to be the race of the week. Chacun Pour Soi was beaten at odds-on in last year’s Champion Chase, which is the only Grade One at the Festival meeting which Mullins has yet to win. He was disappointing, too, on his second start outside Ireland, in the Tingle Creek Chase at Sandown in December, which helps to explain why he is still priced up at 6-1 to win next month even after Sundayyesterday’s decisive success. It was intriguing, then, to hear Mullins suggest afterwards that, in his view at least, Energumene is some way behind Chacun Pour Soi in terms of their natural talent. “I thought I had him very ready the last couple of times and he disappointed,” Mullins said. “So this week I decided I was going to get him here at 95% and I think he’s better like that. “He doesn’t seem to bring his A game when he gets on the ferry, so maybe I’ll go undercooked next time. We always think a day on the boat is like one piece of work, so maybe we’ll do one bit less at home and let’s see. “I would put this fellow in a different league [from Energumene] but that’s before his two disappointing runs and obviously he’s getting older. I think he’s a star and he hasn’t shown himself at his best in England yet, so we’ll try and get it right this time.” In all, Mullins saddled six Grade One winners over the weekend but, when asked for a banker bet from his Festival team, he opted without hesitation for Facile Vega, the winner of a Grade Two bumper here on Saturday evening. He beat a field full of previous winners by a dozen lengths and is now just 11-10 for the Champion Bumper. It is all starting to sound, and feel, a little ominous for the home team.A woman is taking legal action against the Metropolitan police after a detective who told her she was “amazingly hot” while investigating her attack kept his job. Kristina O’Connor, now 33, said she was sent inappropriate messages by DCI James Mason after he responded to her report of an attempted robbery in October 2011. The officer asked her out to dinner while taking her statement about the incident, in which she was assaulted by a group of men trying to steal her phone, the Sunday Times reported. Mason, who went on to work alongside the Met commissioner, Cressida Dick, then sent O’Connor a series of personal emails including one telling her she was “amazingly hot”. O’Connor, the daughter of the late comedian Des O’Connor, told reporters: “I no longer trust the police. I feel that I am as likely to be abused by a police officer as I am by anyone else and perhaps even more likely, as I’ve seen that police officers can harm people with impunity. I am fearful of having to call or depend upon the police.” After her complaint about Mason, who was at the time of the incident a detective sergeant, a panel at a police misconduct hearing last year found him guilty of gross misconduct. The Met has confirmed he remains a serving officer. “I feel appalled that the officer in question is still serving … I question what it takes for an officer to be dismissed. It makes a mockery of the misconduct process that he continues to serve,” O’Connor said. O’Connor’s intervention comes after an official report revealed shocking details of Metropolitan police officers sharing messages about hitting and raping women, as well as the deaths of black babies and the Holocaust. The Independent Office for Police Conduct said the hateful and offensive remarks were part of a Met culture that needed to be rooted out. Last month, it emerged that the Met had apologised and paid compensation to an academic for “sexist, derogatory and unacceptable language” used by officers about her when she was strip-searched. Lawyers for O’Connor are arguing that the force “failed to properly investigate” her complaint as a case of gender discrimination. They are seeking a judicial review of how the investigation was handled. A Met spokesperson said: “We recognise there is a need for real change in the Met. We are committed to creating an environment that is intolerant to those who do not uphold the high values and standards expected of us.” They added: “Any victim of crime should have the confidence and trust to come to police to receive the support and professionalism they rightfully expect. “Where this does not happen, we want to know about it so any learning and, if appropriate, disciplinary action can be taken.”Right then, I’m off. While you wait for the match report to drop, here’s an Afcon final liveblog: Leicester have released a statement concerning the pitch invader: The club is appalled by such behaviour and offers its apologies to Nottingham Forest and its players whose safety was compromised. We applaud the swift action taken by City Ground stewards in apprehending the individual involved, who will be subject to a lifetime ban from all Leicester City fixtures at home and away. We will offer every support to the relevant authorities in pursuing further appropriate action. Since Steve Cooper’s appointment on 21 September 2021 Forest have the third best record in the Championship with 39 points and a goal difference of +13, behind only Fulham (42 points, +37(!)) and Blackburn (40 points, +12). To be fair QPR also have 39 points, and have played one less game. When he was appointed Forest had played eight games, won one and were bottom of the league. They were nine points off the play-offs; that number now is two. The pitch invader who was throwing punches at celebrating Forest players a little earlier is now in police custody, apparently. Brennan Johnson on the Steve Cooper effect: He’s just taught us all to believe in the way we play, especially against Premier League teams. We know we’re a good team. We know the Huddersfield’s game [in round five] is going to be a big one. We’ve beaten Premier League teams and we don’t want to be done by a team of lower quality. The holders lose their grip on the FA Cup, their defence obliterated by a rampant, wildly exciting Nottingham Forest! 90+2 mins: We might hear some more about this: 90+1 mins: Leicester nearly score a second, but Ricardo Pereira shoots across goal and just wide of the far post. 90+1 mins: Stoppage time has begun. It will stop in three minutes. 88 mins: A couple more substitutions. Forest take off the good Garner and excellent Johnson and bring on Cafu and Silva. 84 mins: Leicester pass the ball around in defence before Soyuncu eventually pumps it aimlessly forward and Forest get it back. 82 mins: Save! Amartey’s dipping shot is well saved by Samba, who can’t have seen it until late. 81 mins: They’re still pushing, but not at all convincingly. They win a corner, which is headed clear. 78 mins: Leicester are enjoying a few minutes of sustained territorial advantage, though without creating anything with it. 74 mins: Maddison gets a booking for running through the space where Jed Spence was and would still have been had he not leapt into the air and to his right. 71 mins: Sam Surridge makes his debut off the bench, replacing Davis for Forest. 70 mins: For the first time tonight, Forest boot the ball aimlessly clear. 67 mins: Forest still want more, and Lowe runs onto Garner’s pass before hitting a left-footed half-volley across goal and wide. 66 mins: Garner is booked for fouling Maddison. 65 mins: Leicester take off Lookman and Tielemans and bring on Ricardo Pereira and Dewsbury-Hall. 62 mins: Forest take of Zinckernagel, scorer of the first and creator of the last, and bring Colback on. Forest score another! From a throw-in on the right Spence runs infield, plays a one-two with Zinckernagel and, with two players to his left open for a pass, prods it past Ward and into the back of the net! 60 mins: Lookman gets in front of Garner, goes into the area and throws himself down. The referee shakes his head and Forest rip down the other end where Johnson has a shot saved, and then another shot saved. 59 mins: Ndidi brings Zinckernagel down from behind. “Lucky not to get booked there,” says Martin Keown on commentary as the referee gets his book out. 57 mins: “You’re right Brendan Rodgers didn’t have a great spell at Reading,” writes Jon Keen. “He came in with his “methodology” - all set out on PowerPoint - but the players at the club then just weren’t flexible or skilled enough to play that system and there was no Plan B. He went to Swansea who had the right players for it, and there was no looking back!” He’s probably got some good use out of that PowerPoint presentation - a couple of name changes here and there and it’s ready for the next interview. 55 mins: A chance for Leicester, but Iheanacho lays off to Daka, who skies his shot from 15 yards. 53 mins: Leicester break, and at the end of the move Maddison sends a low, curling shot just wide of goal from the edge of the area. 52 mins: From the free kick Leicester attempt a routine they’ve worked on on the training-ground, although there they presumably didn’t pass the ball straight to an opponent. 50 mins: Leicester win a corner, which is well cleared by McKenna. Soyuncu picks it up on the right and basically stands still and waits for Zinckernagel to run over and straight into him, which doesn’t take long. Free kick. 48 mins: So Forest haven’t been told to sit back and defend their lead. Zinckernagel runs into the Leicester half, resists the opportunity to go down with Ndidi pretty much hanging off his back, and passes to Johnson whose shot deflects wide. 46 mins: Peeeeep! They’re playing again at the City Ground. The players are back out and ready to go. Leicester have made one halftimely change, taking Barnes off and bringing Daka on. “I’m old enough to remember people saying Brendan Rogers is an elite manager and we’d be lucky to have him at Spurs,” writes Shorkey. “So much for that eh?” I’m still a believer, but there are managers who can work with the same group of players almost indefinitely without diminishing rewards, and others who seem to only have two or three seasons in them. Rodgers doesn’t seem to be in the first group, but he had had a significant positive impact on almost every club he has managed (all of them except Reading, probably). 45+4 mins: We have had half of the time, and Forest have been superb. They have scored three, might have had another couple, and now have a chance to recover from the gift of the goal that let Leicester back into the contest. 45+2 mins: There’s a stoppage-time stoppage after Garner slips, and McKenna falls over his head. Happily, he looks to have recovered. 45+1 mins: There will be three minutes of stoppage time, or something along those lines. 43 mins: Before the goal Leicester were basically desperately clinging on for half-time when Brendan Rodgers might have produced a rocket to wake them up. Now, though, they’re dominating possession and it’s the home side who look ready for a refresh. From nowhere, Leicester are back in the game! Maddison curls a pass down the left flank with the outside of his right foot, and Samba in the Forest goal makes a mad dash to intercept, fails, and leaves Iheanacho with an empty goal to aim at. Stretching, sliding and from wide on the left, he finds it! 40 mins: Save! Forest nearly have a fourth after Zinckernagel and Davis combine before setting up Spence, whose effort hits the keeper. 37 mins: Forest win another corner, but this time the whistle blows while the ball is in the air after Soyuncu goes down. 34 mins: There are upsets, and then there’s lower-division opponents spending quarter of an hour or so repeatedly ripping the FA Cup holders to shreds like so much damp tissue. 32 mins: Garner does have excellent set piece delivery, and it dips into the depths of the area widely known as the mixer from where Worrall’s diving, bouncing header finds the net! Forest are ripping Leicester apart! Ward in the Leicester goal turns a shot round the post, and from the corner Joe Worrall heads in! 30 mins: Forest hold the ball away from and play it around Leicester’s defence for a while, before Spence’s cross deflects behind for a corner. Their fans are having the best of times. 27 mins: Zinckernagel, who really needs to stop doing niggly fouls on Forest’s left flank, brings down Justin with a niggly foul. 26 mins: Just 24 seconds elapsed between the restart and the second goal. And another one! Almost from the kick-off! It’s a backpass from Amartey on the Forest left, and Johnson latches on to it, draws the keepeer and tucks it through his legs and into the net! Spence lays off to Johnson, whose cross is headed down by Davis to leave Zinckernagel with what is pretty much a tap-in! He taps in with his shin. Pretty classy goal, that. 22 mins: A lovely backheel flick from Johnson in midfield illustrates Forest’s confidence. And it’s no surprise because ... 18 mins: Chance for Forest! Garner takes a free-kick from the right, and it’s sent into the mixer, headed out, sent back in, and Davis Chests it down and volleys back across goal and off the corner of post and bar! 14 mins: Leicester go close again, but Barnes’ low centre runs beyond Lookman, who throws himself at it but can’t make contact. All the action is coming down that wing, where Spence and Johnson look bright for Forest, and Barnes for Leicester. 11 mins: Leicester win a corner on the right and pass it along the edge of the area to Lookman, whose first-time shot would have been on target had it not hit a defender and deflected wide. 9 mins: Neither side is hanging around. Leicester win a free-kick on halfway, and the TV cameras zoom in on Maddison, who won it. By the time they pan out again a second later the ball is already rolling. 6 mins: Chance for Leicester! They attack down the left, from where Barnes passes infield for Thomas, who passes infield to Ihenacho, who blazes high and wide! 5 mins: Brennan takes the kick, and biffs it into the wall. 4 mins: A lovely cross from Johnson on the Forest right is headed to the edge of the area, where Yates is brought down. Free kick, and a decent shooting chance. 3 mins: A predictably full-throttle opening to the game, but no chances yet. 1 min: Forest get the game started. And out they come! The players are gathering in the tunnel, and the coaches have made their way to the bench. Kick-off is but a few minutes away. Foil-wrapped cardboard FA Cup: Tick. Steve Cooper has a chat: We’re really looking forward to it. It’s going to be a tough game but we always back ourselves and today’s a good day of showing what we can do. You have to back yourself in any game that you play. We’re trying to build a mentality, we’re trying to grow the team and the mentality, and whatever team is in front of us we go into it with the same idea. [Leicester are good and stuff but] we’ve got to think about what we can bring to the game and concentrate on that. Keinan Davis, the Aston Villa striker currently on loan at Forest, starts in attack with new signing Sam Surridge on the bench. Meanwhile it’s three changes for Leicester, with Iheanacho and Ndidi back in the starting XI. Both teams have announced their line-ups, and here they are: And so fourth round weekend coasts towards its conclusion, with this the penultimate match. A home tie against Huddersfield in round five is the prize that these two teams will contest today. Leicester are of course defending champions, but with one win, a draw and two defeats to their name in the league since Christmas their form isn’t exactly scintillating, while Forest have won four out of five in all competitions, including their third-round victory over Arsenal. Forest will be without the man who scored the only goal in that game, their top scorer Lewis Grabban, who is expected to be out for a while after injuring his ankle in last Sunday’s defeat at Cardiff. As a result deadline-day signing Sam Surridge could make his debut, with another new arrival in Jonathan Panzo also potentially involved. Leicester will be boosted by the return of Wilfred Ndidi and Kelechi Iheanacho, who have both returned from the Africa Cup of Nations, though Nampalys Mendy is still in Cameroon and preparing to play for Senegal in tonight’s final. Wesley Fofana, Jamie Vardy, Jonny Evans, Timothy Castagne and Ricardo Pereira are all injured. Forest have played Leicester three times in major cup competitions and won only once - and that was in the FA Cup back in 1901, when their opponents were still known as Leicester Fosse and the gate was depressed by the fact that Notts County were playing Liverpool at home on the same afternoon (they won 2-0). The game, according to the Sportsman, was “disappointing as a spectacle” and certainly one-sided: Forest were four up inside 20 minutes and eventually won 5-1. Anyway, welcome!Labour has called on the Tories to return money from donors with links to Russiain response to tensions over Vladimir Putin’s military buildup on the Ukrainian border. In a joint letter, David Lammy, the shadow foreign secretary, and Rachel Reeves, the shadow chancellor, called on ministers to address Russian finance flowing into the UK. Writing to their counterparts, Liz Truss and Rishi Sunak, both possible contenders to succeed Boris Johnson in No 10, Lammy and Reeves said: “Donors who have made money from Russia or have alleged links to the Putin regime have given £1.93m to either the Conservative party or individual Conservative associations since Boris Johnson took power in July 2019. Will the Conservative party agree to return it?” Truss has said oligarchs and key supporters of Putin will be targeted by UK sanctions if Russia invades Ukraine, but offered no new money-laundering curbs. The Foreign Office has threatened to seize the wealth of Putin’s inner political circle and business backers. Labour criticised the package for failing to speed up the long-promised structural measures to tackle money laundering in the UK, including measures first announced by David Cameron in 2014 and 2015. In their joint letter, Lammy and Reeves said: “We believe, however, that there is much more that can be done to address the UK’s openness to suspect Russian money. “For years, the Labour party have raised the alarm about the role of dirty money in the UK and the lack of action from the Conservative government. Despite repeated warnings, the government has been asleep at the wheel and needlessly left our defences down at home.” They said this “openness to illicit finance has begun to damage our diplomatic efforts, with the Biden administration being warned that the widespread presence of suspect Russian money in the UK could jeopardise Britain’s response to this crisis”. Johnson said last week that he would bring forward an economic crime bill in the third session of parliament, but Labour said this should already have happened. In particular, they called for reform of Companies House to prevent fraud and abuse, a register of overseas entities, foreign agent registration, new counter-espionage laws, a replacement for the computer misuse act and additional powers for the Electoral Commission. “We can’t stand up to Russia’s aggression abroad while ignoring Russian-linked corruption at home,” they said. “It is in our national and economic interests for the government to address the challenges of hostile influence and interference which the government’s inaction and behaviour have regrettably permitted.” The Guardian reported last week that anti-corruption campaigners were accusing the government of failing to curtail Russian wealth and influence in Britain, despite years of provocative actions from the Kremlin. In response to the Lammy and Reeves letter, a Conservative party spokesperson said: “The Conservative party only accepts donations from permissible sources, namely individuals registered on the UK’s electoral roll or UK registered companies. “Donations are transparently declared to the Electoral Commission and openly published by them.”Twenty-five miles, 18 places and one division may separate Nottingham Forest from Leicester City but ultimately it was the crazy two minutes in the first half that exemplified the difference between these East Midlands rivals. That was the time between goals from Philip Zinckernagel and Brennan Johnson as Forest, from the Championship, deservedly knocked out FA Cup winners for the second round in succession to land a fifth-round tie at home to Huddersfield Town. The FA has confirmed it will investigate the unsavoury scenes that followed Joe Worrall’s goal nine minutes later as a fan from the Leicester end found his way on to the pitch and took two punches at the celebrating Forest players before stewards took him to ground. Leicester have confirmed they will ban him for life. It is eight years since these teams last met but, with some of the form Forest are producing under Steve Cooper, it is not inconceivable the next time they meet will be in the Premier League. Only Fulham can better Forest’s Championship form since the former Swansea manager took charge in September and, after beating Arsenal in the previous round, this made it five wins in six games. Cooper has challenged his players to prove they have “that winning mentality” when they go to Blackburn on Wednesday. Brendan Rodgers has talked about changing his squad around this summer but Leicester, without an away win in seven games, need to do something about reviving this season before this rot goes any deeper. They were not just beaten here; they were humiliated. The Leicester manager admitted that not even bringing the trophy itself into their team meeting had sufficed to motivate his players. “I said to the players after, that for the first time since I’ve been here I’ve been embarrassed,” Rodgers said. “It was an embarrassing performance. I feel for the supporters. “Forget about the players who are missing. There are players here that may have achieved everything that they can. It’s something we’ll have to look at between now and the end of the season. Until then, they’ve got to have a look at themselves in the mirror and fight like hell to prove they’re good enough to be here. “ They won the FA Cup, and that might be it. But it’s not for me and not what I want to achieve here and do here. Too many players think they’re top players but they’re a long way off it.” The pivotal spell of three goals in nine minutes simply took the breath away as Leicester were blown away. When Forest have been good this season they have been very good – and when Leicester are bad they have been very bad – but this was something else. Keinan Davis had already volleyed, left-footed, against the angle of post and bar when they took flight. Leicester were undone easily for the opening goal. After good work from Djed Spence down the right wing, there was too much space for Brennan Johnson to cross to the back post where Davis outmuscled James Justin to nod the ball down for Zinckernagel to sidefoot the ball home. The BBC were still showing replays of that goal when Johnson, the subject of a £20m bid from Brentford last month, made it 2-0 after Daniel Amartey played a blind back pass towards goalkeeper Danny Ward. Ryan Yates should have headed in and Zinckernagel had a shot deflected wide as Forest smelled blood; some of the first-time pass-and-move from Cooper’s team was exhilarating, not least in the move that led to the corner for the third goal. James Garner’s flag-kick was headed in by captain Worrall, back from injury, who celebrated injudiciously in front of the 4,000 Leicester fans. Quite why the eccentric Brice Samba needed to come sprinting from his goal to cover James Maddison’s channel ball only he will know but Kelechi Iheanacho’s neat finish from a difficult angle did not prompt a recovery. Spence, superb all afternoon, cut inside from wide on the right and kept running after playing the ball in to Zinckernagel whose return pass cut out the creaking Leicester back-line. Spence took one touch to compose himself before sliding his shot into the far bottom corner. It was a fitting finish for a display balancing fight and finesse. Cooper cuts a phlegmatic figure but his quiet satisfaction spoke of his ambition to extend this impressive run. “If we want to be a proper team with a winning mentality, we have to prepare for the next game,” the Forest manager said. “I thought we were good for the result and the performance matched it. First half, some of our attacking play was excellent – dare I say it, it could have been more. “What I liked about it was though we conceded, we didn’t let it affect our focus or mentality. The lads were brilliant.”Sajid Javid has begun a rather dramatic U-turn. Until recently, the health secretary insisted that care workers and frontline NHS staff had to get vaccinated against Covid or find another post, but the policy has now been dropped. Compulsory vaccination is still good health policy, he told fellow MPs, but ministers worry about a plunge in staff numbers. Yet there is a policy that public health officials, doctors and trade unionists have been calling for since the start of the pandemic, and that would not infringe on civil liberties or dent staff numbers: introducing a proper sick pay system. Doing that would reduce the spread of infectious diseases, ease the cost-of-living crisis for the working poor during this pandemic, and be a small step towards a fairer country. The UK’s statutory sick pay system is in terrible health. The previous health secretary, Matt Hancock, admitted that he couldn’t live on what it pays, currently £96.35 a week. No surprise there: it is among the lowest sick pay in the industrialised world. Even worse, about 2 million workers do not earn enough to qualify for it, a fact that troubled the government enough to consult on whether to make the regime more generous. Three out of four employers who responded agreed that statutory sick pay should be extended, and small businesses were as supportive as large. Despite such hearty enthusiasm, the welfare secretary, Thérèse Coffey, long-grassed any idea of reform. The motive is probably the same as that behind last autumn’s withdrawal of the £20 boost to universal credit: the government does not want any of its pandemic-era “giveaways” to become permanent. For all that ministers pretend spending cuts are over, this remains a very austere government. The UK is thus running a huge risk to public health. If waiters think they are coming down with Covid but know they are not eligible for any sick pay, they have every incentive to go to work and cough and splutter over colleagues and customers alike. If care workers suspect they are seriously ill but worry that £96 a week will leave them behind on rent and bills, they have a choice: fall into debt or risk patients getting ill – with potentially serious consequences. These are terrible choices, yet ministers force them on low-paid workers every single day. About 8 million workers – more than a quarter of the labour force – face penury just for falling ill. So much for clapping for carers. What’s also unfair about this system is who it affects. New research from the IPPR thinktank shows that those people denied sick pay tend to be older or from an ethnic minority and it argues that this reeks of “age and race-based discrimination”. A healthier sick pay regime would allow anyone to claim it, regardless of low earnings. It would vastly increase mandatory pay and allow workers to claim from day one of their illness. When, in spring 2020, Rishi Sunak announced his measures to prop up the economy and slow the spread of coronavirus, he said: “We’re all in this together.” It was a generous phrase that soon rang hollow, as more and more low-paid workers fell ill just by doing their often essential jobs. The chancellor has had nearly two years to fix the sick pay system. If not now, when?Ehud Barak, Israel’s then defence minister and the country’s most decorated soldier, warned in 2010 that “as long as in this territory west of the Jordan river there is only one political entity called Israel, it is going to be either non-Jewish or non-democratic. If this bloc of millions of Palestinians cannot vote, that will be an apartheid state.” This argument was made again in 2014 by John Kerry as US secretary of state (though he later regretted the language). Three years later, Boris Johnson, when he was UK foreign secretary, said much the same thing. No one seemed in any doubt that were Israel to carry on without making peace with the Palestinians, the country would face credible accusations of apartheid. After a four-year investigation, Amnesty last week became the latest human rights organisation to level that charge, concluding that Israel operated a “system which amounts to apartheid under international law”. It said that the UN security council must “impose targeted sanctions against Israeli officials implicated”, and demanded an arms embargo on Israel. Amnesty also called for the perpetrators of apartheid to be “brought to justice” through the international criminal court. This is the world’s biggest human rights organisation; its conclusion shows the discussion is becoming embedded in international forums. Such a grave diagnosis of Israel’s situation should be a concern for all those, like this newspaper, who wish for the country to prosper. Amnesty was attacked by the Israeli government, but defended by more than a dozen domestic human rights groups. Its message is no doubt painful to hear for many Jewish Israelis who consider their country to be a beacon of hope and are proud of its democratic traditions. Yet the continuing subjugation of Palestinians erodes the country’s stature internationally and damages its democracy. There has been an emerging consensus that the term “apartheid” can be applied to Israel in a way distinct from the system seen in the old South Africa. The charge has also been broadened – for some, in a heretical way. It is not just applied to areas under military occupation but used to characterise Israel’s command of the land from the Jordan river to the Mediterranean sea. Palestinians – including those who are Israeli citizens – are, Amnesty says, treated as an inferior non-Jewish racial group and prevented from exercising “fundamental human rights” to varying degrees depending on where they live. As the number of Palestinians in the Holy Land approaches that of Jews, Israel’s predicament becomes more glaring. Neither the country’s prime minister, Naftali Bennett, nor his designated successor, Yair Lapid, will concede that they cannot hold all the territory, keep Israel’s Jewish identity and be a proper democracy. Perhaps this is because Donald Trump backed a rightwing expansionist vision, and several Arab states have normalised diplomatic relations with Israel. Maybe with an Israeli Arab party in the ruling coalition, the government feels insulated from charges of discrimination. Yet land grabs and demolitions continue to dispossess and disenfranchise Palestinians on both sides of Israel’s “green line”, alongside the expansion of illegal settlements in the occupied territories. Last year, protests about the expulsion of Palestinian families from their homes in East Jerusalem snowballed into a clash between Hamas militants and the Israeli army, leaving 250 in Gaza and a dozen Israelis dead. Israel’s leaders may view as victories the continuing de facto annexation of Palestinian land, the laws with constitutional status that enshrine non-Jewish inferiority, and the entrenchment of a system of control. But trends in human and civil rights suggest they will become defeats in the court of international public opinion.Labour has called for an urgent inquiry into the way A-level results were awarded last year, after reports that private schools in England gave out more than eight times as many top grades compared with before the Covid pandemic. The government scrapped exams in England in 2021 and told teachers to award A-level and GCSE results by assessment, but figures collected by the Sunday Times suggest some schools took undue advantage by massively increasing the rate of top grades awarded to their pupils. A staff member at a school identified as one of the worst offenders told the Guardian that teachers felt pressurised into awarding the highest grades, while the school’s leaders orchestrated internal assessments to show evidence if queried by Ofqual, the exam regulator, or the exam boards tasked with overseeing the process. School leaders also told teachers who complained about the ethics of inflating grades that the exams boards had given “a nod and a wink” to the practice, and that schools were “all doing it”. In one case of alleged grade inflation, Derby high school went from 6.5% of its entries awarded A* by examination in 2019 to nearly 54% awarded by assessment in 2021. North London Collegiate, a private girls school, nearly trebled the rate of A*s awarded so that more than 90% of its entries were assessed as A*s. The shadow education secretary, Bridget Phillipson, said: “Ministers’ chaotic, last-minute decision-making created a grading system which enabled privileged schools to push sky high results unchallenged. “Reports that teachers were pressurised to put up grades show utterly unacceptable behaviour in some schools. An inquiry is urgently needed, including enabling anonymous evidence from staff to uncover how these results went unchecked last summer. “Young people without adults advocating for them have been let down terribly by a government system that was open to abuse. Ministers must get a grip and get a proper plan in place to stop inequalities widening again this summer.” Robert Halfon, the Conservative MP who chairs the education committee, supported the call for an inquiry. An inquiry would probably require the publication of individual school results for A-levels and GCSEs, which the Department for Education (DfE) has so far refused to do. Prof Lindsey Macmillan, of University College London’s Institute of Education, said the DfE should allow researchers access to school and pupil data to enable them to study the 2021 results. An experienced teacher at a private school who spoke to the Guardian said the pressure to increase grades came from senior leaders, rather than from parents. “If you went against it, you met with a few different responses, some of it just stonewalling, others were that ‘exam boards know this is going on, it’s a bit of a nudge, nudge, wink, wink, they know we’re doing this, we know that they know’, it was all a bit chummy. “The other response was ‘other schools are doing the same, so we are just doing what other schools are doing’. But teachers know other teachers from other schools so we were able to compare and know that this was definitely not going on in other schools. “Although we were aware that private schools were more corrupt in their dealings than state schools, there was a spectrum within private schools that we were aware of as teachers. “Many teachers felt very uncomfortable with it, but many felt they couldn’t say anything. Teachers said to me they felt very uncomfortable, and I felt there was nothing we could [do] that wouldn’t unleash a whole load of hell upon our heads, in terms of intimidation or making our lives difficult in a number of ways.” A DfE spokesperson said: “Overall results in 2021 showed success for young people who were targeting top grades from all types of schools and from all backgrounds. The grades achieved reflected the hard work of students and their teachers, and those efforts should not be undermined. “We are clear that exams are the best form of assessment, which is why they will take place this summer with adaptations to maximise fairness for young people.” Ofqual said in a statement: “All school types awarded higher A-level grades last year, when teachers determined their students’ grades, than they did in 2020. All heads of schools and colleges submitted a formal declaration on the accuracy and integrity of grades and processes supporting them.” The rapid increase in overall grades awarded last year – after the abrupt decision to scrap exams when England went into lockdown in January – was first highlighted last August when A-level results were published. The national figures showed that 70% of all A-level grades awarded to private school pupils were A or A*. In comprehensives the figure was just 39%. When the use of teacher assessment was announced by the then education secretary, Gavin Williamson, experts predicted that A-level grades would rise even further than they did in 2020, when exams were also scrapped. Derby high school did not respond to a request for comment.Tributes have been paid to Rayan Oram, the five-year-old Moroccan boy whose body was recovered from a well on Saturday, and whose plight had moved his country and the world. News of Rayan’s death after a massive four-day rescue operation pitched Morocco into deep grief and prompted condolences and expressions of gratitude to the search teams. His parents, Khaled Oram and Wassima Khersheesh, thanked all those who had worked tirelessly to try to save their son. “This is God’s will,” his mother told Al Oula TV. “I thank all for their efforts to help.” Morocco’s prime minister, Aziz Akhannouch, offered the government’s condolences, adding: “I learned with great sadness and sorrow the news of the death, after days of suffering, and the hope of finding him alive.” The French president, Emmanuel Macron, said: “I want to say to the family of little Rayan and to the Moroccan people that we share your pain.” Pope Francis said he had been moved by the solidarity and kindness shown during the rescue effort. “We’re used to seeing, reading in the media, so many ugly things, ugly news, accidents, killings,” the pontiff said on Sunday. But he added it had been “beautiful” to see how Moroccans had clung to one another as they tried to save Rayan. AC Milan’s Algerian midfielder Ismaël Bennacer posted a tribute accompanied by a picture of a little boy rising into the sky while clutching a heart-shaped balloon in the colours of the Moroccan flag. “Rayan’s courage will stay in our memories and continue to inspire us,” the footballer wrote on Twitter. “And so too will the devotion of the Moroccan people and of the rescuers. All my thoughts are with his family and loved ones. May Allah grant this little warrior the highest degree of paradise.” The Moroccan-American novelist Laila Lalami wrote: “We all of us had been holding out hope that little Rayan would make it. This is all so tragic.” Morocco’s King Mohammed VI spoke directly Rayan’s parents to express his condolences. Rayan fell down a well 32 metres (100ft) deep in his home village of Ighrane on Tuesday afternoon. As the shaft was just 45cm (18in) across – and widening it considered too risky – rescuers instead used large diggers to carve a slope in the hope of reaching the boy from the side. Details of the complex and dangerous mission made international headlines and led to an outpouring of sympathy online, with the Arabic version of the hashtag #SaveRayan going viral. In the final stages, with teams estimated to be just 3 metres away from Rayan, authorities decided to dig by hand to avoid a landslide of the rocky, sandy earth. Large round concrete pipes were brought in to make a safer, horizontal tunnel for the final stretch. A camera lowered down the well showed Rayan lying on his side, and rescuers had sent food, water and oxygen down the shaft. By Saturday morning, the head of the rescue committee, Abdelhadi Temrani, said: “It is not possible to determine the child’s condition at all at this time. But we hope to God that the child is alive.” Those hopes were dashed on Saturday night when Rayan’s body was recovered, wrapped in a yellow blanket, and taken away. The circumstances of the accident are unclear but Rayan is understood to have been playing nearby when he fell. The family realised he was missing when they heard muffled crying, a male relative told Reuters. They lowered a phone with its light and camera to help locate him. “He was crying ‘lift me up’,” the relative said. But the well narrowed as it descended, preventing rescuers from descending. The village of about 500 people is dotted with deep wells, many used for irrigating the cannabis crop that is the main source of income for many in the poor, remote and arid region of Morocco’s Rif mountains. Most of the wells have protective covers. Rayan’s death comes three years after that of a two-year-old boy whose fall down a 100-metre borehole in southern Spain sparked a major rescue operation that transfixed the country. Julen Rosseló was having lunch with his family in the countryside on 13 January 2019 when he fell down the 25cm-wide hole in Totalán, near Málaga. A parallel shaft and a small horizontal tunnel were dug to reach the toddler, but the process was slowed by layers of hard rock that had to be cleared with controlled explosions. Julen’s body was recovered 13 days later.Over half of paramedics are suffering from burnout caused by “overwhelming” workloads, record numbers of 999 calls and the public misusing the ambulance service, a study has found. Frontline crew members also blame lack of meal breaks, delays in reaching seriously ill patients and their shift often not ending when it should for their high levels of stress and anxiety. The working lives of ambulance staff are so difficult that nine out of 10 display symptoms of “depersonalisation”, characterised by “cynicism, detachment and reduced levels of empathy” when dealing with patients who need urgent medical treatment. The widespread poor mental welfare of paramedics is a problem for the NHS because it is leading to some quitting, thus exacerbating its shortage of ambulance personnel, the authors said. The findings, published in the Journal of Paramedic Practice, have prompted concern that the demands on crews, alongside the injury, violence and death they encounter, are storing up serious mental health problems for them, including post-traumatic stress disorder. The research is based on responses from 382 crew members who work for an unnamed NHS regional ambulance service in the north of England. “Ambulance staff are passionate about their role. However, burnout is a significant and very real issue that decreases staff efficacy and reduces quality of patient care,” the study said. It was undertaken by Rachel Beldon, who works for the Yorkshire ambulance service, and Joanne Garside, a professor and school strategic director of Huddersfield university’s health and wellbeing academy. “Participants wanted better resources and staffing levels. The current workload appeared to be overwhelming and negatively affected their mental health and work-life balance.” Many ambulance crew also have negative feelings about their bosses, do not feel valued, and “some felt they were thought of as ‘dots on a screen’ rather than people”, the paper said. The findings come as 999 calls hit record levels and concern is rising about unprecedented numbers of patients being kept waiting in ambulances outside hospitals because A&amp;E staff are too busy to admit them. Two major reports last year said delayed handovers were a factor in thousands of patient deaths a year. One paramedic, who recently described ambulance crews’ working lives in an article in the Guardian, said the findings captured the realities of responding to 999 calls. “Workload is massive. You could have just dealt with a very complicated job and need a few minutes to gather your thoughts, but that time is never allowed as the control centre is constantly harassing you. “Burnout affects the quality of care patients receive because staff are exhausted generally and only get a 30-minute break during an eight-hour shift, so become grumpy and make poor decisions, and that is reflected in poor patient care.” Sara Gorton, head of health at the union Unison, said: “Excessive hours without proper breaks, shifts overrunning, and queueing for hours outside hospitals has become commonplace for many ambulance staff. Some are regularly reduced to tears by the overwhelming pressures. “The government’s failure to fund services properly has left them with too few staff and emergency vehicles. “Demand is so extreme that paramedics have no time to offload about their many challenging experiences. Long-term exposure to this level of stress could lead to serious mental illness. Staff shouldn’t be left to suffer emotional damage just for doing their jobs.” A spokesperson for the Department of Health and Social Care said: “We recognise the pressure this pandemic has put on all NHS staff. “To help relieve these pressures, NHS England and Improvement has given ambulance trusts an extra £55m to boost staff numbers for winter, providing over 700 additional staff in control rooms and on the frontline, alongside £1.75m to support the wellbeing of frontline ambulance staff.”It was received wisdom that none of Johnson’s former aides now in the private sector were likely to accept the risk of a job back alongside the beleaguered prime minister. Step forward Guto Harri, a former BBC journalist turned PR professional who helped Rupert Murdoch’s News UK after the phone-hacking scandal and worked alongside Johnson during his first term as London mayor in City Hall. Harri had been working as a director for Hawthorn Advisors, a communications firm founded by Tory co-chairman Ben Elliot. With his previous communications director on the way out, Johnson clearly turned to a familiar face in his moment of need as he faced a vacuum at the heart of No 10 after the “partygate” scandal. Harri, who said he was “proud to join a team of capable, grownup and professional and pragmatic people”, will start immediately in a critical week for Johnson’s premiership. The choice was on one level predictable, as Johnson has often chosen advisers who were longstanding and trusted, such as Sir Edward Lister, Munira Mirza and Ben Gascoigne. However, it is surprising in other ways given that Harri was a staunch remainer in the Brexit debate and had previously been critical of Johnson, saying in 2018 that he believed Johnson would be a “hugely divisive” prime minister. These comments were seized on immediately by Dominic Cummings, Johnson’s former adviser who is trying to bring him down, who tweeted: “Message from No10: ‘So our new boss is a pro-Remain lobbyist who’s said the PM is ‘sexually incontinent’, ‘hugely divisive’, ‘destructive’, ‘dragging the country down’, &amp; picked ‘wrong side’ in referendum’ GREAT.” But Harri has been by no means uniformly critical of the prime minister. He struck a defensive tone towards Johnson on LBC last month, saying people were losing their “sense of perspective” about the story that Johnson was given a cake while happy birthday was sung in the cabinet room in June 2020. “Are we really so prissy, a piece of cake being brought into a meeting is considered sickening?” he said at the time. During a previous media appearance, Harri denied that Johnson was either a “party animal” or someone who was easy to tempt to “wine o’clock” drinks after work. He also told BBC Newsnight that a “really grovelling apology” could help Johnson survive the “toxic” situation, but added: “The problem at the moment is that nobody seems to be getting a grip.” After the news of his appointment, Harri responded to Cummings by highlighting an article he wrote in 2020 predicting the adviser’s demise within the No 10 operation. It described him as a “powerful unelected official cultivating a high profile, disagreeing with the prime minister, undermining the cabinet, picking on special advisers, hiring weirdos who can’t survive a week in public life and providing us all with a detailed running commentary of how wonderful this is all meant to be”. The article contained a defence of the BBC’s place in national life, which contrasts with Cummings’s critical stance towards the broadcaster and could be interesting in light of the government’s plans to abolish the licence fee. A native Welsh speaker who often tweets in Welsh, Harri started his career as a journalist and later became chief political correspondent for the BBC. He worked for Johnson in City Hall between 2008 and 2014 before going into private PR working for Rupert Murdoch’s News UK as it sought to recover from the phone-hacking scandal. He made the news last year after being taken off air by GB News for taking the knee during a discussion about racism towards black footballers. His return to Johnson’s team has thrust him back into the headlines, but his main job will be to see if it is possible to keep his scandal-hit boss out of them.Mike Pence’s former chief of staff Marc Short joined several senior Republicans in rallying to defend the former vice-president on Sunday in his escalating feud with Donald Trump over the legitimacy of the 2020 presidential election. Some of Trump’s advisers on the 2020 election were like “snake oil salesmen”, Short said on Sunday. Pence angered the former president this week by rejecting Trump’s false claim that he had the power to overturn Joe Biden’s victory by refusing to accept results from seven contested states. At a conference hosted by the conservative Federalist Society in Florida on Friday, Pence delivered his strongest rebuke to date of Trump’s election lies, declaring that it was “un-American” to believe that any one person had the right to choose the president. On Sunday, Short, and the Republican senators John Barrasso, Lisa Murkowski and Marco Rubio, were among senior party figures who backed Pence’s position, adding their voices to a backlash by other prominent Republican figures apparently growing weary of Trump’s continued obsession with his election defeat and subversion of democracy. “There’s nothing in the 12th amendment or the Electoral Count Act that would afford a vice-president that authority,” Short told NBC’s Meet the Press, describing advisers who told Trump that Pence could send election results back to the states as “snake oil salesmen”. “The vice-president was crystal clear from day one that he didn’t have this authority.” Pence, as president of the US senate, certified Biden’s victory in the early morning of 7 January 2021, hours after a mob incited by the defeated president launched a deadly insurrection on the US Capitol. Short, who sheltered with Pence in the Capitol as the mob outside erected a gallows and called for the then vice-president to be hanged, added that his boss had no alternative but to certify Biden’s win. “He was following what the constitution afforded the vice-president … he was doing his duty, which was what he was required to, under an oath to the constitution to defend it,” he said. “Unfortunately the president had many bad advisers, who were basically snake oil salesmen giving him really random and novel ideas as to what the vice-president could do. But our office researched that and recognized that was never an option.” Short also attacked the Republican party’s position – crystalized this week in a widely derided censure motion for Liz Cheney and Adam Kinzinger, the only two Republicans on the House committee investigating the insurrection, that the January 6 rioters were engaging in “legitimate political discourse”. “From my front-row seat, I did not see a lot of legitimate political discourse,” said Short, who along with the vice-president had to be hustled to a place of safety as the mob rampaged through the building. “They evacuated us into a secure location at the bottom of the Capitol. There was an attempt to put the vice-president into a motorcade but he was clear to say: ‘That’s not a visual I want the world to see of us fleeing.’ We stayed there and worked to try and bring the business back together and complete the work that night.” Barrasso, a Wyoming Republican and ranking member of the Senate foreign affairs committee, agreed with Short’s assessment in an appearance on Fox News Sunday. “I voted to certify the election, Mike Pence did his constitutional duty that day,” Barrasso said. “It’s not the Congress that elects a president, it’s the American people.” Rubio, a Republican senator for Florida, told CBS’s Face the Nation that he had long known that Pence lacked the authority to bend to Trump’s will. “I concluded [that] back in January of 2021, when the issue was raised,” he said. “I looked at it, had analyzed it, and came to the same conclusion that vice-presidents can’t simply decide not to certify an election.” Rubio refused to say whether he thought the riot was political discourse, but added: “Anybody who committed crimes on January 6th should be prosecuted. If you entered the Capitol and you committed acts of violence and you were there to hurt people, you should be prosecuted.” Murkowski, an Alaska Republican, is among the supporters of an “aggressive” bipartisan effort in Congress, criticized by Trump, to overhaul the 1887 Electoral Count Act and enshrine in statute that a vice-president has no role in deciding a presidential election. “We’ve identified clearly some things within the act, the ambiguities that need to be addressed,” she told CNN’s State of the Union.Syl Johnson, the blues, funk and soul singer whose work was much sampled in US hip-hop, has died aged 85. No cause of death was announced by his family, who said of Johnson: “He lived his life as a singer, musician and entrepreneur who loved black music … A fiery, fierce, fighter, always standing for the pursuit of justice as it related to his music and sound, he will truly be missed by all who crossed his path.” Born in Mississippi in 1936, Johnson was raised in Chicago where he remained throughout his life. He released his first solo material in 1959, and wrote genre-straddling work that led him to describe himself as “a jack-of-all-trades. More soul than Marvin [Gaye], more funk than James [Brown]”. He had his biggest hit in 1975 with Take Me To the River, the song by labelmate Al Green that would also be recorded by Talking Heads. It reached No 7 in the US R&amp;B chart and crossed over into the Top 50 of the pop chart. Perhaps his most famous song, though, is Different Strokes, sampled by dozens of hip-hop artists: its catchy brass line was used by the Wu-Tang Clan while Kanye West and Jay-Z used Johnson’s energetic exclamations on their track The Joy. It also appears on classics such as De La Soul’s The Magic Number, Public Enemy’s Fight the Power and Eric B &amp; Rakim’s I Know You Got Soul. Another key Johnson track was Is It Because I’m Black?, a slow, disconsolate ballad that is among the most affecting of the civil rights era. It too was frequently sampled, once again by Wu-Tang Clan and also Snoop Dogg and Cypress Hill. Johnson attempted to sue the latter group, arguing their sample wasn’t cleared, but lost in 2008 and on appeal in 2011. Johnson reached a settlement with West and Jay-Z over their use of Different Strokes in 2012. “I’m not Bill Gates, but I’ll never have to worry about money again because of the rappers,” he said in 2010. After releasing 10 albums, Johnson retired in the late 1980s, but returned to music in the mid-1990s. He recorded with daughter Syleena Johnson, an R&amp;B singer best known for her guest vocal on Kanye West’s hit single All Falls Down. His albums found a new audience after they were reissued by the label Numero Group in 2010 – their box set of his work earned him two Grammy nominations. The label said in tribute: “Sock it to ‘em wherever you end up next, old friend.”Good morning. There are fresh warnings about a potential Russian invasion of Ukraine. The Morrison government says it will restore ABC funding. And the future of Neighbours is in doubt. Russia has enough troops in place to seize Kyiv or another Ukrainian city but not yet for a full takeover and occupation of the country, Ukraine’s former defence minister has said, as Washington warned that an invasion could take place at any time. Andriy Zagorodnyuk said in an interview with the Guardian that the situation looked “pretty dire”: “Russia could now seize any city in Ukraine. But we still don’t see the 200,000 troops needed for a full-scale invasion.” Germany is preparing to send reinforcements to its battle group in Lithuania as the chancellor, Olaf Scholz, headed to Washington to reassure Nato allies his country can be relied upon. The government will restore ABC funding to 2018 levels, when Malcolm Turnbull imposed an $84m indexation pause, with the public broadcaster to be given $3.3bn for the next three years. The communications minister, Paul Fletcher, has also announced SBS will receive $953.7m, including an additional $37.5m in ongoing funding to support its long-term sustainability, as part of the government’s response to the media reform green paper. On the eve of the Winter Olympics, China promised the world a “streamlined, safe and most splendid” Games. But just two days into the event organisers are facing a litany of complaints from athletes and countries on multiple fronts. The Swedes have suggested that the conditions in the mountains are perilously cold. A Polish skater says she was living in fear in a Beijing isolation ward and has “cried until I have no more tears”. The Finns have claimed an ice hockey player is being kept in Covid quarantine for no reason. And the Germans? They are frustrated there is no hot food at the downhill skiing. Australia Rapid antigen Covid tests will be made tax deductible for workers and businesses, but the treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, says other economic support measures must wind up as the economy returns to normal. Neighbours has been axed in the UK in a move that could sound the death knell for the show. Australian broadcaster Network Ten says it is determined to save the show but it needs a new backer. The Sex Work Decriminalisation Act 2021 is to be debated in Victoria’s parliament this week. The bill will repeal offences for consensual sex work, strengthen anti-discrimination protections for workers and allow the industry to be regulated using existing laws that apply to all other Victorian businesses. Here’s a closer look at the legislation. Western Australia holds the key to Australia’s emissions goals. But can a government so committed to gas deliver? Environmentalists fear the premier could legislate away regulations and undo progress towards net zero at the stroke of a pen. A landmark homelessness report reveals health and discrimination problems, with the paper’s authors calling for a new national strategy. The world The US has suffered 900,000 deaths from Covid-19, the highest figure of any nation. America also has the highest death rate of any wealthy country, with half of the deaths occurring after vaccines became available. A prominent journalist has been arrested under terrorism and sedition laws as a crackdown on the press in Indian-administered Kashmir continues to escalate. Tributes have been paid to Rayan Oram, the five-year-old Moroccan boy whose body was recovered from a well on Saturday, and whose plight had moved his country and the world. The Prince of Wales has paid tribute to his “darling wife” the Duchess of Cornwall for her “steadfast support” after the Queen announced that Camilla would be known as “Queen Consort” when Charles becomes king. Recommended reads Amid the hype over her acclaimed performance as Diana, Princess of Wales in Spencer, Kristen Stewart briefly stopped awards pundits dead in their tracks when, upon being asked about her Oscar buzz, she drily admitted: “I don’t give a shit.” Sacrilege! Some of the best films and performances of all time haven’t been considered by the Academy, she continued. “There’s five spots. What the fuck are you going to do?” Nobody disagrees with Stewart on any of this: just ask our critics, whose ideal Oscar ballots are knowingly far from the expected reality of next week’s nominations. On the eve of his new double album, Johnny Marr takes questions from readers and celebrity fans on being a style icon, marrying young and 20 years without booze. At 30, Adeel Akhtar was all but homeless – now he’s been nominated for this year’s Baftas. Here the actor talks about the beauty of ordinary lives, racism, role models and feeling hopeful. Listen Joe Rogan’s popularity is down to his ability to connect with his predominantly white male listeners – and to be a relatable, self-optimising role model, journalist Devin Gordon tells Michael Safi. Rogan says he has learned from controversy. But how much is he prepared to change the approach that brought him success? Full Story is Guardian Australia’s daily news podcast. Subscribe for free on Apple Podcasts, Spotify or any other podcasting app. Sport Jakara Anthony has ended a 12-year Winter Olympics gold-medal drought for Australia by claiming a dominant victory in the women’s moguls at the Beijing Games. For the first time in Winter Olympics history Australia had won more than one medal on a single day: Tess Coady claimed bronze in the women’s snowboard slopestyle. This past week has marked five years since the first AFLW game was played. It is still far too easy to identify cracks in the league, including a lack of representation, a truncated season and an ongoing pursuit of pay parity. Equally, though, looking back also serves as a way of counting blessings. In five years, all AFL clubs now have a women’s side. The AFLW has gone from being a largely symbolic league moulded in the shape of the men’s competition to a distinct and strategic offering for the AFL. Women and girls have signed up to play football in droves. Media roundup During an interview with 60 Minutes, the parents of Cleo Smith, a four-year-old girl who was abducted for 18 days, said their daughter was still coming to terms with being held captive, WA Today reports. Cleo is “happy, bubbly, sad and angry”. Australian skier Katie Parker will not be able to compete in the giant slalom after continuing to test positive for Covid-19, despite having recovered from the virus, Sydney Morning Herald reports. Coming up Most Queensland students return to school. An inquest into the death of Kevin Bugmy, 57, an Aboriginal man who died in custody at a correctional centre, will be held. And if you’ve read this far … Is there a better calendar we could use or invent? Guardian readers weigh in. Sign up If you would like to receive the Guardian Australia morning mail to your email inbox every weekday, sign up here. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com. Discover Australian Weekend Every Saturday from 6am, enjoy early access to the best journalism planned for the weekend in one elegant app, plus a curated selection of the week’s news and analysis from Australia and the world.Allies of Boris Johnson have insisted that “grownups” are now in charge of his operation as he heads into critical week for his beleaguered premiership that could see him face a confidence vote and the threat of further damaging revelations. Tory MPs said Johnson may have bought some time by bringing a new team into No 10. One major Conservative donor, Alexander Temerko, told the Guardian that the prime minister should now take the opportunity to “purge” the cabinet of disloyal leadership rivals. However, critics of Johnson’s leadership said they thought the number of letters of no confidence in the prime minister was now not far off the 54 necessary to trigger a ballot on his premiership. “It’s really hard to know, but I’m pretty sure the numbers are in the 40s, so it’s only a small surge that could take it over the line,” said one former cabinet minister. “Having said that, he may well survive the vote itself. There are people doing that calculation, saying they’ll hold off until they think he’ll lose.” Johnson is also facing the possibility of more revelations from Dominic Cummings, his former senior adviser. Cummings, who revealed details of some of the No 10 parties, is said to be planning to raise further questions this week about the furore over the funding of his £112,000 flat refurbishment initially funded through a loan from a Tory donor. A report in the Sunday Times also said the prime minister’s wife was tiring of the pressure they are both under. More than 15 MPs have called on Johnson to resign, about half of whom have publicly confirming they have submitted letters of no confidence. On Sunday, Mark Harper, a former chief whip and major sceptic of Covid rules, gave a scathing assessment of the prime minister’s conduct, saying: “No 10’s repeated denials, changing stories and drift resulting from the scandal around unlawful lockdown parties have led to many of my constituents questioning the prime minister’s honesty, integrity and fitness for office. These views now appear to be widespread across the country.” He added: “Conservatives still have so much to offer to our country, so it’s vital for Conservative MPs to consider all the options necessary to get our party back on track.” No 10 is planning a fightback this week with a series of policy announcements to show it is trying to turn the page on the partygate scandal, even though 12 gatherings are still under police investigation and the final Sue Gray report is yet to come. Johnson has also implemented several staff changes, bringing in Guto Harri, a former aide and ex-BBC journalist, as his new communications director and making Cabinet Office minister Steve Barclay his chief of staff. Henry Newman, a deputy chief of staff and ally of Carrie Johnson, is expected to return to a role with his former boss Michael Gove. Harri told the Guardian he was “proud to join a team of capable, grownup, professional and pragmatic people that will hopefully allow the PM and his cabinet to operate effectively and deliver what they promised to the people”. He added that there were big post-pandemic challenges that they would “really need to get on with”. Harri’s appointment was for the main part welcomed by Tory MPs despite his having backed remain in the EU referendum, with two senior Brexit-supporting MPs saying it was “very positive” and a return at long last to “sensible” appointments. One said it would hopefully provide more stability after the era of Cummings and the subsequent era of aides close to the prime minister’s wife. However, there was more scepticism among some Tories about Barclay’s role; one MP said he was seen with suspicion by some who believe he is an ally of Rishi Sunak. The chancellor has given Johnson only lukewarm support over the parties and distanced himself from No 10 over the prime minister’s false Jimmy Savile slur towards Labour leader Keir Starmer. Experts have also questioned whether Barclay is taking on too wide a brief, with his Cabinet Office ministerial role in addition to his chief of staff job and responsbilities as an MP. A spokesman said many of his ministerial responsibilities would be redistributed to other ministers within the Cabinet Office. With Johnson’s future still hanging by a thread, Temerko, who has given more than £600,000 to the Conservative party, said he was urging other donors and his “friends in parliament” to continue supporting Johnson. The Ukrainian-born businessman, who co-owns an energy firm called Aquind, last month threatened legal action against the government for turning down its plans to build a controversial £1.2bn electricity and internet cable running from the UK to France. Temerko said: “Our party leader, Boris Johnson, is today the best candidate to be the prime minister; he now has nothing to lose, and so must be bold, and thus make urgent decisions to stabilise the situation in the energy market and the general economy, I believe. I can only recommend him to consider a serious reshuffle, and to purge from the cabinet those who try to trigger internal party contests, rather than focusing on their ministerial duties.” Penny Mordaunt, the Conservative MP for Portsmouth North and a former defence secretary, had led calls opposing the project, saying it was not helpful to the UK’s energy security. The majority owner of Aquind was revealed in 2020 to be Viktor Fedotov, a Russian-born billionaire.Brendan Rodgers has apologised to Leicester City supporters for his team’s “embarrassing” 4-1 FA Cup defeat by Nottingham Forest that he said proved “why a lot of these players are not top players”. On a day when a fan from the Leicester end was arrested for running on to the pitch to attempt to attack Forest players celebrating after Joe Worrall’s goal made it 3-0, the visitors’ manager set up a confrontation with his ailing squad by accusing them of a lack of hunger. The FA Cup holders, enduring a trying season in the Premier League, were humiliated at the home of their local Championship rivals who secured a fifth‑round tie at home against Huddersfield Town. Philip Zinckernagel, Brennan Johnson and Djed Spence also scored, with Kelechi Iheanacho pulling one back, in the teams’ first meeting for eight years. “The lads were brilliant,” Steve Cooper, the Forest manager, said. Leicester released a statement banning the pitch invader from their games for life. The FA confirmed it will investigate the incident in which Ryan Yates, Johnson and Davis pushed back against the offender who threw two punches. “The club is appalled by such behaviour and offers its apologies to Nottingham Forest and its players whose safety was compromised,” a Leicester spokesman said. Rodgers, who substituted his captain Youri Tielemans for the day for “performance” reasons, lambasted his players after the game. “It was an awful performance and I have to apologise to the supporters,” he said. “To come here, [for] the first game between the two sides for a long time, [with] a great atmosphere … in derby games you need authority and you need physicality. It was sadly missing from our performance. “I said it before about having changes in the squad. It’s a lack of hunger. That’s why a lot of these players are not top players. Because they can’t sustain it. That’s where my admiration of the really top players who can keep that hunger and desire – no matter how much they achieve. “I always judge it on the physicality of the team: the pressing, the aggression. When you stop getting it, you can’t quite get there, your time could be up.There are a lot of these players, between now and the end of the season, who need to prove that they are still worthy of being here.”When Danny Hunter took over as the chairman of Boreham Wood in 1999, he was working in the film industry as a prop master. He won an Oscar for Shakespeare in Love, he was a part of the team that made Stanley Kubrick’s Full Metal Jacket and there were plenty of James Bonds, too. Were any of the silver screen dramas as gripping and outlandish as this? In the prickly heat of the moment, surely the greatest in Boreham Wood’s 74-year-history, it felt as though the answer had to be no. Under the astute management of Luke Garrard, who has been at the helm since October 2015, Boreham Wood have established themselves in the National League, the top tier of the non-league game – and on a relative shoestring. They have gone close to promotion to the Football League, losing the play-off final to Tranmere at Wembley in 2017-18, and they are well-placed for another push this season. But if going up is the “Hoy Grail,” as Garrard has put it, this was La La Land. Only three times previously have Boreham Wood taken a Football League scalp in the FA Cup – those of Blackpool in 2017-18, Southend last season and Wimbledon in the third round of the competition this time out. Those clubs were in Leagues One and Two. But in Boreham Wood’s first ever fourth round tie, this was Bournemouth – a club that has designs on promotion into the Premier League, which recruited heavily in January to help them there. Garrard’s team were deserved winners. They rode their luck at times towards the end, with Scott Parker seeing three of his Bournemouth substitutes go close to the equaliser. Philip Billing blew a one-on-one chance, Ryan Christie saw a shot come back off the crossbar and, at the very last, Dominic Solanke dragged wide. It did not feel like a siege. Bournemouth monopolised the ball – the statistics showed that Boreham Wood had only 18% of it – but they did not create nearly enough. For long spells, it felt like possession for the sake of possession, sterile domination, and the moment that Boreham Wood had dreamed of came on 38 minutes. Mark Ricketts – a qualified personal trainer – was a youth team player at Charlton when Parker was a star at the south London club. Here, the 37-year-old, who is doing an Open university course in IT and business, made the difference when he threaded home a low shot from the edge of the area. The spark had come from Jacob Mendy, the left wing-back, who began his career within the Atlético Madrid youth set-up. He burst to the byline to pull back a low cross, which produced a rushed and unconvincing clearance from the Bournemouth midfielder, Gavin Kilkenny. Ricketts was waiting and his side-foot went through a crowd, kissed the inside of the post and went in. How the captain celebrated. In the technical area, Garrard tried to show little emotion before he threw the contents of a water bottle up and all over the place´. Parker’s priority is promotion and he made nine changes to the team that had won at Barnsley in the Championship last weekend. His line-up, which featured two of the January deadline day loanees – Freddie Woodman and Nat Phillips from Newcastle and Liverpool, respectively – still ought to have had enough. But they were too passive in the first-half, fringe players failing to seize their opportunities, and Boreham Wood not only settled easily, they went on to create something that they could protect. There had been no trace of nerves from Boreham Wood, who have lost only twice this season – most recently on 23 October. And, if anything, it was Woodman who showed them, the goalkeeper playing out a loose pass which almost ushered in Josh Rees in the opening minute. Boreham Wood’s wing-backs were under orders to push up, with Garrard not wanting to die wondering. Rees worked centrally, in front of the midfield but deeper than the wide attackers, Tyrone Marsh and Scottt Boden. The boos for Bournemouth were loud when the half-time whistle went. Moments earlier, Lewis Cook had lifted high – Bournemouth’s only real effort of the first-half – to draw an ironic chant from the home crowd. Yes, they had mustered a shot but, more seriously, they were staring at humiliation. Parker introduced Christie and another deadline day loanee, Todd Cantwell, for the second-half – a sign of his urgency but would it come from his players? Woodman was almost caught out by a Ricketts cross that swirled towards the far corner and Boreham Wood dug in hard at the other end. Bournemouth pressed on to the front foot and there was an inevitability about how they came on strong in the closing stages. Parker threw on Billing and Jack Stacey and then Solanke, his leading scorer. The changes made a difference and there were chances but the cutting edge was missing. Billing lobbed high when played through by Christie on 76 minutes and Taye Ashby-Hammond tipped a shot from the latter up and on to the crossbar. Billing headed the rebound against the woodwork but he was offside and it did not matter when Jaidon Anthony put the rebound into the net. Deep into five nerve-shredding added minutes, Boreham Wood knew they had pulled it off when Solanke dragged his shot past the post. “We’re going to Wembley,” chanted the 1,400 Boreham Wood fans inside the ground. They are actually going to Goodison Park for a fifth round tie against Everton. “It’s unbelievable,” Garrard said. “This is what dreams are made of.”• From April, national insurance contributions will be charged at 13.25% on most income up to £50,000 and at 3.25% on income above that, not 13.5% and 2% respectively, as an article stated (NIC rise to hit hardest for people on £30K to £50K, 29 January, p45). • A review of the Smile, the latest project by Jonny Greenwood and Thom Yorke, misspelled the former’s first name as “Johnny” (Echoes of prog rock in a meandering second gig, 31 January, p16). • Other recently amended articles include: Behind the label: how the US stitched up the Honduras garment industry François Truffaut’s 20 best films – ranked Reckless, Trumpian leadership is losing Johnson allies. It should lose him his job ‘Apartheid state’: Israel’s fears over image in US are coming to pass Editorial complaints and correction requests can be sent to: guardian.readers@theguardian.com. You can also write to: Readers’ editor, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU, or leave a voicemail on +44 (0) 20 3353 4736.Navy officials on Sunday identified a Seal candidate who died after an intense training session known as Hell Week, and promised to investigate the episode that left a second sailor in hospital. Kyle Mullen, 24, of New Jersey, died in hospital in Coronado, California, on Friday night, the officials said, giving no cause of death. The other sailor is unidentified and remains in a naval hospital in San Diego in a stable condition. The pair were among a group of recruits seeking to become members of the navy’s elite sea, air and land team best known for killing terrorist leader Osama bin Laden in 2011. Neither was engaged in active training when they were taken ill, the navy’s statement said, adding that the incident occurred several hours after the candidates successfully completed the basic underwater demolition segment of “Hell Week” training, which it said was “part of the first phase of the Navy Seal assessment and selection pathway”. In the missive released on Sunday, the navy confirmed Mullen, of Manapalan, New Jersey, as the dead candidate. “We extend our deepest sympathies to Seaman Mullen’s family for their loss,” Rear Admiral HW Howard III, commander of the naval special warfare command, said. “We are extending every form of support we can to the Mullen family and Kyle’s classmates.” Hell Week training is part of a lengthy and rigorous selection process for Seal candidates, following an initial seven to nine-week initial boot camp, and consisting of exhaustive underwater and parachute training. The program, according to the Seal website, “is designed to push you to your physical and mental limits”. The dropout rate is high, and only about 20% of recruits successfully complete the training that the navy acknowledges is “brutal”. Up to 250 candidates each year go on to become Seals. According to USA Today, Mullen’s death is the first of a Seal candidate in training for six years. In 2016, Seaman James Derek Lovelace, 21, drowned in a pool training session, which was initially ruled a homicide by the San Diego medical examiner after hearing evidence that his head was repeatedly pushed under water by an instructor. Navy investigators later ruled that no crime was committed and declined to file charges, although NBC reported at the time that three Seal candidates had died in four consecutive training classes, and that Lovelace was the fifth trainee to lose consciousness in a pool exercise in four months. A postmortem examination later revealed that Lovelace had an enlarged heart, which contributed to his death. The Navy’s Seals unit was formalized by President John F Kennedy in 1962 after military leaders flagged the need for a highly trained maritime force to respond quickly to escalating situations or to conduct special operations. But elite US forces operating as Seals had a storied history before Kennedy’s administration codified the unit, taking a leading role in the D-day landings of 1944 and the invasion of Okinawa the following year.The numbers of cancer patients facing delays in seeing a specialist for the first time and starting their treatment have hit record highs in England, amid fears that overstretched NHS services can no longer provide prompt care. The disclosure comes as a new row over how quickly hospitals can clear the record 6 million-strong NHS backlog has forced ministers to delay publication of the long-awaited plan to tackle it. Half a million people in England with suspected cancer will have to wait longer than the supposed two-week maximum to see an oncologist this year, an analysis for the House of Commons library reveals. The number of patients confirmed to have the disease who are unable to start treatment such as surgery or chemotherapy within the 31 or 62 days that hospitals try to guarantee is expected to exceed 75,000 for the first time. Experts, who claim significant shortages in the NHS cancer workforce are to blame, fear delays in getting diagnosed and starting care could reduce a patient’s chances of survival. Cancer charities highlighted the “unimaginable distress and anxiety” they induce in patients. “Cancer care is in crisis,” the shadow health secretary, Wes Streeting, said. “As this new analysis shows, terrifyingly large numbers of people are waiting longer than they should to receive vital cancer care and treatment with the insecurity of not knowing.” Streeting, who was treated for kidney cancer last year, asked the Commons library to analyse the NHS’s performance against the array of targets introduced 11 years ago that in theory guarantee patients speedy care. The analysis found that between April and November last year 290,428 people with possible symptoms of cancer did not get to see a specialist within 14 days of being urgently referred by a GP. After seven months of the year that is already far higher than the previous highest number breaches of the target, the 235,549 recorded last year. They include 91,896 people who may have breast cancer, 76,307 with suspected skin cancer and 47,936 who GPs believe may be suffering from lower gastro-intestinal cancer. The total figure equates to 41,490 people a month. If that trend continues, as many as 497,877 people who have a lump, unexplained bleeding or other potential sign of the disease will have missed out on a first appointment by the time 2021-22 ends at the end of next month. If confirmed, it will represent an almost 11-fold rise on the 45,291 such cases seen a decade ago. “These figures show the huge challenge the NHS faces in clearing the cancer backlog. This is a time of real worry and anxiety for people waiting for a cancer diagnosis, with any delay creating the risk of a worse prognosis”, said Minesh Patel, the head of policy at Macmillan Cancer Support. The analysis also shows that the proportion of women who GPs fear may have breast cancer who see an oncologist within two weeks has fallen to just 72.7% – the lowest since records began. Delyth Morgan, the chief executive of Breast Cancer Now, said: “It’s highly alarming that increasing numbers of women with potential breast cancer symptoms are waiting over two weeks to be seen by a specialist. “Ensuring that women with breast cancer get a prompt diagnosis and start treatment as quickly as possible gives them the best chance of survival.” She urged ministers to “put an end to agonising delays for women” and boost the NHS breast cancer workforce “which was already overstretched and chronically under-resourced prior to the pandemic”. Some hospitals are so short of specialist cancer nurses that they have had to limit the amount of chemotherapy they provide. Commons researchers also found that 12,498 people diagnosed with cancer during the first seven months of 2021-22 were unable to undergo their “first definitive treatment” within 31 days of doctors deciding to treat them. That is another record high compared with the 13,907 such cases recorded in 2020-21 and could mean that by the end of March about 21,425 people will have waited longer than a month this year. Ten years ago the same figure was 4,005. Even larger numbers of cancer patients are not having their “first definitive treatment“ 62 days after an urgent GP referral. Between April and November in all 32,647 people missed out on undergoing surgery, chemotherapy or radiotherapy within that timescale, which is another key NHS cancer target. Again, if the 4,664 people a month denied that chance is repeated until the end of next month, then a total of 55,966 people across the whole of 2021-22 will have been affected. The Department of Health and Social Care (DHSC) was expected to publish the “elective recovery plan” detailing measures to tackle the 6-million backlog, on Monday. That, however, has been delayed for a second time by a fresh bout of wrangling between NHS England and the government over how how demanding the targets imposed on hospitals should be. The disagreement centres on the deadline by which NHS trusts will have to have treated all those who have been waiting either one year or two years for care, usually an operation. “Conversations about the targets have become protracted and difficult. The Treasury wants a certain scale of ambition, they want tougher targets than NHS England thinks is feasible”, said an NHS source. Another NHS source said: “There will be an aim to end 104-week waiters by the end of March. And nobody will wait more than a year for treatment by March 2025, but the government are trying to bring that forward to March 2024, and that is still being negotiated.” The Commons library’s research shows that the number of patients not getting cancer care on time has been rising relentlessly every year since Labour first created the targets in 2009. “The Conservatives blame the pandemic”, said Streeting. “But the state of cancer care has been worsening every year since 2010, and the NHS had record long waiting lists and 100,000 staff shortages before Covid hit. It’s a bit rich for the Tories to now declare a ‘war on cancer’ when they spent the last 12 years disarming the NHS through mismanagement and underfunding.” In a statement the DHSC blamed the unprecedented delays on the pandemic. It said: “Cancer diagnosis and treatment remains a top priority. The pandemic has put enormous pressures on the NHS, causing waiting lists to grow, but now most cancer services are back to or above pre-pandemic levels. “Our record investment in the NHS includes an extra £2bn this year and £8bn over the next three years to cut waiting times, including through delivering an extra 9 million checks, scans and operations, making sure more patients get the treatment they need sooner. “Last week the health and social care secretary declared a national war on cancer, with the launch of a call for evidence to inform a new 10-year plan to improve cancer care, speed up diagnosis and invest in innovative new treatments.”Eddie Jones’s decision to take Marcus Smith off at a crucial juncture in England’s Calcutta Cup defeat by Scotland was premeditated and a missed opportunity for the fly-half, according to his Harlequins coach, Tabai Matson. England were 17-10 ahead at Murrayfield – with Smith scoring all of their points – when Jones replaced him and introduced George Ford in the 63rd minute. Scotland proceeded to mount a dramatic comeback with Ford’s main contribution a disappointing touch-finder as Jones’s side sought to snatch victory in the closing minutes. When asked about the substitution, Jones brushed off suggestions it was a costly decision, insisting, “It’s a 23-man squad and we felt George could do a job” – despite the fact that Smith had scored England’s only try and was on target with four penalties during his time on the field. Numerous former players questioned the decision and, when Matson was asked about Smith’s showing at Murrayfield before Harlequins’ defeat by Sale on Sunday, he told BT Sport: “I think when he went off it must have been premeditated because he was going really well. His opportunity to close out the game would have been great for him but it must have been premeditated.” Smith is, at least, expected to keep hold of the No 10 jersey against Italy on Sunday with Jones saying he will stick by his rookies as England seek to get their Six Nations campaign back on track. Tom Curry is also likely to retain the captaincy with a defiant Jones adamant that his players need to be put “back into the fire” after England succumbed to defeat on the opening weekend of the championship for the third year in a row. Italy’s defeat by France on Sunday was their 33rd in a row and the trip to Rome offers Jones the chance to freshen up his side. The England head coach revealed that Courtney Lawes, who has been sidelined since last month with a head injury, has an outside chance of being fit to face Italy but Curry is expected to continue as captain if he does not return. Manu Tuilagi made an eye‑catching 29-minute cameo in Sale’s 36-14 victory at the Stoop, so he, too, could come into contention to face Italy. The side that faced Scotland was the most inexperienced Jones has fielded in the Six Nations and, while England are now playing catchup in the championship, he intends to avoid making wholesale changes. “We’ve got a young team here that will learn a lesson from that,” Jones said. “I was really impressed by how in the first half it didn’t look like we were playing at Murrayfield – because we took it to them. So they didn’t have any of the fear of the crowd or the hostile reception you get. “It’s a tough lesson but we will learn from it, very quickly. They need to get put back in the fire but what I want to see is that enthusiasm to tackle the game. It’s only a good lesson if you learn from it. And the only way you learn from it is to be tested again. We’ll need to pick the best 23 to play against Italy. Courtney at this stage has an outside chance of playing against Italy. He is progressing well.” England’s defeat hinged on the penalty try awarded to Scotland when Luke Cowan-Dickie was shown a yellow card for deliberately slapping Finn Russell’s crossfield kick to Darcy Graham out of play. England led 17-10 at the time but another Russell penalty put Scotland 20-17 to the good and, while Jones’s side pressed for a response with a series of powerful scrums within kicking range, the referee, Ben O’Keeffe, opted against awarding a penalty. Jones has history with O’Keeffe, having been reprimanded for comments made after his side’s victory against Wales in 2020. Jones joked he would make a video similar to that which landed South Africa’s Rassie Erasmus in hot water last year but later said: “There is a good feedback system but ultimately we play in a game where there is a lot of judgment and the referee has got to make a judgment on the field quickly. And I am not going to criticise his decisions.”I have dedicated my entire existence to eliminating uncertainty, stress and anxiety in all their possible forms. So there is nothing more compulsively watchable to me than someone not only rushing to embrace those things at every turn but actively creating them – pumping their life so full of exhilarations and potential disasters that it threatens to explode at the lightest touch. If you are of the same persuasion, settle back – or rather, sit on the edge of your seat and prepare to fall off well before the closing credits – and enjoy the masterful portrait of such a thrill-seeker in the BBC’s rather wonderful Chloe (BBC One). It is a fierce, fresh sort-of-murder-mystery that is as keenly scripted as it is paced, and whose many threads are held firmly together by an outstanding performance from Erin Doherty. First (properly) seen as Princess Anne in The Crown, Doherty here plays Becky, a quiet twentysomething living with a mother who has early onset dementia. When not at one of her succession of office temp jobs, she spends her time obsessively scrolling through the social media accounts of Chloe (Poppy Gilbert), another twentysomething, who appears to be living a much more successful and glamorous life than her. It is soon revealed, however, that Becky has found a way of livening up her drab and (as her mother becomes more and more erratic and wounding) increasingly miserable life – namely, by faking several others instead. She is, in broad terms, a con artist. We watch in more or less grudging admiration as she parlays snippets of information, dates, names on invitations and overheard fragments of conversation as she gets first a toehold then a sturdy entrée into the art world. Her grift takes on a sudden focus, however, when the object of her obsession dies – apparently by suicide, preceded by a soulful quote put up on Chloe’s Instagram account, then confirmed by friends’ heartbroken posts beneath. Armed with a plausible backstory, a more suitable name (Sasha) and a designer coat she has lifted from a coat hook on the way out of the office, Becky gradually worms her way further into the scene. She covertly surveils the funeral, does some online digging and befriends Livia (Pippa Bennett-Warner), one of the bereaved posters and Chloe’s closest pal, to find out more about the non-curated version of Chloe’s life and the circumstances of her death. Another motivation is Becky’s slightly sociopathic instinct for meeting any emotional or practical need presented to her. The kaleidoscope twists again when we realise that there is a buried connection between Chloe and Becky so great that Becky was, in fact, the last person Chloe called – twice – before she died. Add further complications via a one-night stand, Josh (played by Brandon Micheal Hall with a perfect combination of amused detachment spiked with just a little fear, as he realises that there may be much more to the woman he knows as “Helena” than he ever suspected), and you have an absolute feast of a show. Created, written and directed by Sex Education alumna Alice Seabright, it has much of that show’s brio and fleet charm, although the subject matter couldn’t be more different. The central intrigue builds and never gets forgotten, but the real tension comes from seeing how far Becky can go – how big a house she can build with purloined business cards, how many plates she can keep spinning, how far out she can go with this jazz riff of a life and still get herself back in. On top of that, it’s a drama that examines the always fascinating gulf between the haves and the have-nots, and the increasingly common abyss running crossways to that – between the perceived figures (all filtered and posed shots presented for public consumption) who seem to be effortlessly winning at life and the ragged, very different realities behind them. Vitally for a drama about fake identities and shifting truths there is not one false note in it. That’s not to say it’s all massively likely (although before you decide quite how impossible Chloe’s events might be, do watch the upcoming fact-based Netflix drama about Anna Delvey, Inventing Anna, if you haven’t already mainlined everything you can about the most extraordinary scam artist of modern times). But you do understand what drives Becky, with all her gifts – whose useful expression is truncated by circumstance and crammed into a life that promises only to become smaller – to take the risks she takes and thrive on them. I hope she gets away with everything – and then joins Villanelle in Rome.Just 15.5% of the world’s coastal regions remain ecologically intact, according to new research that calls for urgent conservation measures to protect what remains and restore sites that are degraded. The study, led by researchers at the University of Queensland, used satellite data to examine the extent to which human activities have encroached on coastlines around the globe. It found that up to 2013 – the latest year for which the data was available – few intact coastlines remained, with even remote areas such as the Kimberley region of Western Australia affected by fishing and mining. The research, published in the scientific journal Conservation Biology, builds on previous work that examined human activities within terrestrial and marine ecosystems. The small areas of coast that remain undamaged by pressures such as fishing, agriculture, urban development, mining and roads were mostly in Canada, followed by Russia, Greenland, Chile, Australia and the United States. Very few intact areas and often high levels of degradation were found in island nations, much of Europe, and countries including Vietnam, India and Singapore. Coastal regions containing seagrasses, savannah and coral reefs had the highest levels of human pressure. Brooke Williams, the study’s lead author and a conservation ecologist at the University of Queensland, said because most of the world’s population live in coastal regions, the pressures on those ecosystems could take many forms and occurred both on land and at sea. “Our paper really advocates for coastal region restoration quite urgently,” she said. “That such a low proportion is at the higher spectrum of the intactness scale is alarming. It’s not good news.” The situation certainly would not have improved since 2013, she said. The coastal analysis was compiled by using two datasets called the human footprint (which examined land-based ecosystems) and the cumulative human pressure index (which examined pressures in marine environments). Pressures were then mapped out to 50km on either side of the shoreline. Williams said areas that were still largely intact were often more remote and thus more difficult to access. In Australia, the Great Australian Bight remained relatively untouched, but Williams noted it had faced development threats in recent years. Co-author James Watson, of the University of Queensland, said remoteness didn’t guarantee coastlines would remain intact, pointing to mining and particularly fishing as industries causing environmental decline in those places. He said he had expected Madagascar, Namibia and northern Australia would all retain large areas of intact coastline, but it had not proved to be consistently the case. “It shocks me how pervasive fishing is. It’s just everywhere. You can’t avoid it,” he said. “These remote places around the world, you’re seeing fishing impacts.” The researchers argue that protecting the world’s coastlines will require a range of measures, including legislation to protect undamaged regions and restoration work to improve places that have been degraded. “You’ve got to increase those areas that are safeguarded,” Watson said. “And in places that are heavily degraded we’ve got to have a much bigger restoration agenda not just for species but for water, for carbon, all of those things.”Getting a good night’s sleep has a positive impact on every part of our wellbeing. While we’re snoozing, our body works to support healthy brain function and physical health, and might even give our brains a chance to flush out toxins associated with neurodegeneration. On the flip side, ongoing poor sleep can lead to myriad health issues and affect our ability to learn and think clearly. Over time, the duration of our sleep has declined, so it’s more important than ever that when we do sleep, we get the best rest possible. It’s time to make a serious investment in our sleep, from the way we relax to the quality of our mattress. Here’s how to avoid the dreaded 3am wake-up call. Be firm about your bedtime routine To have a restorative sleep, we need to give our bodies and brains a chance to wind down properly before bed. Research has shown that a consistent evening routine can help us get to sleep faster and concentrate better the next day. Start by planning a set bedtime, working backwards from when you need to start unwinding to get the recommended seven to nine hours of sleep. Make the time to unwind properly. That might mean reclining with a good book, dropping in your favourite bath bomb, listening to music, or relaxing with breathing exercises and meditation. Take a break from devices. Studies in young people overwhelmingly show a link between screen media use and delayed bedtime and/or decreased total sleep time, while other research suggests blue-light emissions – such as those from our phones and tablets – negatively affect sleep, circadian timing and next-morning alertness. A light snack can help reduce wakefulness during the night, too. Create the ideal sleep environment Humans can be fussy sleepers. We find it harder to get a good rest when we’re too hot, overly stimulated or uncomfortable. The ideal environment is often cool, quiet and dark, but we’re all different. You might experiment with the conditions that suit you best – while others sleep best in total silence, you might feel comforted by rain sounds or white noise. Some people prefer to wear an eye mask, or have air movement from a fan, or crack open a window. As the seasons change, your environment might also need adjusting. Your physical environment is crucial, too. A pillow that’s the right height and firmness, together with the right mattress, can help you feel more supported as you sleep. Make sure your mattress is the right fit We spend about a third of our lives in bed. If you’re waking up feeling tired or stiff, it might be time for a mattress upgrade. Snooze mattress specialists recommend getting a replacement about every seven to 10 years. Mattress technology is always changing, so if you’re not sure what to look for, head into a store or online and ask. Sleep can be affected by having a bed that’s too firm or too soft, noisy or uncomfortable springs, and other people’s movement in the bed. And as our bodies and sleep behaviours change, so might our ideal mattress. We spend about a third of our lives in bed. Some tailored mattresses are designed to suit individual needs, even offering different comfort options and independent support systems for each side of the bed, so you can tailor the mattress to your comfort without having to compromise. Options such as Snooze’s SleepTailor® Luxe include restful features such as Nested Duo pocket springs that are interlaced for a seamless dual feel and a micro pocket coil comfort layer that provides additional support and conforms to your body. Get moving during the day What you do while you’re awake can also make a difference once your head hits the pillow. Research shows that regular exercise can help you fall asleep more quickly and improve the quality of your rest. Be mindful of your ideal sleeping environment, though. Exercise can raise our core body temperature and release endorphins, both of which can signal to our brains that it’s time to be awake. Talk to your doctor If you have all the right tools in place for a great sleep but you’re still feeling tired, it might be a sign of a more serious issue. Your doctor can talk to you about managing sleep disorders and conditions such as sleep apnoea and insomnia, so you can get the most out of your new sleep routine. With the right support, you’ll have the best chance of a restful night and an energetic day ahead. Customise your mattress for a better night’s sleep with the Snooze SleepTailor® range.Germany is preparing to send reinforcements to its battle group in Lithuania as the chancellor, Olaf Scholz, headed to Washington to reassure Nato allies his country can be relied upon over the Ukraine crisis. Tentative planning for a further deployment of German military force follows weeks of criticism of Berlin’s approach to Russia’s mobilisation of 145,000 troops on the border with Ukraine. The German government has refused to act on Kyiv’s calls for arms and has been vague over the future of the Russian Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline to Germany in the event of an incursion over the Ukrainian border. But in an interview with the Funke media group, Germany’s defence minister, Christine Lambrecht, emphasised her government’s continuing military commitment on Nato’s eastern flank. “We [Germany] are already making a very important contribution in Lithuania, where we are the only country in the European Union to have a battle group,” she said. “As a matter of principle, additional troops are available as reinforcement, and we are in talks with Lithuania at the moment to find out what exactly would make sense in this regard … Everyone in Nato can rely on us.” Since Russia’s annexation of Crimea in 2014, there have been four battle groups containing a total of 5,000 troops in Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and Poland led by the US, Germany, Canada and Britain. Germany provides about half of the 1,200 Nato troops in Lithuania. The US has ordered a further 3,000 troops to strengthen Nato’s eastern allies, with the first arriving on Saturday at Rzeszów military base in south-eastern Poland. On Sunday, 300 troops from the US 18th Airborne Corps arrived in Wiesbaden, Germany. As discussions over troop reinforcements continue, the German government will go on a diplomatic foray this week, with Scholz due at the White House on Monday and Germany’s foreign minister, Annalena Baerbock, expected in Ukraine on Monday and Tuesday, where she will inspect the frontline between Ukrainian troops and areas held by Russian-based separatists. Following a meeting with the US president, Joe Biden, Scholz will also welcome heads of state and government of the Baltic states to Berlin on Thursday to discuss the security situation in eastern Europe. On Sunday evening, in an interview with the ARD broadcaster, Scholz said Germany was open to boosting troop numbers. “We are … prepared to do whatever is necessary to strengthen” Germany’s presence in Nato operations in the Baltics, he said. A frenetic period of diplomatic activity is under way, with Moscow believed by US intelligence to have now assembled at least 70% of the firepower it needs to launch a major military operation by mid-February. On Sunday, the White House’s national security adviser, Jake Sullivan, said an attack could be launched as soon as Monday or come weeks down the line. Before Scholz’s visit, he also emphasised that he believed Nord Stream 2 would not go forward in the event of an incursion. Scholz, who took over from Angela Merkel in December, is due to visit Ukraine on 14 February and the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, at the Kremlin the next day. The French president, Emmanuel Macron, is seeing Putin on Monday, while the British foreign secretary, Liz Truss, will see her Russian counterpart, Sergei Lavrov in Moscow this week, the first such visit for four years. Last week, Fiona Hill, a former US intelligence officer on Russia and Eurasian affairs, told a congressional hearing that Putin “already has had something of a win because he’s got our undivided attention and part of the exercise was clearly to get us to focus on him”. EU diplomats concede that Putin has also been successful in highlighting fissures in the west’s approach, with the bloc’s leadership left out of the top-table peace talks and clear breaches emerging in a common line on the crisis. Last week while seeing Putin in Moscow, Hungary’s prime minister, Viktor Orbán, cast himself as a longtime ally of the Russian leader, informing the Kremlin that the EU was “ready for a reasonable agreement”. In an interview published on Sunday, Lambrecht, who became defence minister in December, defended Germany’s attitude, including the rejection of a request from Kyiv for missile defence systems, tools for electronic warfare, night-vision goggles, digital radios, radar stations and military ambulances. The German government was widely mocked for instead sending 5,000 protective helmets and a field hospital. Lambrecht said: “It has long been the clear stance of the federal government, even in previous legislative periods, that we do not deliver weapons to crisis areas in order not to escalate further there. “In the Ukraine conflict we have negotiating partners who have come back to the negotiating table … That is why it is now our task to de-escalate. We want to resolve this conflict peacefully.” Scholz has said the future of Nord Stream 2 will be on the table as part of a package of economic sanctions in the event of a Russian incursion into Ukrainian territory, but he has been shy of making any stronger statements in public. Last week, Ursula von der Leyen, the European Commission president, appeared to follow the US administration’s lead in trying to box Berlin in on the issue. “Nord Stream 2 cannot be excluded from the sanctions list, that is very clear,” she said.Russia has enough troops in place to seize Kyiv or another Ukrainian city but not yet sufficient numbers for a full takeover and occupation of the country, Ukraine’s former defence minister has said, as Washington warned that an invasion could take place at any time. Andriy Zagorodnyuk said in an interview with the Guardian that the situation looked “pretty dire”. “Russia could now seize any city in Ukraine. But we still don’t see the 200,000 troops needed for a full-scale invasion,” he said. His comments follow ominous briefings by the Biden administration about the Kremlin’s military buildup on Ukraine’s border. The White House believes Moscow has assembled at least 70% of the firepower it needs to give Vladimir Putin the option of a major military operation by mid-February. The US national security adviser, Jake Sullivan, said on Sunday that an invasion could take place at any time. “It could happen as soon as tomorrow or it could take some weeks yet,” he told NBC. “We’re in the window where something could happen. We believe the Russians have put in place the capabilities to mount a significant operation.” He insisted, however, that Joe Biden was still pursuing diplomacy. “He’s reinforced and reassured our partners on the eastern flank. He’s provided material support to the Ukrainians, and he’s offered the Russians a diplomatic path if that’s what they choose instead, but either way, we are ready, our allies are ready,” he said. “We’re prepared to sit down with the Russians, alongside our allies in Nato and other partners in Europe, to talk about issues of mutual concern in European security. And yes, that includes the placement of certain range systems of missiles.” Later on Sunday, the White House reported that Biden had spoken on the phone to Emmanuel Macron before the French president’s visit to Moscow on Monday. “The leaders discussed ongoing diplomatic and deterrence efforts in response to Russia’s continued military buildup on Ukraine’s borders, and affirmed their support for Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity,” it said in a statement. Before leaving Paris, Macron told the Journal du Dimanche newspaper that Russia’s objective was “not Ukraine, but a clarification of the rules … with Nato and the EU”. He said his dialogue with Putin would probably be enough to prevent military conflict breaking out and that he believed the Russian president would be open to discussing wider issues. US officials have warned that a full attack could lead to the swift capture of Kyiv and potentially result in 50,000 civilians killed or wounded, as well as up to 25,000 dead Ukrainian soldiers and 10,000 Russian ones. Millions could flee in a refugee crisis for Europe, they suggested. They said the Russian army had now positioned 83 “battalion tactical groups” near Ukraine, each with between 750 and 1,000 soldiers. The figure has risen from 60 battalion groups two weeks ago, they added. Zagorodnyuk said he did not believe a Russian invasion was inevitable. He said the remorseless Russian troop buildup was proceeding along textbook lines, but that the Kremlin’s intentions and strategy remained opaque. “We don’t see a political endgame here,” he said. “If Putin seizes Kyiv, there will be full-scale war. The Ukrainian army forces will fight. There will be enormous resistance for all time. Why would you do that? “Ukraine is not going to say: ‘Let’s join Russia.’ This is understood. Unless, of course, Putin is totally delusional and has his own understanding of reality. There will be blood, sanctions. Nobody needs that kind of international war in Europe right now.” The Ukrainian foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, sought to play down “apocalyptic predictions” about an imminent Russian invasion, saying his country was strong and had unprecedented international support. Zagorodnyuk said the US administration was right to release intelligence about Russian plans and capabilities. On Thursday, US officials claimed to have evidence of an elaborate plot by the Kremlin to make a “very graphic” fake video of a Ukrainian attack as a pretext for a military invasion. Downing Street said on Friday it had “high confidence” that Russia was planning to fabricate a reason for attacking Ukraine. Zagorodnyuk said the plot seemed “a bit exotic”, but added that Moscow had previously carried out similar “false flag” operations. The latest US assessment was shared late last week with House and Senate representatives in closed briefings. Putin had not made a final decision to invade, US intelligence analysts indicated. But they pointed to satellite images and communications among Russian forces that showed Moscow was in a position to carry out the largest military operation on land in Europe since 1945. From Thursday, Russia will stage major military exercises with Belarus, within striking distance of Kyiv. According to the Nato secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, Russia has deployed 30,000 combat troops, elite Spetsnaz units, Su-35 fighter jets and S-400 missile defence systems. In total, there are 135,000 Russian troops on Ukraine’s border. They are stationed close to the Donbas region in the east, where the Ukrainian army has fought a low-intensity conflict with pro-Moscow separatists for almost eight years. Russia has moved troops into Crimea, in the south, which Putin annexed in 2014. Its forces have been positioned in a way that suggest Russia could invade from three sides, the US thinks. US officials briefing on Saturday said 14 battalion tactical groups were on their way to the border from other parts of Russia. The US believes the Kremlin would want between 110 and 130 battalion tactical groups for use in a full-scale invasion, but also says Putin could decide on a more limited incursion. Including support units, Russia could be aiming to have 150,000 troops in place for a full-blown military offensive, one US official said, adding that the buildup could reach that level in the next couple of weeks. Hundreds of elite US troops were due to arrive in Poland on Sunday. The Biden administration is sending additional soldiers to Poland, Romania and Germany to bolster Nato’s eastern flank. The Kremlin rubbished Washington’s latest briefing as “fake”. Dmitry Polyanskiy, Russia’s deputy ambassador to the United Nations, said it was “another masterpiece of US propaganda war”. “Unnamed officials, undisclosed sources, no evidence,” he tweeted, alongside the hashtag #KeepCalmAndBlameRussia. Ukraine’s embattled pro-western president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has sought to play down fears of invasion. His aide, Mykhailo Podolyak, said on Sunday the chances of a diplomatic solution to the crisis were “substantially higher” than a Russian attack. Podolyak said Russia had been conducting large-scale troop rotations, manoeuvres and weapon deployments on a regular basis “to ensure constant massive psychological pressure” on Kyiv. “For our intelligence service and our armed forces, this Russian activity comes as absolutely no surprise,” he said. Zelenskiy made Zagorodnyuk defence minister after winning a landslide election victory in 2019. Zagorodnyuk later left government and now runs a thinktank, the Centre for Defence Strategies. “Russia has increased its troop numbers in Belarus. They are getting ready for a potential invasion. The main concern I have is for Kyiv,” he said. In Washington, efforts in Congress to impose economic punishment on Russia also appear to be growing. John Barrasso, the Republican ranking member of the Senate foreign relations committee, said on Sunday that it was clear that Putin alone would make the decision to invade. “He is a predator. He’s going to see what it costs him and what he gets,” Barrasso told Fox News Sunday. “And if we put biting sanctions in place right now, without delay before an attack, financial as well as making sure Ukraine has the weapons that they need to defend themselves with first-class weapons, then that will make Putin think twice.” Ben Cardin, a Democratic senator for Maryland and a senior committee member, said there were differences with Republicans over the content and timing of the sanctions package, but that he expected a bill to be presented to the House of Representatives soon. “The bill is just about complete. We have a few issues we’re trying to resolve, but from a substance point of view, it will contain the strongest possible sanctions, including financial sanctions and personal sanctions,” he said.It was a dreadful final to end a largely dreadful tournament but in the end it came down to a moment of the purest drama and the great redemption of Sadio Mané. He had missed a penalty in normal time. Senegal had wasted chance after chance. They had twice lost in finals before. Egypt are the kings of penalties. They had won their last six shootouts and had played for penalties from the off. But Mané, unexpectedly, was left with a penalty to win it. It was not just that Abou Gabal had saved his earlier penalty, apparently after Mohamed Salah, Mané’s Liverpool teammate, had told him which way to dive. Mané had also missed against Kenya and Uganda in 2019 and, more consequently, the decisive kick in the quarter-final shootout against Cameroon in the quarter-final in 2017. And Abou Gabal had already saved five penalties in the tournament. Mané took a long run-up and, with a great cathartic release, drilled his shot low and extremely hard to his left. Abou Gabal could not get down and Senegal, at last, had their first Cup of Nations triumph. Mané then embarked on a solo lap of honour, side-skipping delightedly with a Senegalese flag draped over his shoulders. It turns out there is a limit to what can be achieved by anti-football. Senegal, as Cameroon had in the semi-final, occasionally threatened to get in behind the Egyptian full-backs, which brought the early penalty as Saliou Ciss was chopped down by Mohamed Abdelmonem. Too often when they did, though, the crossing and the decision-making was poor. And like Cameroon, they soon found themselves frustrated by Egypt’s spoiling, the feigning of injury, the long debates after every decision. Senegal must bear their share of the blame. They were not good enough to break Egypt down and allowed themselves to be dragged into the gamesmanship, playing far too slowly, allowing Egypt time to regroup – but at least there were occasions when they tried to play. And it is hard to play when there are 52 fouls in the game, when the ball is in play for only 40 minutes and 26 seconds of normal time – more than a fifth less than is usual. For that the South African referee, Victor Gomes, must take responsibility. He did not crack down on cynical fouling, seemed reluctant to deploy his yellow card and, disgracefully, played only five minutes of added time across two halves of normal time. Little wonder Egypt have so little time for the Gambian official Bakary Gassama, who has been the only official in this tournament prepared to stand up to them. Mané, too, it should be said, could easily have seen a second yellow card when he appeared to dive but by then Gomes seemed to have given up. What makes it baffling is that Egypt are clearly a decent side. Perhaps they are not the same calibre as the team that won three Cups of Nations in a row between 2006 and 2010: Salah aside, there is nobody of the class of Ahmed Hassan, nobody with the drive of Mohamed Hosny or the invention of Mohamed Abou Treika, but they have shown in flashes that they are better than this. They could offer more than just spoiling and giving it to Salah, and yet they did not at any point in the tournament. It was in keeping with their general gracelessness that they left the pitch before Senegal were presented with their medals. The reaction of Egyptians on social media would suggest they are not bothered by how their side plays but will their fans really look back at videos of this tournament to revel in their progress? Look, there’s Salah arguing with the referee! Celebrate Abou Gabal taking an age of a goal-kick! Goggle at Ahmed Abou El Fotouh committing a cynical foul! Rejoice in Abou Gabal receiving treatment! Welcome to the shithouse of fun! No side had ever won a tournament via three penalty shootouts but, given Abou Gabal’s aptitude and Senegal’s obvious anxiety, Egypt seemed the more likely winner once the 120 minutes had ended goalless. Abdelmonem’s penalty was two inches from being perfect but, with Mendy sprawling the wrong way, it pinged off the inside of the post. Immediately, though, that was cancelled out as Bouna Sarr’s effort was saved by Abou Gabal. But when Édouard Mendy saved from Mohanad Lasheen, suddenly the advantage was back with Senegal and it was all down to Mané. He had converted one late against Zimbabwe in the group stage having only recently returned to spot-kick duty. In truth, it is only really his celebrity that has him taking them; Senegal probably should look to somebody better. But the narrative demanded it should come down to Mané. He delivered and so, after a detour to the elderly Cameroonian president, Paul Biya, in the stand, Kalidou Koulibaly became the first Senegalese player ever to lift the trophy.Koulibaly lifts the trophy! What a night for Senegal. Thanks for joining me! Here is Jonathan Wilson’s match report. They have had to take it to the president of Cameroon in stands and he is handing it over to Koulibaly. What silly little idea. Koulibaly is now walking the trophy back down to the team. Infantino is walking off with the trophy. What an emotional night for Infantino to turn up and take credit. They are off high into the stands, but the Senegal squad are still on the pitch. This is very silly. Egypt come up to get their medals. Needless to say, they do not look too happy with silver. The officials all get a medal. They all seem to have taken a ball too. One asks all the dignitaries to sign it, which is ironically undignified. Sadio Mane gets the player of the tournament, I think. Edouard Mendy wins the goalkeeper of the tournament award. The biggest cheer of the night comes for Aboubakar for winning the golden boot. Aliou Cisse is in tears on the pitch too. Fair play to him. Gianni Infantino is here to take credit for something or other, I assume. The trophy has been placed on a small plinth by Roger Milla. Fair play to Egypt goalkeeper Gabaski for winning Man of the Match. Very much the real quiz in all of this. Not sure anyone was supporting Egypt there outside of Cairo. Bottle. Oh well ... Incredible bottle from Mane to step up and take the winning penalty after his earlier failure. And what a pen! Whipped it right into the corner. The Senegal fans are going absolutely crazy in the stands. It’s great to see. There are plenty of Egyptian tears on the pitch. Salah will look back on this and be fuming that Egypt never even tried to win the final. Woeful stuff. Senegal deserve to win their first Africa Cup of Nations as they actually tried to win the final. Egypt never even attempted to play football. Mane runs off in celebration and is chased by all his teammates while Salah is on the ground on the halfway line in tears. Mane steps up to make amends for his earlier penalty miss. HE FINDS THE CORNER AND IT ALL GOES OFF! Penalty shootout, Senegal 3-2 Egypt. Lasheen misses. Mendy goes to his right and saves it. Mane to win it ... Penalty shootout, Senegal 3-2 Egypt: Dieng scores. Into the roof of the net. Penalty shootout, Senegal 2-2 Egypt: Hamdi scores. The sub calmly slots the ball into the corner. Penalty shootout, Senegal 2-1 Egypt: Sarr MISSES. Gabaski goes to his right and saves. A poor penalty. Penalty shootout, Senegal 2-1 Egypt: Abdelmonem MISSES. He sends Mendy the wrong way but hits the post. Penalty shootout, Senegal 2-1 Egypt: Diallo scores. He sidefoots it just beyond the outstretched hand of the goalkeeper. Penalty shootout, Senegal 1-1 Egypt: Zizo scores. He whacks it down the middle with incredible force. Penalty shootout, Senegal 1-0 Egypt: Koulibaly scores. The Senegal captain just gets the ball under Gabaski. Senegal will take the first penalty ... Koulibaly is walking up. The referee is explaining how the goal-line works. I think they know, mate. Gabaski has a water bottle with advice on the penalty takers. Classic. Gabaski has been the better goalkeeper today, so Egypt will confident he can do a job for them again. Mendy has made a few little mistakes and lacked concentration at times. He needs to refocus for this. Fair play to Egypt for dragging this out for 120 mins. What a night for all of us. As we knew from the seventh minute onwards, we are going to penalties. 119 mins: I think Salako just referred to Aboubakar as the “Golden Boat winner”. What a prize! 118 mins: Nick should have told us about this earlier. 117 mins: Hamdi moves the ball quickly to rifle a shot from 16 yards but it is straight at Mendy who tips it over. This is about as exciting as the match has got. The corner comes in from the left and it looks like an easy catch for Mendy but he fails to grasp it and gives Egypt another corner. 115 mins: Dieng thwacks a shot from about 22 yards towards goal but Gabaski gets down to the right to palm it wide. Colum Fordham has been in touch to say: “As a Liverpool fan, I had been looking forward to this match and the prospects of an exciting Salah vs Manè encounter. Based in Naples, I also had added interest of Koulibaly which has tipped the scales in favour of Senegal who have at least tried to play football. Quite frankly, Egypt’ s defensive approach has taken Egyptian football back to the second dynasty. “And, as my Chesea-supporting friend Jeff has pointed out, Manè is guilty of ruining the game by dint of his appalling penalty.” 113 mins: When Salah tucks away the winning penalty, a lot of Liverpool fan boys on Twitter are going to be discussing how he deserved it and made the difference in this tournament. They will not have watched it. “Sorry, only just got in,” says Tom Hopkins. “What have I missed?” Mane missed a penalty. That’s about it. 111 mins: A player from each side is treated after a clash, which is good news for timewasters. “I’m guessing this isn’t exactly the auspicious return of BBC Three that licence payers were looking for,” suggests Gary Byrne. Get Gavin and Stacey on. 109 mins: Ciss goes right across Zizo on the right. The referee does not book him, though, maybe he has lost his cards. Gabaski is trying to wake the crowd up with some fist pumping. 107 mins: Gabaski comes out to collect a long ball and then hugs it on the ground to waste a few more seconds. “Riveted to my couch here in Waterford, Ireland,” says John G. “this MBM is fantastic. If only there were as much creativity on the field of play. Penalties it will be - I can’t take this level of excitement on a Sunday night.” Just 15 more minutes to go. Rob Marriott emails: “I think there is perhaps an important difference between this Egyptian side and Greece in 2004. The Greeks were huge underdogs, finding a way to win that may have been tedious but was in its way kind of impressive, given their limitations. “Egypt, on the other hand, seven-time winners, huge resources compared to most African nations, arguably the best forward in the world... of course they’ve got every right to be relentlessly negative and to win in whatever way they can, if that’s what they want to do, but it does feel a bit annoying that a country with such advantages is so miserably cynical. “Anyhow, I’ll congratulate them through gritted teeth in advance of their win on penalties. Well done for staying awake through this.” 105 mins: Mane dives over the leg of Abdelmonem but the referee bottles booking him. This referee is dreadful. In the original 90 minutes, the ball was in play for 40 minutes and 26 seconds. Awful stuff. 104 mins: Egypt are pretty much icing the puck here by whacking it long to no one just to get rid. “Loving the AFCON final coverage,” emails Samuel Dodson. “Less so the actual match. Shades of England Vs Algeria at the 2010 World Cup (a game so painfully dull it is seared deeply into sinews of my nervous system). But overall think this Egyptian team reminds me most of that Rangers team that somehow got to a europa league (/UEFA cup) final, through sheer dint of playing agonisingly negative football and grinding out painful result after painful result. While Salah is surely the best in the world right now, fear we will all need some heavy pain meds if this goes on much longer. “Should I give up and switch to the curling?” The Winter Olympics liveblog will follow this. 102 mins: A fine corner from the right is attacked by Diallo but he sends his header goes well wide. 100 mins: *Raises laptop to the sky*. Trezeguet receives the ball 14 yards out from goal, he spins on it but his shot is a trickle at best. Down the other end Ciss lifts a cross into the area for Dieng to attack, he flashes a header across goal but Gabaski is equal to it. Juuso Sallinen says: “At least one can see some progress, when watching paint drying. Egypt seems only to regress. Not sure they remember how football is played anymore. “Thanks for great coverage. Makes this more fun to watch.” *Bursts into tears* 98 mins: The Egyptians are wasting time like its an art form. Sadly, the referee is letting them. Lasheen is ready to come on for Egypt. What Jonathan says. 96 mins: Salah is called for offside, which at least means Egypt are trying to attack. “Hi Will, spiffing coverage,” email Ben. “From Anfield to Olembe, I am on to watching my fourth game of the day. Can anyone top that tally?” What a life you lead, Ben. We are all very jealous. Must be nice to be single. 94 mins: Senegal have a free-kick in a dangerous position on the right but like almost all of their set-pieces today, it is awful and goes out for a throw-in. 92 mins: Mane lifts a pass through for Dieng to chase. He reaches the ball first and whacks a shot across the goalkeeper but he gets down quickly to save it. “Thoroughly enjoying your MBM,” Edward Graves states (I deserve praise for watching this and I will publish it), “in contrast to your experience with the actual match. Question: how does this compare to Greece’s unlikely triumph in Euro 2004? Or Chelsea managing to take Bayern to penalties in the CL final in 2012? Those are the best examples I can think of ultra-defensive tactics paying dividends in a final.” This game needs more Ryan Bertrand. I watched both of those games but can’t remember them, so they must have been awful. Here we go again (again)! Another 30 minutes to go. I am off to find wine. 90+2 mins: Leroy Rosenior says Senegal are “slowly losing belief”. They are not alone, Leroy. 90 mins: Zizo sends in a free-kick from deep which goes just over everyone’s head. Three minutes added on. 89 mins: Mane chases the ball into the corner but loses his footing slightly on a loose bit of turf. Soon after the Liverpool forward is booked for a late challenge on Ashour. This allows Egypt to pretty much halt play until the end of the 90 mins. “Would you resign your job if you were assigned the MBM for the upcoming two legs between these teams for the World Cup playoff?” asks James Burrows. Technically, I do not have a job to resign from. 87 mins: Elneny goes down under a challenge from Pape Gueye. He then gives his teammates a nod to acknowledge how clever he’s been. 85 mins: When Egypt inevitably win this on penalties, I am going to have to say how well their gameplan worked. But, for now, I will criticise how awful they are to watch. Peter Oh says: “The Egyptian goalie may not be the first choice keeper but he keeps coming up with the goods! Huge play by the big Gabaski. The dude abides!” Peter has been waiting all tournament to use this gag. 83 mins: Is there any way this is not heading to extra-time? 81 mins: GABASKI IS DOWN WITH AN INJURY! The delaying tactics from Egypt are in full flow and what a dreadful watch it is. Or so I thought ... as Sobhi warms up on the sidelines. He is currently uncapped. Incredibly mind games from Egypt. 79 mins: Bouna Sarr speeds down the right to provide an overlap. He receives a pass on the byline and drives a cross along the six-yard line but, once again, there is no one there to meet it. Fathi slides in to take down Mane on the edge of the box but gets away without a second booking. This referee is pretty poor. 77 mins: Egypt have decided to attack! This is all very strange as they put Senegal on the backfoot. They win a corner on the left, which is whipped to the near post but Senegal clear it to relieve the pressure. Dia and Dieng join the party. Diedhiou and Ismaila depart. 75 mins: Trezeguet lifts a beautiful cross into the box from the left for Hamdi to attack from six yards out but he can only flick it wide. What a moment for Egypt. Will they come to regret that? Peter Littley emails: “Maybe the inevitable penalty shoot out should be determined by the number shots on target in normal time. Senegal currently has 4, Egypt has 2. Four attempts for Senegal and only 2 for Egypt in the shoot out. See what boredom does! Clearly my medication isn’t working.” We are all pretty bored, I can assure you. 73 mins: Mane, who I suspect is a little frustrated, dives in on Ashour and gives away a free-kick. The Egyptian coaching staff then have a good laugh with the referee, I assume over all those free-kicks he is giving for Koulibaly doing his job. 71 mins: Koulibaly is penalised again for jumping and winning a header. The Egyptian did not jump. I am not sure the referee is very good or understands football. 69 mins: Zizo curls a free-kick from the left into the box for the Egyptians to attacks. Abdelmonem gets ahead of everyone else but flicks the ball over the bar. “The Wood have won,” emails Joe Pearson. “That was some performance!” 67 mins: Senegal send on Marseille’s Pape Gueye for Kouyate as they look to freshen things up in midfield. 65 mins: Egypt are playing it out from the back impressively slowly. “Sounds like the stoppages could fill a ball by ball report!” says Ian Copestake. 63 mins: Whenever it looks like Egypt are about to launch an attack, I take a sip of my water as I know it will come to nothing. 61 mins: Senegal play a neat free-kick but Egypt have so many bodies inside their own box they quickly nullify the threat. 59 mins: Egypt have made a triple substitution as they are already looking very tired and have a few players on bookings. Trezeguet, Zizo and Hamdi on; Marmoush, Mohamed and El Soleya off. 57 mins: Ciss drives into the area and sends another cross into the six-yard box for Diedhiou to attack but he makes no contact at the near post. I agree with Ed, for once. 55 mins: Diallo sprints into the back of Salah for absolutely no reason other than to get himself booked. If I were to pick a kit, I would go with a nice Ivory Coast orange number, Ruth. 53 mins: Another dangerous cross along the six-yard line goes into the Egypt box but Diedhiou can’t move his feet quick enough to get a shot away, allowing Gabaski to claim. “Favourite shirt/kit of this championship?” asks Ruth Purdie. 51 mins: Gueye receives the ball on the left-hand side of the area, he gets it out of his feet and fires off a shot but his connection is poor and the goalkeeper gobbles it up. 49 mins: Mane is taken down on the edge of the box by Fathi from behind. Gueye lines it up but sends his shot a long way over the bar. 47 mins: Egypt have started by wasting time taking a goal-kick. What fun this half will be. Here we go again! “Since I don’t have Bein,” says Joe Pearson. “I’m closely following your MBM as well. At the same time, really enjoying Boreham Wood leading Bournemouth 1-0 in the FA Cup with 20 minutes to go.” We’re a broad church, Joe. Egypt like timewasting, so I am anticipating this will be going to penalties. Mane will be ruing his missed penalty at this stage, that’s for sure. Senegal look like a decent football team, while Egypt do not. 45 mins: Koulibaly is booked for an aerial challenge on Mohamed. He catches the Egyptian in the back of the head but it is not a booking. Poor refereeing. Two minutes added on. Rotimi Styles Obisesan asks: “What happens if Salah decides to collect the card and whistle offered to him by the Ref?” It would make it an occasion, that’s for sure. 43 mins: A ludicrous pass from the Egypt left-back position is intercepted by Mane but when Senegal get into the box they are crowded out. Down the other end, Salah collects the ball on the right, drives for the area and pings a shot towards the near post but Mendy sees it and tips it over. 41 mins: Egypt will be loving the stop-start nature of this fixture as we close on half-time. 39 mins: Ismaila Sarr lifts in a free-kick which Diedhiou flicks towards goal from 16 yards but it goes straight at Gabaski who easily holds on. Mendy goes down holding his face after supposedly being hit by Mohamed’s arm. There is contact but there is certainly nothing malicious in it. Egypt will be pleased the game has slowed down again. 37 mins: Mane is sandwiched in a tackle by two Egyptians. The referee deems it necessary to book Fathi for his involvement. Salah then spends a good while moaning at the referee who offers him his whistle and cards to see if he fancies doing the gig. 35 mins: Ismaila Sarr gets his cross all wrong, miscuing it out for a goal-kick as he lifts the ball over the net tamely. 33 mins: Fathy lays a pass from the edge of his own box towards the halfway line but it is intercepted by Kouyate. Luckily for Egypt, they quickly retrieve the ball to end a potentially dangerous situation. 31 mins: Egypt’s big plan is to ping some long balls. You would not pay to watch them as a team. Fair play to them for getting this far on the back of being disciplined but they are not good to watch. 29 mins: Senegal have got a number of dangerous low crosses into the box already but never had someone in the right position to convert them. Mayne they need to do a bit of goal-hanging in the middle of the six-yard box. Down the other end, Salah has his first notably involvement as he dribbles into the area, jinking one way and then another. He opens up his body to curl a shot at goal but he scuffs his effort, allowing Mendy to gratefully fall onto the ball. And a bit from African football expert, Ed Aarons: 27 mins: Ashour is down on the deck bemoaning some ailment or other. He looks unhappy but he could just be desperately trying to waste time. There is more than an hour to go, lads! 25 mins: Egypt ping a long ball for Marmoush to try and latch onto but the pass bounces into Mendy’s hands. This will be an industrial game from Egypt. 23 mins: Senegal are looking to spread the play in the hope of moving the Egyptian defensive unit around, which helped them win the early penalty. Ismaila Sarr receives the ball in the box and once again flashes it across the face of goal but it is too powerful for Mane, who is forced to watch it pass him. “Dear Will,” emails Jukka Itäkylä, “let it be known from Finland to anyone, let alone any doctor, that without this free service I would be a sick patient in a hospital.” One in the eye for Dr N. I hope you enjoy your holiday and that no one with access to your house invites a big dog round! 21 mins: Egypt providing as much needle as possible in this match to ensuring the game slows down to a snail’s pace to suit their style. 19 mins: Sarr drives down the right win and earns enough space to flash the ball across box but no one is there to turn it home from three yards. 17 mins: Mendy goes into the book for a foul on Marmoush. It looks like he catches him on the top of the boot, so it’s fair enough. 15 mins: Egypt are knocking it around a bit as they enjoy their first bit of sustained possession but their slow-paced attack means they are very easy to defend against. 13 mins: Salah lifts a free-kick into the box for Hamdi to head back across goal but he gets underneath the ball, making it easy for Mendy to catch. “Please can you tell us what is happening at the half minute too?” asks Dr N. “We are on holiday on the African continent and very interested.” I hope you are enjoying this free service Dr N. 11 mins: Senegal look like the better team, that’s for sure. They are moving the ball a lot quicker and look dangerous in possession. Egypt will have to rely heavily on their organisation to keep this at 0-0. 9 mins: Well ... this has been a lively start. I feel Mane will be very keen to make up for his error, as it was an underwhelming penalty from him. Looks like the goalkeeper played some mind games with Mane and it paid off. Huge if true. 7 mins: The Liverpool striker steps up and whacks the ball almost down the middle allowing Gabaski to move slightly to his right to save. 4 mins: PENALTY TO SENEGAL! Ciss chests the ball down and drives into the box where Abdelmonem slides in to clean him out. The bad news for Senegal is Ciss is still down needing treatment. 2 mins: Egypt look eager to get the ball forward, while Senegal are more composed and happy to build up more slowly. Good news from Les Brown in France: “The good news in France is that it’s available not only to those with a BEIN subscription but also free-to-air on TMC.” Peep! Peep! Peep! Here we go! The teams wander out onto the pitch. Salah leads out the Egyptians. Our man in Cameroon. “Hi Will,” says Jonathan Denness, “disappointing that most of mainland Europe isn’t broadcasting the final. Here in Belgium I can’t find any broadcaster who is showing it. Probably lots of African streams that I don’t know about or don’t want to know about but still.” This is putting a lot more pressure on my typing and I am not sure I am up to it. Judging by Egypt’s love of a penalty shootout, I am assuming this one will be going all the way. Settle in. It’s a very defensive lineup in the Sky Sports studio with Chris Samba and Sol Bamba being ably supported by Quinton Fortune, who will provide plenty of industry in midfield. This Nick Ames article is very much worth your time. The exciting news is that in the UK the final will be shown live on the newly relaunched BBC Three. The channel that brought you Gavin and Stacey (and some other programmes) is the only place for such a momentous occasion. “I had my booster jab at the Carlos Quieroz stadium complex here in Lisbon the other day,” emails Paulo Biriani. “The place looked a bit worn out in places but the organisation was unbelievably efficient and lacking in any drama. Metaphors and all that ...” I assume Mo Salah is somewhere in this metaphor as the jab itself. Get in the mood with some Jonathan Wilson. Senegal: E Mendy, Ciss, Koulibaly, Diallo, B Sarr, Gueye, N Mendy, Kouyate, Mane, Diedhiou, I Sarr Egypt: Gabaski, Ashour, Abdelmonem, Hamdi, El Fotouh, Elneny, El Soleya, Fathi, Salah, Mohamed, Marmoush Here we are at the final stage of this/last year’s Africa Cup of Nations. There is heightened interest thanks to the simple Sadio Mane v Mohamed Salah narrative as the Liverpool forwards go head-to-head to decide who is the king of Africa. There is, however, much more to Senegal v Egypt. The Pharaohs have not looked particularly exciting under Carlos Quieroz in this tournament, needing two penalty shootouts to make it through the knockout stages. They have only scored four goals in normal time during the competition, half of them from Mohamed Salah who they heavily rely on to produce the goods. Senegal have not set the word alight either, scraping through the group stage thanks to a 1-0 win and two goalless draws, which is nothing to write home about by anyone standards, let alone a supposed top international side. Things have started to click since and they have netted eight in the knockout matches, so will feel confident and causing a number of problems to the rigid Egyptian backline. Let’s hope for a cracker. Kick-off 7pm (GMT)David Moyes has said he is concerned that international duty could take its toll on Michail Antonio. The West Ham striker missed their FA Cup extra-time win at Kidderminster on Saturday because he was flying back from Jamaica, for whom he started three World Cup qualifiers in seven days, one in Panama City, in which he scored a penalty. Moyes has criticised the schedule and said he is worried the long-haul travel could prove detrimental. Antonio is Moyes’s only senior recognised striker after the manager failed to add to his squad in January. Jarrod Bowen led the line in Antonio’s absence at sixth-tier Kidderminster and, despite scoring the winning goal in the final minute of extra time, West Ham lacked a focal point. The 31-year-old instead trained on Saturday after returning to London late on Friday following defeat to Costa Rica, which ended Jamaica’s hopes of qualifying for Qatar 2022. “He has been away a couple of times now and I’ve had concerns about it, yes, because it is new to him,” Moyes said. “It is not something he has been doing it since he was 21 or 22 or something like that. Obviously they are long travels if you’re going to Jamaica … they’re long journeys to play the games. But I’ll never stop anybody if they want to play for their chosen country.” Antonio, who was an unused substitute for England under Sam Allardyce in 2016, made his Jamaica debut last year and in March he is expected to be called up for another triple-header of matches. The forward is set to return to West Ham’s starting lineup when they host Watford in the Premier League on Tuesday. Moyes introduced Declan Rice and Craig Dawson at half-time at Aggborough but Kurt Zouma and Bowen ended up playing 121 minutes. “I quite like the boys playing extra time because it makes 90 minutes a lot easier once you’ve played 120,” said Moyes, whose side were handed a trip to Southampton in the fifth round draw. “I’m quite happy, maybe get them back into better shape. They had a week off and maybe they needed it, so hopefully it gets them in better condition. The biggest thing now is [that] the players make sure they get back to the levels they can show.”Carrie Johnson has denied that she has any role in shaping government policy and claimed she has been targeted by enemies of the prime minister in a “brutal campaign”. Boris Johnson’s wife took the unusual step of issuing a statement through her spokesperson on Sunday evening after months of claims that she is a “Lady Macbeth” figure behind government decision-making in Downing Street. It has been alleged that she was influential in the decision to allow the evacuation of animals from the Nowzad charity from Kabul as the city fell to the Taliban in August 2021, while thousands who had worked with British forces were left behind. No 10 has denied either Boris or Carrie Johnson had any involvement in the evacuation. There has also been criticism over her possible role in the redecorating of their Downing Street flat, where interior designer Lulu Lytle used gold wallpaper that cost £840 a roll. Allies have dismissed the allegations as sexist. A spokesperson for Carrie said on Sunday: “Yet again Mrs Johnson has been targeted by a brutal briefing campaign against her by enemies of her husband. “This is just the latest attempt by bitter ex-officials to discredit her. She is a private individual who plays no role in government.” The Sunday Times reported on Sunday that she had privately said the prime minister should resign, as unhappiness among Conservative backbenchers caused by the “partygate” allegations shows no sign of going away. Since the stories broke the Tories have fallen behind Labour in the polls. It added that she had grown weary of the pressure on her and her family after recent revelations. The Tory peer Michael Ashcroft, who has written a new biography of the 33-year-old, claimed on Sunday that she was hindering the prime minister’s ability to lead Britain “as effectively as the voters deserve”. Carrie Johnson was previously a Conservative party official and worked for Zac Goldsmith, Sajid Javid and John Whittingdale. She has been a vocal supporter of environmental and animal rights causes. She moved into Downing Street with the prime minister when he took office in July 2019, and they have since got married and had two children.It’s worth prioritising The Curse (Channel 4) just to hear the voice Tom Davis does in it. He has written himself the part of hulking weirdo Mick, a grimy, pie-stealing cartoon of a man whose tank tops are four inches too short and whose anecdotes about sparring with George Foreman (“They call me into the ring, my old Aristotle’s going like a rabbit’s nose … you ever been kicked by a ’orse?”) are clearly fraudulent. But the voice! A fruity back-of-the-throat baritone with loose consonants bouncing off a lolling lower lip and splashing everywhere, like a cockney Bernard Ingham – it’s a thick extra layer of funny on an already very funny script, and it’s the sound of a man at the top of his character-comedy game. Davis and his long-term collaborator, co-writer/director James De Frond, are in a run of form that suggests they can do just about anything. After the cleverly marshalled absurdity of innovative BBC Three meta-comedy Murder in Successville, they skipped through one series of spy spoof Action Team on ITV2 before landing on BBC One with the perfectly formed suburban sitcom King Gary. Now, still insisting on launching each new project via a different channel and in a different genre, they switch to Channel 4 for period crime caper The Curse. Set in a gorgeously rendered 1980s east London – a place of magnolia Formica, peeling paint on corrugated fencing, some beautiful painted signage and pints served in thick, dimpled glass mugs – The Curse tracks a gang of idiots as they conceive, plan and execute a heist for which they are drastically under-qualified. At the end of episode one, the incident that gives the rest of the series its narrative impetus takes place. Before that, this little world is lovingly constructed. Davis’s character Big Mick is merely an ensemble player. First we meet cafe owners Tash (Emer Kenny) and Albert (Allan Mustafa): her in the kitchen doing all the work; him front of house, forgetting customers’ orders and failing entirely to assert himself when visited by imposing local villain Joey (Abraham Popoola). Then Tash’s brother Sidney (Steve Stamp) brings news of his employment as a security guard in a warehouse where booty worth as much as £50,000 is apparently begging to be nicked. Over a few jars, Albert, Sidney and Mick, along with their other mate Phil (Hugo Chegwin), decide to go for it. For viewers who did not see People Just Do Nothing on BBC Three, it must look as if The Curse has somehow surrounded Davis with an array of skilled unknowns, all of them unfeasibly brilliant at playing deluded weaklings whose bravado cannot hide how adorably ineffectual they are. Albert is smart but too timid to speak up for himself, while Sidney means well but is a fragile man (“Yes, I can do pressups! I do 50 a week!”) who does not know when to stay stumm. Phil, meanwhile, is a wannabe gangster who entirely lacks the necessary air of authority. He’s got himself a trilby, but his boss Joey keeps knocking it off his head, and his effort to rebrand himself as “the Captain” hasn’t caught on. “No one calls you that, Phil,” Tash wearily tells him. “You can’t just give yourself a nickname.” Those who did see People Just Do Nothing, who know that Mustafa, Stamp and Chegwin all wrote and starred in it together as deluded weaklings running a shambolic pirate radio station, will know that the trio have spent five seasons of their show honing the dynamic that powers any number of great sitcoms: men whose opinion of themselves is hopelessly at odds with obvious reality. Davis, himself a master at offsetting his chunky 6ft 7in frame by playing fretful softies, has spotted kindred spirits and formed some kind of sitcom supergroup. The scene with the four of them around the pub table is just sublime: while the People Just Do Nothing trio do their finely calibrated routine about blokes who are endlessly peeved by their friends’ foibles while being unable to see their own, Davis enjoys himself hugely as the random factor Mick. “I’m in! I’m all over it! Fifty thousand grand!” In its execution, though, The Curse is less traditional sitcom and more swinging Britflick, with De Frond deploying kinetic split screens, shiny old cars rolling vertically through shots, and Camille Coduri as a reflective, all-seeing narrator. There’s a lovely nod to the old Reservoir Dogs/Taking of Pelham One Two Three motif where criminals assign themselves colours – based on snooker balls, in this case – and all the right tunes by the Cult, Talk Talk, Talking Heads and the The on the soundtrack. Davis and De Frond seem primed to move on to movies before too long – with The Curse, they continue to make fabulous TV comedy look easy.Some of the world’s biggest businesses are failing to live up toclaims they will hit net-zero emissions targets, according to research that suggests they will cut their carbon emissions by only 40% rather than the 100% cuts claimed. Household names such as Amazon, Ikea, Nestlé and Unilever are among the companies named as showing little substance to their claims that they will cut emissions drastically. Thomas Day of NewClimate Institute, who compiled the report, said that taken in aggregate, the efforts of the 25 companies studied would make little impact. “It is not clear these reductions take us beyond business as usual,” he said. “We were very disappointed and surprised at how much room for improvement there was [among the companies studied]. Companies need to be much more transparent about these goals.” Near-term targets were of particular concern, he added. The report showed that the companies surveyed would only cut their emissions by about 23% on average by 2030, falling far short of the figure of nearly halving in the next decade that scientists say is needed to limit global heating to 1.5C. “It’s short-term action that’s the most important thing, in the climate crisis,” he said. Many are relying on carbon offsetting for a large portion of their projected cuts. Carbon offsetting is the controversial practice of paying for projects that reduce carbon dioxide – usually by maintaining forests or growing new trees – to compensate for greenhouse gases emitted elsewhere. Many of the companies studied have made much of their public claims to environmental sustainability. “Some companies I had expected more from, given their very positive perception, such as Ikea, Unilever and Nestlé,” said Day. The Corporate Climate Responsibility Monitor, by NewClimate Institute and Carbon Market Watch, scored companies on criteria including their targets, how much offsetting they planned to use and the reliability of those offsets, as well as progress on reducing their own emissions, and how transparent they were in their target-setting and corporate reporting. None of the 25 companies rated were judged to achieve a high standard according to these benchmarks. Among those showing “low integrity” were Amazon and Ikea, while the 11 companies that ranked worst in the study, showing “very low integrity”, included E.ON and Nestlé. The over-use of offsetting was one of the main reasons most companies were marked down, said Day. Offsetting is increasingly popular among companies seeking to burnish their green credentials, and is set to become even more so through a new standards body. Critics say that many offsetting projects have been found to be of doubtful value, and some have been fraudulent. Forestry also makes a poor substitute for immediate emissions cuts as carbon emitted into the atmosphere today begins to heat the atmosphere now and continues to do so for at least a century, while trees take decades to grow and store carbon absorbed from the air. Proponents counter that with deforestation rampant across the world, preserving existing forests is one of the most important ways of tackling the climate crisis. Day said using offsetting tended to obscure whether companies were making genuine progress on cutting their own emissions, or hiding behind offsets to achieve a notional net zero. “It’s better practice not to offset – it’s more transparent and constructive,” he said. “Companies should not be claiming they are net zero by 2030 unless they are reducing their emissions by 90% by then.” He was also concerned at the apparent poor quality of some of the offsetting projects that companies were using. “If they insist on offsetting, at least it should be with carbon credits that have more integrity,” he said. An Amazon spokesperson said the company had a goal of reaching net-zero carbon by 2040: “We set these ambitious targets because we know that climate change is a serious problem, and action is needed now more than ever. Amazon is on a path to powering our operations with 100% renewable energy by 2025, five years ahead of our original target.” An E.ON spokesperson said: “In our view, [the report] is not only methodologically incorrect, but its results are misleading. E.ON’s carbon footprint is based on the principles of the globally applicable greenhouse gas accounting standard. E.ON was again included in the A List by CDP [the Carbon Disclosure Project] for its climate reporting in 2021.” A spokesperson for Ikea said: “While Ikea has achieved much already, such as breaking the link between decreasing our absolute emissions while increasing business growth, we have plans in place to address our remaining complex challenges, such as the climate footprint of the materials used in the Ikea range.” Benjamin Ware, the global head of climate delivery and sustainable sourcing at Nestlé, said: “We welcome scrutiny of our actions and commitments on climate change. However, the report lacks understanding of our approach and contains significant inaccuracies. [Our] climate roadmap has been validated by the Science-Based Targets Initiative [a corporate sustainability body]. The work that went into it is rigorous and extensive.” A spokesperson for Unilever said: “While we share different perspectives on some elements of this report, we welcome external analysis of our progress and have begun a productive dialogue with the NewClimate Institute to see how we can meaningfully evolve our approach.”It’s the start of a new week, morning tea, and you have found yourself on Five Great Reads, our summertime wrap of interest and entertainment, lovingly brewed by me, Alyx Gorman, Guardian Australia’s chai, chemises and calisthenics editor. If you’re after breaking news instead – parliament starts sitting this week, so there’s a lot of it – please head over to our live blog. And if you just want to know what’s happening with Australia’s first olympic curlers, they’re having a very wild ride. Otherwise, let’s get to the reads. 1. Hong Kong’s expat exodus Between 2019’s protests and the heavy national security laws that followed and souring US-China relations, Hong Kong’s once freewheeling foreign business community is feeling mounting pressures. But, according to a recent survey by the American Chamber of Commerce, it’s the territory’s strict Covid rules that have 44% of their members considering an exit. Notable quote: “Everyone is walking a fine line here, and I’m afraid things aren’t going to get better,” says Prof Bhaskar Chakravorti, dean of global business at Tufts University. “Businesses these days feel they need to balance between their political capital and their ‘capital capital’.” How long will it take me to read? Three minutes 2. On-screen age gaps in the spotlight In Hollywood films it’s not uncommon to see a leading man paired with a love interest a decade or two his junior, with no acknowledgement of the May-December dynamic in the script. But at Sundance this year, a spate of films deal explicitly with romantic age gaps, and the practice of casting young female actors with older men is beginning to draw ire. Could this spell a reckoning? Repeatable line: “Men on-screen have a whole life, and women only have a shelf life,” says Nicky Clark, the founder of campaign group Acting Your Age. Clark lobbies for age-appropriate casting and representation for older women on screen. “Since the medium began, women were expected to retire at 40 and not do anything particularly interesting if they were working after that age. And that hasn’t really changed.” How long will it take me to read? Three minutes 3. The new Neighbours Yesterday, Amanda Meade wrote that Australia’s longest running soap opera Neighbours is in peril, as the UK’s Channel 5 pulled the plug on the show in Britain. But what is it being replaced with? The answer is “programs about the royals, steam trains and almost anything with Yorkshire in the title”, apparently. What now? Well, Channel 5 is re-investing its Ramsey Street money in British properties instead. Such as? All Creatures Great and Small. Sounds familiar… Well, it’s a reboot of a beloved eighties series, and it is airing here on the ABC. Our critic also described it as “the television equivalent of taking your brain out and dunking it into a bucket of warm tea”. 4. WhatsApp scammers’ parent traps It is easy for criminals to get their hands on databases of names, phone numbers and dates of birth from the dark web. Increasingly, fraudsters are using these lists in concert with other information available online to impersonate people’s university-aged children. Why? Because it’s a very plausible way to ask for money. Notable quote: “When you are being called mum or dad, that is what many people would have in their phonebook,” says Jake Moore, a cybersecurity adviser. “Preying on the heartstrings by saying they have lost their phone – it fits in with what is very likely.” How long will it take me to read? Two and a half minutes. 5. A middle aged guide to catching waves Alison Rourke had always dreamed of learning to surf, but she was afraid she had left it too late. Dodging storms and tsunami warnings, four weeks on a board in a seaside town proved those fears wrong. Notable quote: “As far as I can tell, there’s not really any timeline when learning to surf,” she writes. “If you are prepared to be unceremoniously dumped on a regular basis, things progress.” How long will it take me to read? Two minutesThat’s it from the Guardian’s Covid blog for today. Please join us a little later for a new live feed where we will continue to cover the coronavirus crisis. You can also keep up with the top headlines here. I leave you with a summary of the latest developments from the past 24 hours: The mayor of Ottawa has declared a state of emergency over Covid-19 protests. Jim Watson said the order highlights the need for support from other levels of government, as protesters opposed to lockdowns brought downtown of the Canadian capital to a stand still. Thousands descended at the weekend, joining a hundred who had stayed throughout this week. The Chinese city of Baise in Guangxi (population 3.57 million) has been locked down because of a Covid outbreak, reports the BBC’s China correspondent Stephen McDonell. He says that it has reportedly been sealed off with people not allowed to enter or leave. That news comes as China’s chief epidemiologist, Wu Zunyou, says that as long as there’s no other way to contain the spread of the virus, the country won’t adjust it’s “dynamic Zero Covid” pandemic control policy. Xiomara Castro, the president of Central American country Honduras, has tested positive for Covid-19. In a tweet, she said she had mild symptoms. Authorities in India have approved Russia’s one-jab Sputnik Light Covid-19 vaccine. It will be the second Russian-developed jab to be approved by the country, after Sputnik V was allowed in April 2021. China detected 10 new cases of Covid-19 among Olympic Games-related personnel on Saturday, down from 45 a day earlier, the organising committee of the Beijing 2022 Winter Games said on Sunday. Of the cases detected, four were among new airport arrivals, including two athletes or team officials. Another 54,095 Covid cases have been confirmed in the UK, the lowest figure since December, but the statistic does not include cases in Scotland. Papua New Guinea’s prime minister James Marape tested positive for Covid-19 upon arrival in Beijing on Thursday for the opening of the Winter Games and will not be travelling to France next week for an Indo-Pacific summit, his office has said. UK travellers have been warned to check their half-term holiday plans to make sure they meet Covid vaccination rules when travelling to EU destinations as a growing number of countries impose new restrictions. Boris Johnson’s desperate efforts to save his premiership have been undermined with one of his most loyal backbench supporters saying it was now “inevitable” that Tory MPs would remove him from office over the “partygate” scandal. Portugal has announced an easing of its travel restrictions for holders of European Covid-19 certificates by scrapping a requirement to test negative before entering the country, AFP reports. Travellers with an EU digital health pass or other recognised vaccine passes will be exempt from having to prove a recent negative test result from Monday. The EU Covid certificate proves a traveller is fully vaccinated, has recently tested negative or has recovered from a Covid infection within the past six months. The move comes after the European Council recommended harmonising the bloc’s travel rules to avoid placing restrictions on fully vaccinated travellers from neighbouring EU states with higher infection rates. Like other EU member states, Portugal has since early December required passengers aged 12 and above to test negative before entering the country regardless of their vaccination status. On Thursday, the government reduced the validity of lateral flow test results from 48 to 24 hours. Portugal has entered a steep wave of coronavirus cases driven by the highly contagious Omicron variant, recording more than 41,000 new infections and 44 deaths on Saturday. Hello, this is Helen Livingstone taking over from my colleague Harry Taylor. To start with, check out this dispatch from Bolivia, which details how misinformation, distrust and religion, among other things, have combined to leave the South American country with one of the worst vaccination rates in the continent. According to Dr Yercin Mamani, former director of the departmental health service in Cochabamba, vaccine access is no longer the main problem. Instead, for various reasons, people are refusing vaccination. Mamani identified three groups. “First, the self-described anti-vaxxers,” said Mamani. “This is a very small group. Even in their biggest protests, they’ve never cleared 100 people.” The second group refuse the vaccine for religious reasons. “Roughly 30% of the population is evangelical. Of this group, two-thirds have not accepted vaccination. In many places – especially in rural settings, where these churches are a little more radical – they’ve even come to demonise it.” The third group is less clearly defined, but Mamani described it as mostly rural, with a low level of education – and susceptible to misinformation about vaccines. Read more here: Brazil registered 59,737 Covid cases on Sunday, its health ministry has reported. Officials said it had recorded 391 new coronavirus deaths. The mayor of Ottawa has declared a state of emergency over Covid-19 protests. Jim Watson said the order highlights the need for support from other levels of government, as protesters opposed to lockdowns brought downtown of the Canadian capital to a stand still. Thousands descended at the weekend, joining a hundred who had stayed throughout this week. Associated Press said residents were furious at the blaring of horns, traffic disruption and harassment. Xiomara Castro, the president of Central American country Honduras, has tested positive for Covid-19. In a tweet, she said she had mild symptoms. Castro took office in January 2022 and is the country’s first female to become president. France registered 155,439 positive cases on Sunday, lower than the number on the same day last week. It follows a continued downward trend in infections for the country which has seen more than 20.7m positive tests throughout the pandemic. At the peak of the Omicron wave, more than 350,000 cases were recorded on several days in January. Another 129 deaths were recorded, taking the death toll to 132,506. China’s chief epidemiologist has said that as long as there’s no other way to contain the spread of the virus, the country won’t adjust it’s “dynamic Zero Covid” pandemic control policy. In an interview with the state-owned Global Times on Sunday, Wu Zunyou, chief epidemiologist with the Chinese Centre for Disease Control and Prevention, also said that even though China has reached a 70 percent vaccination rate, as long as the virus can evade herd immunity, people can still get infected. It comes as the city of Baise in Guangxi has been locked down because of a Covid outbreak. Reports say that it has reportedly been sealed off with people not allowed to enter or leave. Wu pointed to the recent outbreak in the northern port city of Tianjin, where many infected with Omicron had been vaccinated. It is the latest confirmation from Beijing that China won’t re-open any time soon. “We previously thought Covid -19 could be basically contained through vaccines, but now it seems that there’s no simple method to control it except with comprehensive measures, although vaccines are the most important weapon in curbing the epidemic, including Omicron,” Wu said. Wu told the Global Times that living with Covid is a “permanent task for humans”. Italy has reported a fall in Covid cases on Sunday, with 77,029 new infections compared to 93,157 on Saturday. It took the number of people to have tested positive during the pandemic in the country to more than 11.6 million. Data from the health ministry, reported by Reuters, showed a decline in daily deaths, from 375 on Saturday to 229 on Sunday. Authorities in India have approved Russia’s one-jab Sputnik Light Covid-19 vaccine, according to Reuters. It will be the second Russian-developed jab to be approved by the country, after Sputnik V was allowed in April 2021. The jab can be used as a booster shot when combined with other vaccines. The Russian Direct Investment Fund (RDIF), which is behind the Sputnik vaccines, has signed deals with seven Indian pharmaceutical companies to make 1 billion doses in the country. Another 54,095 Covid cases have been confirmed in the UK, the lowest figure since December, but the statistic does not include cases in Scotland. The last time daily infection numbers were this low was on 14 December, however Scotland does not report its daily positive test numbers until Monday. It comes as a further 75 deaths were registered on Sunday. The death toll stands at 158,318 with more than 17.8 million people now having tested positive for the virus. The Times of India is reporting that the central government offices is calling all workers back to the office from tomorrow, following a decline in coronavirus cases. Minister of state for personnel and PMO Jitendra Singh said: A review of the pandemic situation was done on Sunday and it has been decided that full office attendance, without any exemption, shall resume with effect from February 7, 2022. The Chinese city of Baise in #Guangxi (population 3.57 million) has been locked down because of a #Covid outbreak, reports the BBC’s China correspondent Stephen McDonell. He says that it has reportedly been sealed off with people not allowed to enter or leave. Powerful story by the BBC’s Grainne Connolly, about the impact that shielding had on one young woman Bethany Menar, a patient at Muckamore Abbey hospital in County Antrim, which cares for adults with learning disabilities. The 20-year-old was forced to isolate at the end of last year after some of her family members tested positive for coronavirus, and turned to blogging to document her experiences. Forced into isolation Bethany had to be in separate rooms at all times from the patient she shares her living space with. She told the BBC: It was difficult, I had to wait until she got into her living area before I could actually go up the corridor. I just felt trapped, like I can’t even move. [...] I got to speak to my family but it was just over Facetime and WhatsApp or ringing them. Not being able to go home and see my three brothers, two sisters and my mummy was just so hard. I know it was in everyone’s best interest but I just wanted to go home. Fascinating dispatch from Costa Rica by CNN’s Latin American affairs editor, Rafael Romo, who reports of the fallout of the country’s decision last November to became the first country in the world to mandate Covid-19 vaccines for minors, with all children five and older required to get vaccinated, barring medical exemptions. It started as a heated discussion between a father and his son’s doctor. But it quickly escalated to a multi-person fist-fight that shocked the nation. Inside the St Vincent de Paul hospital in Costa Rica’s Heredia province, not far from the capital San Jose, the argument – over the country’s Covid-19 vaccine mandate – came to blows last week, leading to the arrests of seven people.But this fight proved more consequential than for just the people involved: The incident forced authorities to temporarily close the hospital’s doors, marking a dark moment in the country’s fight against the pandemic and highlighting the debate around its mandatory vaccination policy. You can read the whole story here: Teachers at dozens of private schools at least doubled the proportion of A*s handed out to their A-level pupils last year compared with 2019, when children last sat public exams, according to the Sunday Times. The publication states: In 2019, 16.1 per cent of private school pupils had their A-levels graded A*. In 2021 — when teachers decided what marks to award their pupils — the proportion jumped to 39.5 per cent. Research by The Sunday Times shows for the first time the extent of the grade inflation in individual schools. At North London Collegiate School, a girls’ school in Edgware whose senior fees are more than £21,000 a year, the proportion of A* grades soared from 33.8 per cent in 2019 to 90.2 per cent last summer. The 56.4 percentage point increase is the highest recorded in the investigation. [...] Introduced in 2010, the A* grade was meant to be a mark of exceptional achievement, but it has been handed out to record numbers during the pandemic. The number of A* grades trebled — and even quadrupled — at 25 schools. Travellers have been warned to check their half-term holiday plans to make sure they meet Covid vaccination rules when travelling to EU destinations as a growing number of countries impose new restrictions, reports James Tapper. France joined Spain and Denmark last week in requiring anyone who completed their vaccination jabs more than 270 days ago to have a booster to enter the country – or be considered unvaccinated. Austria requires boosters after 180 days. It means that any of the 18 million people in the UK who had their second dose before mid-May in 2021 would need to have been boosted if they travel to those countries on Saturday, 12 February. Yet only 65% of over-12s have had a booster so far. Read the full story here: More on partygate from Toby Helm, Mark Townsend and James Tapper in the Observer today, who report that Boris Johnson’s desperate efforts to save his premiership have been undermined with one of his most loyal backbench supporters saying it was now “inevitable” that Tory MPs would remove him from office over the “partygate” scandal. In an interview with the Observer, Sir Charles Walker, a former vice-chairman of the 1922 Committee of backbench Conservative MPs, implored the prime minister to go of his own accord in the national interest, and likened events in the Tory party to a Greek tragedy. Walker said: It is an inevitable tragedy. He is a student of Greek and Roman tragedy. It is going to end in him going, so I just want him to have some agency in that. Read the full story here: A girl who missed two birthday parties due to Covid restrictions has written to Boris Johnson to ask for an apology over events held at No 10 in lockdown, the BBC reports. Isobel, seven, from Sheffield, South Yorkshire, told the prime minister he needed to set a good example and follow the rules. She wrote: Why on my 6th and 7th birthday I couldn’t have a party, and you were? She went on the ask why Johnson didn’t follow the “rulse” as “Even the Queen had to follow them.” Papua New Guinea’s Prime Minister James Marape tested positive for COVID-19 upon arrival in Beijing on Thursday for the opening of the Winter Games and will not be traveling to France next week for an Indo-Pacific summit, his office said on Sunday. Reuters reports: The prime minister’s office said in statement on its Facebook page: Prime Minister Marape will now abort the French leg of this trip due to COVID-19 restrictions, having returned a positive test result upon arrival in Beijing last Thursday evening. Marape was due to return to PNG on Sunday but did not give any further details about his condition. According to a statement posted on the website of the PNG’s National Control Centre for COVID-19, Marape received his booster vaccination against the coronavirus on Jan. 24th. On Saturday, while in Beijing Marape held a virtual meeting with Chinese Premier Li Keqiang to discuss strengthening economic cooperation, Marape’s office said. A joint statement published on China’s embassy in the United States after the meeting stated that the two sides agreed to strengthen cooperation in trade, investment, energy, resources and infrastructure, among others. Marape was to travel from Beijing to the Feb. 9-11 One Ocean Summit in the northwest of France on 9-11, held in the context of the French Presidency of the Council of the European Union, with the support of the United Nations. Marape was also scheduled to meet France’s President Emmanuel Macron, Marape’s office said earlier in the week. Statistician and Observer columnist Sir David Spiegelhalter has admitted he was “overly optimistic” at the start of the coronavirus pandemic. The 68-year-old Cambridge University scientist has confessed he “didn’t take it seriously enough”. Appearing on BBC Radio 4’s Desert Island Discs on Sunday, Spiegelhalter says: I think it’s very important that we have to acknowledge that we can never take an objective view about evidence. We always bring our, I think, personalities into it, and mine is unfortunately very optimistic and that’s why I’m very glad I’m not a government adviser. I don’t think I’d be very good at it because I do tend to hope for the best and sort of expect the best as well. You can read the full story by the Observer’s Science Editor Robin McKie here: China detected 10 new cases of COVID-19 among Olympic Games-related personnel on Saturday, down from 45 a day earlier, the organising committee of the Beijing 2022 Winter Games said on Sunday. Of the cases detected, four were among new airport arrivals, including two athletes or team officials. The remaining six were already in the “closed loop” bubble that separates event personnel from the public, according to a notice on the Games’ official website. Living memorials to those that died during the coronavirus pandemic are to be created, with new woodlands to be planted in Wales, the Welsh government has announced. Two new memorial woodlands will be planted at the National Trust’s Erddig estate in Wrexham, and at a further site at Brownhill in Carmarthenshire’s Tywi Valley, with another set to be planted in south east Wales when a location is identified. Wales’ First Minister Mark Drakeford said: It has been almost 2 years since the coronavirus pandemic hit Wales. Too many people have been taken too soon by this awful virus. We will remember all of them and keep them in our hearts and our minds. These woodlands will be a permanent and living memorial to all those who have died. They will also be a symbol of the strength the people of Wales have shown over the past 2 years. A total of 9,477 deaths involving Covid have occurred during the pandemic in Wales. The woodland sites are to become part of a planned National Forest for Wales. Natural Resources Wales chief executive Clare Pillman said: Our forests and woodlands are powerful, poignant symbols of life, helping to enhance our environment and biodiversity and providing space for recreation and reflection. Our ambition for this commemorative woodland is for it to become a living, growing area for all the community to enjoy, as well as a quiet space for contemplation as we continue to navigate this most challenging of times. As part of the journey, we want to engage with local communities and our partners to plan and design the woodland, shaping with them safe and accessible spaces, where people of all ages can come to remember and reflect for years to come. The Welsh government said it expected the sites to become part of the National Forest for Wales in the future, with opportunities for local communities to help shape the management of the woodland. Justin Albert, Director, National Trust Cymru said: For over 125 years, the National Trust has provided places for people to connect with nature, beauty and fresh air. This has felt as relevant over the last 2 years as it has in any time in our history: knowing that nature has been hugely comforting to many during the pandemic, bringing both pleasure and reassurance as all other aspects of our lives changed. Russia reported 180,071 COVID-19 cases on Saturday, a record daily high, as the Omicron variant continued to spread, the coronavirus task force said. Russia confirmed 661 deaths of coronavirus patients in the past 24 hours, the authorities said. There were 177,282 cases the previous day.