Growing numbers of adults and children in England are surviving for longer after being diagnosed with cancer, with increases in lifespan seen in almost all types of the disease. Survival for one year and five years rose among adults diagnosed between 2015 and 2019 compared with those whose illness was identified between 2006 and 2010, NHS Digital reported. Survival is highest in adults who have melanoma of the skin, one of the main forms of skin cancer. Nine out of 10 men now survive for five years, as do almost 95% of women. However, survival remains stubbornly low for other forms of the disease, including pancreatic cancer and mesothelioma, which is mainly caused by prolonged exposure to asbestos. Just 6.3% of men and 7.8% of women who develop mesothelioma are still alive five years later. NHS Digital found that “in England one-year non-standardised net survival has improved, with patients diagnosed between 2015 and 2019 having a higher one-year survival than patients diagnosed between 2006 and 2010. “This trend was seen for all cancers and both genders except for bladder cancer. The largest improvement was 1.6 percentage points on average per year for lung cancer in females.” Greater survival after five years “was seen for all cancers and both genders except for bladder cancer and colon cancer,” the NHS’s statistical arm added. “The largest improvement was myeloma in females, [which was up] 1.4 percentage points on average per year.” Both increases were much bigger among children. In children up to the age of 14 who were diagnosed between 2002 and 2019, one-year survival rose from 90.7% in 2002 to 93.4% in 2019. Five-year survival went up even more over that period, from 77.8% to 85% – a rise of 7.2 percentage points. The figures were compiled by the National Cancer Registration and Analysis Service. About 375,400 people a year across the UK are diagnosed with cancer and about 166,533 die, according to statistics compiled by Cancer Research UK. Overall, 50% of people in England and Wales live for 10 years. Experts say that improved cancer survival is mainly due to advances in treatment and greater public awareness leading to earlier diagnosis. The NHS has run high-profile campaigns urging people with particular symptoms to see a doctor and more people now ask a GP to check out symptoms, such as a lump, bump or change in their general health, such as weight loss or onset of fatigue. However, Anna Jewell, the chair of the Less Survivable Cancers Taskforce, warned that the chances of survival remained low for people with a number of some forms of the disease. “Although overall cancer survival rates have generally increased in the past decades, we are not seeing the same improvements in prognosis for patients diagnosed with less survivable cancers, including those of the lung, liver, brain, oesophagus, pancreas and stomach.” Sajid Javid will today declare a “war on cancer” and pledge to make cancer care in England the “best in Europe” within a decade. In a major speech at the Francis Crick Institute in London, the health secretary will announce that he plans to draw up a new 10-year strategy to tackle cancer, which is the UK’s second biggest killer. He will pledge to improve early diagnosis, embrace innovation, reduce the stark differences in survival between the richest and poorest, and that England “will lead the world in cancer care”. However, experts pointed to understaffing in the cancer workforce – especially a shortage of specialist cancer nurses that has left some hospitals struggling to give patients the chemotherapy they are meant to receive – as a major constraint on Javid’s ambition. “Innovations in diagnosis and treatment will be crucial to improving people’s chances of survival. But it will be like building sandcastles while the tide comes in without a clear plan to guarantee there are the NHS staff on hand to provide this care”, said Lynda Thomas, the chief executive of Macmillan Cancer Support.1) Jamaica, we have a bobsleigh team (again) Jamaica will enter a four-man bobsleigh team in the Olympics for the first time in 24 years after nicking the final qualifying spot, offering a feelgood reboot for the island nation whose debut at the 1988 Calgary Games inspired the Disney film Cool Runnings. Just making it to Beijing might seem like accomplishment enough for Shanwayne Stephens, the team’s 31-year-old pilot and Royal Air Force lance corporal who emigrated to Great Britain with his family in 2002: certainly after improvised training methods at the height of the pandemic that included pushing his girlfriend’s Mini Cooper around the streets of Peterborough. But having touched down in China after undergoing their final preparations at the University of Bath, his goal is plain. “It’s got to be medalling,” Stephens says. “It’s everybody’s dream, it’s what we’re here to do. So why not aim high?” BAG 2) Bankes to lead Britain’s charge on slopes? There is no such thing as a banker in an event as chaotic or frenetic as snowboard cross, where four racers take each other on down a mountain, but Britain’s Charlotte Bankes is certainly in pole position. The 26-year-old, who transferred from France to Team GB after the Pyeongchang Games four years ago, is not only the reigning world champion but has been in impressive form on the circuit this season. Bankes is at the vanguard of a strong GB snowsport team that also have reasonable medal chances in the form of Zoe Atkin, James Woods and 17-year-old Kirsty Muir, the youngest member of the Team GB squad. SI 3) Shiffrin and the drive for five Mikaela Shiffrin, the 26-year-old American sensation of the piste whose three Olympic medals include gold in slalom in 2014 and in giant slalom in 2018, has said her plan is to race all five individual events in Yanqing and will go off as a hot medal contender in all but the downhill. That puts Janica Kostelic’s women’s record of four medals at a single Olympics on watch. The Vail native, whose 73 career World Cup wins are 13 short of Ingemar Stenmark’s all-time record of 86, can further burnish her legacy by becoming the first skier from the US, male or female, to win more than two Olympic gold medals. BAG 4) Chen v Hanyu for all the marbles It’s the most compelling figure skating rivalry in a generation. In one corner: Nathan Chen of the US, the three-time world champion, who has won all but one competition he has entered since a nightmarish short programme doomed him to a fifth-place finish in 2018. In the other: Japan’s Yuzuru Hanyu, the two-time defending Olympic gold medallist who became the first men’s repeat champion in 66 years at those same Pyeongchang Games. Chen goes off as the favourite on merit after winning their three most recent head-to-head meetings, but Hanyu’s knack for raising his level when the lights burn brightest makes their showdown at the Capital Indoor Stadium one of the must-watch fixtures of the coming weeks. BAG 5) A Brucey and Evey bonus in curling? Remember how Britain briefly went curling crazy in 2002 when Rhona Martin and her stone of destiny won gold in Salt Lake City? Well, Beijing 2022 could be far bigger. The bookies rate the British mixed and men’s teams, led by Bruce “Brucey” Moaut, as favourites for gold, and the women’s team, skipped by Eve “Evey” Muirhead, as the third favourites in their event. And while there might be some parochialism baked into those odds, the form of the British teams stacks up. The men are world champions. The mixed team are world champions. And the women recently won the European championship. Three medals? It’s not out of the question. SI 6) Warm-weather nations make Games debuts Haiti and Saudi Arabia are poised to make their Winter Games debuts, with these Games matching the fewest number of debutant countries at an Olympics after Squaw Valley 1960, when South Africa was alone to join the fray. In a curious twist, both will take part in the same event. Richardson Viano, a 19-year-old originally from Port-au-Prince who was adopted by an Italian couple living in France, is scheduled to compete in the men’s giant slalom alongside Fayik Abdi, a 24-year-old born in San Diego and raised in Beirut who will become the first athlete from any Gulf nation to compete in a Winter Olympics. BAG 7) Eileen Gu becomes household name The San Francisco-born freestyle skier and IMG model competed under the US flag before switching affiliations to China, where she is known as Gu Ailing and has been positioned as the face of the Beijing Games. The 18-year-old is among the gold medal favourites in the halfpipe, slopestyle and big air events – having scored World Cup wins in all three disciplines this year – and well on her way to becoming a household name with more than 1.3 million followers on Weibo and a growing roster of sponsors including Cadillac, Tiffany’s, Visa and Victoria’s Secret. BAG 8) Norway to reign supreme again? It was a minor surprise when Norway, a country of only 5.4 million people, finished top of the podium at the 2018 Games, winning 39 medals. It won’t be if they repeat the trick in 2022. Indeed the data company Gracenote projects them to win 44 medals – well clear of the Russian Olympic Committee and Germany – with cross-country skiing and biathlon providing the majority of medals. But what makes Norway’s success so remarkable is they spend only a 10th of what Team GB does on Olympic sports each year – and they also stress the importance of the umbilical link between grassroots and elite sport and of putting fun and happiness ahead of medals. SI 9) Return of the queen Southern Californian prodigy Chloe Kim shot to global stardom in Pyeongchang when she became the youngest female athlete to secure Winter Olympics gold on snow with a transcendent performance that included back-to-back 1080s, the gravity-defying manoeuvre she remains the only woman to have landed in competition. But she quickly found the trappings of fame – gracing the fronts of cereal boxes and magazine covers, getting name-checked in Frances McDormand’s Oscar speech – were dwarfed by her yearning for a normal life as a college student at Princeton. After nearly two years off the mountain Kim picked up right where she left off with a world title, crediting her decision to start therapy and turn focus to her mental health with helping rekindle her competitive fire. Now 21, she is the hot favourite to defend her Olympic snowboard halfpipe title. BAG 10) Russian figure skaters plot world domination A trio of boundary-pushing Russian teenagers armed with point-gobbling quadruple jumps is poised to obliterate the competition in women’s figure skating, reducing the entire podium of the Winter Olympics’ glamour event to a fait accompli. Barring a colossal surprise, the more familiar pair of the 17-year-olds Alexandra Trusova and the reigning world champion, Anna Shcherbakova, will compete for the silver and bronze medals behind the 15-year-old prodigy Kamila Valieva, the newly minted European champion who has already broken the world records for the women’s short programme, free skate and combined total in an extraordinary first season on the senior circuit. BAGMotorists will have to pay by the mile to make up a £35bn tax shortfall that will arise from the shift to electric vehicles, MPs have warned, calling on the government to act urgently to bring in a national road pricing scheme. The cross-party Commons transport select committee said it saw “no viable alternative” to road pricing and work should start immediately on creating a replacement for fuel duty before it dwindled away with the transition. Without urgent reform of motoring taxation, the UK would face an under-resourced and congested future, the committee said. New petrol and diesel vehicles will be banned from sale from 2030, as part of the governments 2050 net zero plans, losing the Treasury roughly £28bn in fuel duty and £7bn in vehicle excise duty, under current tax rules. With the exception of the Green party, few have consistently called for road pricing, after an attempt in 2007 by Labour to implement a scheme met with an enormous public backlash. The mayor of London,Sadiq Khan, last month said the capital should move to a smart road pricing scheme but claimed the technology was not ready to introduce it before the end of his current term in office. Recognising the political difficulty, in its report published on Friday, the committee said new charges should entirely replace fuel duty and vehicle excise duty and be “revenue neutral”, with most motorists paying the same or less than they do now. The MPs said the government should consider the impact on vulnerable groups and those in rural areas, and ensure that any data captured be subject to “rigorous governance and oversight” to protect privacy. It should also incentivise people to continue to use public transport, walk or cycle, the committee said, with driving set to become an ever cheaper option once an electric vehicle is bought. Drivers of electric vehicles should pay to maintain and use the roads, the MPs said, like petrol and diesel drivers do – although incentives to purchase cleaner vehicles must remain. The report calls on the Treasury and Department for Transport to set up an arm’s length body to draw up a scheme by the end of 2022. Committee chair Huw Merriman said it was “time for an honest conversation on motoring taxes” with the uptake of zero-emission vehicles ahead of official government forecasts. He said that he believed the public would support a scheme despite previous opposition: “It’s important to emphasise that motorists won’t pay more. The difference between now and then is that the revenue – for roads, schools and hospitals – is ticking down to zero, unless we put 5p on to income tax. This issue can’t be dodged. We have to change policy.” Merriman said that the technology now existed to deliver a national scheme that priced up a journey based on the road, time and type of vehicle, offering better prices at less congested times. Motoring thinktank the RAC Foundation backed the call for road pricing but warned against “the temptation to create an over-complex system that’s expensive to run” – suggesting charges could be calculated and collected alongside vehicle insurance premiums. Steve Gooding, director of the foundation, said: “Drivers choosing to go electric deserve to know what is coming next – particularly if the promise of cheap per-mile running costs is set to be undermined by a future tax change. If the Treasury is thinking it can leave this issue for another day but still recoup their losses from electric vehicles they risk a furious backlash.” The Policy Exchange thinktank, issuing its own report, said road pricing could be “good for drivers” by easing congestion, and should be implemented through location-tracking technology in cars, backed up by automatic numberplate recognition.The assistant attorney general, Amanda Stoker, has muddied the waters about whether LGBTQ+ students will be protected at the same time as the religious discrimination bill potentially passes federal parliament. Stoker said on Friday the Sex Discrimination Act “shouldn’t be changed unless we know the final form of the religious discrimination bill”, prompting the prime minister, Scott Morrison, to reassert his pledge that amendments to protect LGBTQ+ students would be contained in the same set of bills. Stoker’s intervention comes ahead of the release of two inquiry reports. Stakeholders think Labor will join the Coalition in joint reports for both, calling for the religious discrimination bills to be considered for passage through parliament, although Labor will also express concerns about hiring and firing powers and the contentious statements of belief clause. The government is still struggling to secure the support of three key Liberal backbenchers for the bills ahead of next week’s crucial parliamentary sitting. On Thursday, Scott Morrison announced the government would introduce an amendment that would prevent students being expelled from school for their sexuality or gender, to be included in the religious discrimination package. The move, which infuriated conservative Christian groups, fulfils a deal with four Liberal MPs – Angie Bell, Katie Allen, Dave Sharma and Fiona Martin – made in December in return for their support for the religious bill. But on Friday, Stoker told ABC radio that although the prime minister wanted to do both at the same time, the government was still “looking for ways” to legislate the promise. Stoker said she was concerned that the amendment to the Sex Discrimination Act must “integrate well” with the religious bills. Removing the exemption to the SDA that enables schools to expel LGBTQ+ students without knowing the final form of the religious bill, which might face amendment in the Senate, could create “unintended consequences”, she said. These include preventing schools “maintaining standards of behaviour within their community”. Stoker said although the government wants to do “the right thing by these kids” it also acknowledged “the fact that religious schools are the education choice for thousands of Australian families” and did not want to stop their ability to set their own ethos. The comments raise the prospect that although LGBT students could be protected from expulsion for their gender or sexuality, schools will retain the right to punish students for advocacy of beliefs that conflict with the school on those topics. Asked whether rates of self-harm among trans people were attributable to discrimination against them, Stoker acknowledged the “shocking figures in relation to people who are transgender”. Stoker then blamed “many of the medical procedures that we provide to try to help transgender people feel much more mentally healthy”, suggesting that they “aren’t actually providing the improvements in health and wellbeing”. In Melbourne today, Morrison said it was his intention to legislate the protections at the same time, and asked if that would be before the election, he replied “yes”. Despite the LGBT students deal the remaining trio of holdouts – Bridget Archer, Warren Entsch and Trent Zimmerman – indicated the amendment would not be sufficient for their support. Archer told Guardian Australia the amendment was a “positive step forward” but it “doesn’t shift my position at all” because the concern over LGBT students “is only a fraction of the issue with the bill”. Archer said she was concerned with the “explicit override of Tasmanian anti-discrimination laws”, as the religious bill explicitly overrides its laws banning speech that “offends, insults, or humiliates” people based on other protected attributes. “I agree there should be freedom from discrimination on any attribute including religion, sexuality, or parenting status. “For me – it’s the statement of belief that is problematic in that regard – it goes beyond freedom from discrimination and extends to entrenching religious privilege.” “I value our gold standard anti-discrimination laws … I’m not prepared to stand by and see them eroded, the Tasmanian government doesn’t want to see them eroded.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Archer said her objections would be “very hard to overcome” unless the bill was stripped back to an “orthodox discrimination bill” that simply prohibits discrimination on the grounds of religion. Entsch said negotiations were “a work in progress” that he would not conduct through the media, adding: “I’m at the stage of my political career where I’m more concerned with outcomes than reputation.” Zimmerman, who has previously called for discrimination against LGBT teachers to also be banned, confirmed he has reserved his position, at least until he sees the committee inquiry reports. Labor MP Josh Burns told Guardian Australia it would “be helpful if the government would reveal if it is planning on amending the bill”. Burns noted the “conflicting public statements” between attorney general, Michaelia Cash, who said in December that amending the Sex Discrimination Act to protect LGBT students would wait for 12 months and a further review, and the prime minister on Thursday who appeared to commit to an amendment in the religious discrimination package itself. Burns, a member of the joint human rights committee that considered the bill, said he had “no idea” which was the government’s position. The government has listed the religious discrimination bills on the Senate program for Wednesday, suggesting they could try to pass them in the lower house on Tuesday, but Labor is increasingly confident that with the Coalition split on its own side the bills may not be forced to a vote. Labor caucus resolved in November that it would reserve its final position until after the inquiries were completed. If the government forced a vote Labor would “not oppose” the bill in the house, while making clear “the need for the government to deliver on its three-year-old commitment to protect LGBT students from discrimination”, caucus resolved. Labor will not resolve its position until it sees the final version of the bill, meaning the shadow ministry and caucus meetings on Monday may not even consider it, because Morrison’s flagged amendments are still yet to be tabled. Although in-principle support for the bill does not commit Labor to vote for it, it has caused consternation among some LGBT activists who wanted the opposition to take a harder line, including to require the amendments to protect LGBT students be tabled first.Scott Morrison has hosed down Peter Dutton’s suggestion that troops could be deployed to aged care homes to help with the sector’s staffing crisis, saying defence personnel were “not a shadow workforce”. But the prime minister has acknowledged the situation is a “crisis”, as aged care providers report being stretched by sickness furloughing, with dramatic staff shortages leaving some elderly residents without food, cleaning or support. “Simply taking [army] reserves out of where they are working, putting a uniform on them and getting them somewhere else, that doesn’t change anything,” Morrison said on Friday. He spoke after comments from Dutton, the defence minister, who had earlier conceded there was an “enormous amount” more the government wanted to do to relieve the workforce crisis in aged care – including the possibility of sending in the Australian defence force. The federal government’s most recent figures on aged care reported active Covid outbreaks in 1,261 facilities, with 9,643 residents and 14,257 staff infected with the virus. The defence minister said “of course” the government had to consider sending in troops: “If that’s what’s required, that’s what we will do.” Mike Baird, a former New South Wales premier and now chief executive of the aged care provider HammondCare, had said troops were required because the sector was facing a “perfect storm” of rising infections and staff shortages triggered by isolation requirements. But the aged care minister, Greg Hunt, stopped short of endorsing the idea, saying on Friday the ADF was already currently “playing the role that they are best skilled for”. Morrison has never ruled out using the ADF in aged care but he poured cold water on the idea in mid-January. On Friday, Morrison resisted moves to send troops in to assist in tasks like bed making or cleaning, as Baird had suggested – criticising what he called “simple solutions to complex problems”. “The defence forces are not a shadow workforce for the aged care sector,” the PM said. “We have some 60,000 members in our defence force, half of those are in the reserves. To the extent that they work in the health sector, they are already working in the health sector.” Morrison said he had asked Dutton and Hunt to collaborate on how the defence force could be better used in the health response, and noted members were already assisting on triple-zero call lines and in the ambulance service. “Not anyone can walk in and shower and clean and do those important jobs. They are skilled jobs. They can’t be done by just anyone walking off the street,” Morrison said. “There is not some imaginary workforce that can just come in when the workforce is furloughed by people getting Covid.” Aged care providers estimate about a quarter of all shifts – or the equivalent of 140,000 shifts a week – are going unfilled, while the disability sector has reported roster vacancies of up to 30% during the peak of Omicron. The Australian Nursing and Midwifery Federation, and major aged care provider Arcare, both told Guardian Australia they would support defence personnel further assisting in homes with tasks like cleaning, admin or bed making. But Gerard Hayes, from the Health Services Union, said the army wasn’t needed. Instead, he called for the federal government to try to tap into retired or underemployed people in the community with skills in health or aged care, to offer paid jobs to immediately assist staffing shortages. On Friday Dutton said aged and disability care were “obviously the most difficult” sectors because Covid-19 “deliberately targets older people” and those with underlying medical conditions. Asked if use of the ADF was something that needed to be considered, and quickly, Dutton replied: “Of course it is … If that’s what’s required, that’s what we will do.” He said the best thing the government could do was “provide those nurses and those additional shifts to be covered where people are sick”. Hunt told Guardian Australia that the ADF had already played a key role in responding to the pandemic, including in aged care, including in Victoria’s second wave outbreak in 2020. Asked whether a further announcement about ADF deployment into aged care homes was imminent, the health and aged care minister stopped short of endorsing the idea. “At the moment they have been providing strategic support to assist the national medical stockpile in the delivery of essential PPE to aged care,” a spokesperson for Hunt said in a statement. “They are playing the role that they are best skilled for.” The Queensland deputy premier, Steven Miles, called the situation in aged care a “national disgrace”, and said he welcomed Dutton raising the potential for army assistance. “We have elderly residents locked away, isolated in their rooms, not being bathed, not getting food, not getting the medical care they need, and the national government should be doing absolutely everything they can to change that,” he said. Federal Labor’s health spokesperson, Mark Butler, said it was “high time the Australian Defence Force was called in to help with this crisis.” “Scott Morrison cannot continue to sit on his hands,” he said on Friday. Hunt’s office said the federal government was assisting with a surge workforce to cover 78,000 shifts in aged care, noting an agreement with private hospitals to provide extra staff, and changes to furloughing conditions which decreased the number of staff required to isolate. Anthony Albanese repeated his call for the aged care services minister, Richard Colbeck, to resign, saying he had “failed before” and “continues to fail”. At his press conference, Morrison rebuffed a journalist’s question on whether Colbeck should remain in his job, saying the minister had an important job. Guardian Australia last week revealed that Colbeck attended the Hobart Test from 14 to 16 January after declining to attend the Covid committee on Friday 14 January – citing the workload of officials battling the Omicron wave. On Wednesday Colbeck defended the decision and said the aged care sector was performing “extremely well”, despite coming under “genuine stress” due to coronavirus. Australian defence force staff helped at aged care facilities in Melbourne in mid-2020 during Victoria’s Covid wave. Hunt also noted ADF members had assisted with vaccinations in aged care.Joe Biden made a trip to New York to discuss his administration’s efforts to reduce violent crime and gun violence. “The answer is not to defund the police,” Biden said during a meeting at NYPD headquarters. “It’s to give you the tools, the training, the funding to be partners, to be protectors.” Ahead of Biden’s trip, the White House also outlined its plan to crack down on interstate gun-trafficking, which has led to the presence of more firearms in Northeast cities like New York. Some progressive activists have expressed fear that the White House’s efforts to reduce crime could encourage unjust policing tactics. “What we need from the President is a comprehensive plan to end gun violence and one that doesn’t rely on introducing even more violence by adding to bloated police departments,” said Alexis Confer, executive director of the gun control group March For Our Lives. US officials claim they have evidence of a Russian plan to make a “very graphic” fake video of a Ukrainian attack as a pretext for an invasion. “We don’t know definitively that this is the route they are going to take, but we know that this is an option under consideration,” the deputy national security adviser, Jonathan Finer, told MSNBC. The Pentagon’s spokesperson said the plan is believed to have the backing of the Kremlin. The US military carried out a special forces raid last night that resulted in the death of Islamic State leader Abu Ibrahim al-Hashimi al-Qurayshi. In a speech this morning, Biden said that Qurayshi detonated a bomb, killing himself and several family members, to avoid being captured by US troops. “Last night’s operation took a major terrorist leader off the battlefield, and it sent a strong message to terrorists around the world: We will come after you and find you,” Biden said. – Joan E Greve A number of California politicians are facing scrutiny after posing for photos – sans-mask – with LA Lakers legend Magic Johnson. Johnson posed with California governor Gavin Newsom, LA mayor Eric Garcetti and San Francisco mayor London Breed at the NFC championship game over the weekend. Public health rules require attendees of large-scale events to wear masks as California grapples with the Omicron variant-fueled surge in Covid-19 infections. Even as the number of new infections in the state taper down, public health experts recommend wearing face masks in indoor and crowded settings to slow the spread of the virus. The SoFi Stadium, where the game took place this weekend, also requires attendees to keep their masks on unless they are eating or drinking. Garcetti, who has been nominated to serve as the US ambassador to India, defended himself - asserting at a news conference: “When people ask for a photograph, I hold my breath.” “There is a zero percent chance of infection from that,” he said. Newsom meanwhile, said he had his mask on him - just off frame, and not on his face. “You’ll see in the photo that I did take ... in my left hand’s the mask,” he said at a news conference. “The rest of the time I wore it, as we all should.” Two judges on the reality show The Masked Singer walked off after the contestant singing and dancing beneath a disguise was revealed to be Rudy Giuliani. Last week, during a taping of the first episode of the seventh season, judges Ken Jeong and Robin Thicke walked off the stage when the former New York City mayor and former attorney to Donald Trump removed his elaborate headpiece and costume, for which the show is known, to reveal himself. Fellow judges Jenny McCarthy and Nicole Scherzinger remained on stage. According to Deadline, which first reported the incident, they “bantered with Giuliani … for pressing what is widely derided as a baseless claim” that the 2020 presidential election was stolen from Trump. Jeong and Thicke eventually returned. In 2020, Sarah Palin, the former governor of Alaska and another controversial political figure, made a similar reveal on the show. Palin said she appeared as a “walking middle finger to the haters out there in the world where I could do whatever I wanted to do”, prompting shock and criticism of the show. In 2019, Trump’s controversial former White House press secretary, Sean Spicer, appeared on Dancing with the Stars. Tom Bergeron, the show’s host, responded to the ensuing criticism by saying the competition aimed to offer “joyful respite from our exhausting political climate” free from “party affiliations”. A California county is on track to be run by a militia-aligned group, reports the Guardian’s Dani Anguiano: A retired police chief and self-described Reagan Republican with decades of public service, Leonard Moty checked all the boxes to represent his community in one of California’s most conservative counties. But on Tuesday, voters ousted Moty, handing control of the Shasta county board of supervisors to a group aligned with local militia members. The election followed nearly two years of threats and increasing hostility toward the longtime supervisor and his moderate colleagues in response to pandemic health restrictions. While it’s not yet clear who will replace Moty, the two candidates in the lead attended a celebration on Tuesday with members of an area militia group, the Sacramento Bee reported. The recall is a win for the ultra-conservative movement in Shasta county, which has fought against moderate Republican officials and sought to gain a foothold in local government in this rural part of northern California. It also highlights a phenomenon that extends far beyond the region, as experts warn the pandemic and eroding trust in US institutions has fueled extremism in local politics and hostility against officials that could reshape governments from school boards to county supervisors to Congress. “I think it’s going to be a change in our politics. I think we’re going to shift more to the alt-right side of things,” Moty said on Wednesday. “I really thought my community would step up to the plate and they didn’t and that’s very discouraging.” Located more than two hours from California’s more densely populated state capital, Sacramento, Shasta county has long been a conservative bastion and home to a thriving State of Jefferson movement, which advocates for secession from California and the formation of a new state. But it was also the sort of place where people could work through their differences to achieve common goals, said Moty, who had served as a supervisor since 2009. After the pandemic took hold in 2020 and the governor instituted lockdown measures, however, many residents were outraged by the restrictions and what they viewed as the failure of county officials to stand up to the state government. Shasta county was among the least restrictive in California, Moty said, but residents unhappy about state rules and mask requirements began showing up in meetings in large numbers. Read more: Biden spoke with the family of New York police officers Wilbert Mora and Jason Rivera ahead of his visit to the city, according to White House press secretary Jen Psaki, “to express his heartfelt condolences for their loss”. The officers were killed last month after they were fired upon while responding to a 911. officer shot and killed the suspect. Another officer shot and killed the suspect. Here’s more on the president’s visit: That’s it from me today. My west coast colleague, Maanvi Singh, will take over the blog for the next few hours. Here’s where the day stands so far: Joe Biden made a trip to New York to discuss his administration’s efforts to reduce violent crime and gun violence. “The answer is not to defund the police,” Biden said during a meeting at NYPD headquarters. “It’s to give you the tools, the training, the funding to be partners, to be protectors.” Ahead of Biden’s trip, the White House also outlined its plan to crack down on interstate gun-trafficking, which has led to the presence of more firearms in Northeast cities like New York. Some progressive activists have expressed fear that the White House’s efforts to reduce crime could encourage unjust policing tactics. “What we need from the President is a comprehensive plan to end gun violence and one that doesn’t rely on introducing even more violence by adding to bloated police departments,” said Alexis Confer, executive director of the gun control group March For Our Lives. US officials claim they have evidence of a Russian plan to make a “very graphic” fake video of a Ukrainian attack as a pretext for an invasion. “We don’t know definitively that this is the route they are going to take, but we know that this is an option under consideration,” the deputy national security adviser, Jonathan Finer, told MSNBC. The Pentagon’s spokesperson said the plan is believed to have the backing of the Kremlin. The US military carried out a special forces raid last night that resulted in the death of Islamic State leader Abu Ibrahim al-Hashimi al-Qurayshi. In a speech this morning, Biden said that Qurayshi detonated a bomb, killing himself and several family members, to avoid being captured by US troops. “Last night’s operation took a major terrorist leader off the battlefield, and it sent a strong message to terrorists around the world: We will come after you and find you,” Biden said. Maanvi will have more coming up, so stay tuned. The White House press secretary, Jen Psaki, became similarly defensive earlier today when a reporter pressed for more details about the deaths of Abu Ibrahim al-Hashimi al-Qurayshi and his family members. Joe Biden said that Qurayshi detonated a bomb to avoid capture by the US troops who carried out a special forces raid last night, and the explosion killed the Islamic State leader and several of his family members. NPR reporter Ayesha Rascoe asked Psaki whether the White House would present evidence to substantiate Biden’s claims that a suicide bomb killed Qurayshi and his family. “Obviously, these events just happened overnight. And so, I’m going to let the Department of Defense do a final assessment, which I’m certain they will provide additional detail on once it’s finalized,” Psaki said. Rascoe continued to press the issue, telling Psaki, “The US has not always been straightforward about what happens with civilians. And, I mean, that is a fact.” The US military initially described a Kabul drone attack carried out last year as a “righteous strike,” but Pentagon leaders were later forced to admit that the attack had actually killed 10 civilians and no Islamic State combatants. “The president made clear from the beginning, at every point in this process, that doing everything possible to avoid civilian casualties was his priority and his preference,” Psaki said. “Given these events just happened less than 24 hours ago, we’re going to give [the Pentagon] time to make a final assessment. And they’ll provide every detail they can.” The State Department spokesperson, Ned Price, clashed with a reporter at his press briefing after the journalist demanded evidence to substantiate US claims of Russia’s plans to stage an attack to justify an invasion of Ukraine. “You’ve made an allegation that they might do that. Have they actually done it?” AP reporter Matt Lee asked Price. “What we know, Matt, is what I just said, that they have engaged in this activity,” Price said. “We told you a few weeks ago that we have information indicating Russia also has already pre-positioned a group of operatives to conduct a false-flag operation in eastern Ukraine. So that, Matt, to your question is an action that Russia has already taken.” Lee pointed out that the administration has not presented evidence to support the allegation of a planned false-flag operation either, and he pressed for concrete proof of Russia’s schemes in Ukraine. Specifically on the allegation of a planned fake video to justify an invasion, Lee said, “This is like - crisis actors? Really? This is like Alex Jones territory you’re getting into now.” Pointing to his decades of experience covering US foreign policy, Lee noted that the Pentagon has previously made wrong assertions about the presence of weapons of mass destruction in Iraq and the potential of Kabul falling to the Taliban. Price became defensive, telling Lee, “If you doubt the credibility of the US government, of the British government, of other governments and want to, you know, find solace in information that the Russians are putting out, that is for you to do.” The Guardian’s Julian Borger and Shaun Walker report: US officials claim they have evidence of a Russian plan to make a “very graphic” fake video of a Ukrainian attack as a pretext for an invasion. The alleged plot would involve using corpses, footage of blown-up buildings, fake Ukrainian military hardware, Turkish-made drones and actors playing the part of Russian-speaking mourners. “We don’t know definitively that this is the route they are going to take, but we know that this is an option under consideration,” the deputy national security adviser, Jonathan Finer, told MSNBC, adding that the video “would involve actors playing mourners for people who are killed in an event that they would have created themselves”. Finer added: “That would involve the deployment of corpses to represent bodies purportedly killed, of people purportedly killed in an incident like this.” The Pentagon spokesman, John Kirby, said the video would have purported to show a Ukrainian attack on Russian territory or Russian-speaking people in eastern Ukraine and would be “very graphic”. He added that the US believed that the plan had the backing of the Kremlin. “Our experience is that very little of this nature is not approved at the highest levels of the Russian government,” Kirby said. Meeting then-Israeli president Reuven Rivlin in Jerusalem in May 2017, Donald Trump stunned advisers by criticising the then-prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, for being unwilling to seek peace while Mahmoud Abbas, the Palestinian leader, was “desperate” for a deal. The comment “knocked everyone off their chairs”, David Friedman, Trump’s ambassador to Israel, writes in a new book. “Although the meeting was private and off the record, we all envisioned a headline tomorrow that Trump had praised Abbas and criticised Netanyahu – the worst possible dynamic for the president’s popularity or for the prospects of the peace process. “Fortunately, and incredibly, the event wasn’t leaked.” Friedman now describes the incident, and how he says he changed Trump’s mind, in Sledgehammer: How Breaking with the Past Brought Peace to the Middle East, a memoir which will be published next week by Broadside Books, a conservative imprint of HarperCollins. The Guardian obtained a copy. Friedman’s description of Trump’s private meeting with Rivlin – and behaviour Friedman says would have been embarrassing had it been leaked – could prove embarrassing itself. Trump has been repeatedly burned by books on his time in power, even those written by loyalists like Friedman. In December, the Guardian was first to report that Mark Meadows, Trump’s last chief of staff, described how the president tested positive for Covid-19 before his first debate with Joe Biden – and how the result was covered up. Full story: Congressman Hakeem Jeffries, a member of the House Democratic leadership team, described gun violence as a “national challenge” that has uniquely impacted New York. There are currently more than 300 million guns circulating in the US, and Jeffries said some of those firearms are “weapons of war” that serve no purpose other than harming people. “They’re not used to hunt deer. They’re used to hunt human beings. That’s not acceptable,” Jeffries said during the president’s meeting at NYPD headquarters. “Many of those guns too easily fall into the hands of violent individuals.” The congressman called for “an all hands on deck approach” to limit the flow of guns into New York and reduce the number of shootings across the city. “You can knock us down but never knock us out, and together we will get this done,” Jeffries said. Senator Kirsten Gillibrand was also present for Joe Biden’s event at NYPD headquarters, and she emphasized the need to crack down on gun-trafficking. Gillibrad noted there are currently no federal laws making it illegal to cross state lines with a vehicle full of weapons, which can then be sold to anyone with no oversight. “We have to change that. It’s really pretty simple. We have to keep these illegal guns off of our streets, out of the hands of those who could not buy them legally,” Gillibrand said. “We have to work hand in glove across federal, state and local government lines. We have to pass the common sense gun reforms that the president talked about.” Gillibrand has worked for years to pass a bill that would establish gun-trafficking as a federal crime and make it easier to hold those involved in gun-trafficking accountable. “We cannot have more stories of four-year-olds dying on park benches in Brooklyn,” Gillibrand said. “We cannot have more stories of moms and their movement, speaking out [and] begging leaders to do what’s right. We can do this, and we will.” New York Governor Kathy Hochul said she was committed to stopping the flow of illegal firearms into the state from other regions with looser gun laws. The Democratic governor noted that 80% of guns in New York are coming from other states illegally, and she pledged that her team would crack down on that pipeline. “That is the message,” Hochul said at the community meeting with Joe Biden at NYPD headquarters. “We have the resources. We have the will. We have the desire to get this done because our citizens are calling on us to protect them, so they can feel safe once again in this great city and this incredible state.” New York Mayor Eric Adams said he and Joe Biden see eye to eye when it comes to ensuring public safety and justice in US cities, noting that he has been called “the Biden of Brooklyn”. Adams, a Democrat, demanded a robust response to gun violence that would be similar to how the nation responded to terrorism after the September 11 attacks. “The president is here because he knows what the American people want: justice, safety and prosperity. And they deserve every bit of it,” Adams said. “Our most important mission is protecting the people of this city and this country, making sure they have what they need to live their lives.” Joe Biden is speaking in New York City now about gun violence and has already walked into the heart of a controversial topic by saying that when trying to reduce crime and make cities safer: “The answer is not to defund the police.” The US president said that $350m of additional funding will be put into cutting crime, but he is not calling for police departments to be shrunk or closed down and the funds diverted into social services, which will further frustrate progressives. Biden has been accompanied to New York by US attorney general Merrick Garland and is meeting the Big Apple’s new Democratic mayor, former police officer Eric Adams, and the relatively new state governor, Democrat Kathy Hochul, who succeeded Andrew Cuomo when he resigned last summer. They are at New York Police Department headquarters in lower Manhattan - a strong message to send from the get-go. Biden said: “Mayor Adams, you and I agree, the answer [to crime] is not to abandon our streets. That’s not the answer, the answer is to come together..police and communities building trust and making us all safer. The answer is not to defund the police it’s to give you the tools, the training, the funding, to be partners, to be protectors and...to know the community.” Joe Biden is considering implementing police reform in the US by executive order, the White House said, as the US president arrived in New York to meet the new mayor, Eric Adams, to discuss gun violence. In the wake of failure by Congress to pass police reform legislation introduced after the murder of George Floyd, a Black man crushed to death by a white police officer in Minneapolis in 2020, the US president is exploring other avenues to reform, White House press secretary Jen Psaki. Biden is talking now at New York Police Department headquarters in the Big Apple. Eric Adams took office on January 1 and is a former police officer. Biden said the answer to policing is not to remove funding from law enforcement. He said streets need more cops and more public safety and the administration intends to put more funds into both. This will outrage those progressives who want to defund police departments and switch funding to better social services such as educational and mental health services. House Speaker Nancy Pelosi said moments ago that the tense stand-off situation between Russia and Ukraine is ‘deadly serious’. The California Democrat is giving a briefing and added that it is important that the US impose sanctions on Russia if president Vladimir Putin’s forces strike neighbor Ukraine and that she wanted the US Congress to “move quickly” on legislation introducing such sanctions. Last month Senate Democrats on unveiled a bill to impose sweeping sanctions on top Russian government and military officials, including Putin, and key banking institutions if Moscow engages in hostilities against Ukraine, Reuters reported at the time. The proposed legislation, backed by the White House, includes provisions to help bolster Ukraine’s security and encourages the United States to “consider all available and appropriate measures” to ensure the Russia-to-Germany Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline - a “tool of malign influence of the Russian Federation” - does not become operational. “This legislation makes it absolutely clear that the U.S. Senate will not stand idly by as the Kremlin threatens a re-invasion of Ukraine,” Senator Robert Menendez, the Democratic chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee who unveiled the bill, said in a statement. Russia has amassed about 100,000 troops on Ukraine’s border and Washington is trying to dissuade Moscow from re-invading the country. The bill, first reported by the Washington Post, would also target companies in Russia that offer secure messaging systems, such as SWIFT, which banks use to exchange key information with other financial institutions. More than two dozen Democrats, including Majority Leader Chuck Schumer, have endorsed the bill, a Menendez spokesperson said. The bill would “trigger severe costs to Russia’s economy” if Russia goes ahead with an invasion, a spokesperson for the White House’s National Security Council said. Here’s where the day stands so far: Joe Biden is traveling to New York for meetings on reducing violent crime and gun violence. Biden is traveling with Attorney General Merrick Garland, and the president will be joined by New York Mayor Eric Adams and Governor Kathy Hochul as they meet with community leaders to discuss strategies to combat gun violence. A US military operation in northern Syria resulted in the death of Islamic State leader Abu Ibrahim al-Hashimi al-Qurayshi. In a speech this morning, Biden confirmed that a special forces raid targeting Qurayshi was carried out last night. The US president said that Qurayshi detonated a bomb, killing himself and several family members, to avoid being captured. US officials have uncovered the Kremlin’s plans to stage an attack and use it as justification to invade Ukraine, according to multiple reports. The news comes one day after the White House announced that more than 3,000 US military personnel would be deployed to Germany, Poland and Romania in response to Russia’s troop buildup along Ukraine’s borders. The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned. US officials have uncovered the Kremlin’s plans to stage an attack, blame it on Ukrainian forces and use the violence as justification for an invasion, according to multiple reports. The Washington Post reports: The details of the plan have been declassified by U.S. intelligence and are expected to be revealed Thursday by the Biden administration, said four people familiar with the matter. The administration last month warned that the Russian government had sent operatives into eastern Ukraine, possibly in preparation for sabotage operations. The alleged operation the United States plans to expose would involve broadcasting images of civilian casualties in eastern Ukraine — and potentially over the border in Russia — to a wide audience to drum up outrage against the Ukrainian government and create a pretext for invasion, two of the people said. It was unclear if the casualties would be real or faked, one U.S. official said. The people familiar with the plan said it was formulated by Russian security services and is in the advanced stages of preparation. The news comes one day after the White House announced that more than 3,000 US military personnel would be deployed to Germany, Poland and Romania in response to Russia’s troop buildup along Ukraine’s borders. House speaker Nancy Pelosi applauded Joe Biden for overseeing the US military operation that resulted in the death of Islamic State leader Abu Ibrahim al-Hashimi al-Qurayshi. “Last night, America delivered justice to the leader of ISIS and struck a serious blow to this terrorist group,” Pelosi said in a statement. “Our entire nation is grateful for the patriotism and dedication of our military personnel and intelligence community. On behalf of the Congress, I salute President Biden’s strong leadership to keep our nation safe and secure.” In his remarks this morning, Biden confirmed that Qurayshi detonated a bomb, killing himself and several family members, to avoid being captured by US troops. Pelosi said that Qurayshi’s death represented “a strong step forward in the fight against ISIS,” but she emphasized the importance of remaining vigilant to combat terrorism. “Congress remains ironclad in our commitment to our national security, and we will continue to work closely with the Administration to protect the American people,” Pelosi said. However, Joe Biden’s plans to crack down on violent crime are attracting some criticism from progressive groups who argue his policies could encourage unjust policing tactics. The gun control group March for Our Lives has released a statement criticizing Biden’s latest proposal as an insufficient, piecemeal approach to curbing gun violence that could contribute to mass incarceration. “What we need from the President is a comprehensive plan to end gun violence and one that doesn’t rely on introducing even more violence by adding to bloated police departments,” said Alexis Confer, executive director of March For Our Lives. “We’ve been asking for a year now: What is your plan? How will the agencies work together? What are your benchmarks? Once again the President has outlined steps, but not a plan, and we need him to finally commit to formulating a plan and appointing a cabinet-level director to be laser-focused on carrying it out and ending gun violence.” In New York, Joe Biden and the attorney general, Merrick Garland, will join Mayor Eric Adams and Governor Kathy Hochul for a Gun Violence Strategies Partnership meeting at NYPD Headquarters. The president will then visit a public school in Queens to “discuss community violence intervention programs with local leaders,” according to his official schedule. Biden and Garland are expected to tout the administration’s renewed efforts to combat gun violence, including adding more personnel to help curb the flow of illegal guns from the South to Northeast cities like New York. Joe Biden’s departure to New York has been delayed because of his speech on the US military’s raid targeting Islamic State leader Abu Ibrahim al-Hashimi al-Qurayshi. The president has left the White House for Joint Base Andrews, and he is now expected to arrive at New York’s John F Kennedy Airport in about an hour. Once he arrives, he will meet with New York Mayor Eric Adams and the state’s governor, Kathy Hochul, to discuss ways to reduce violent crime and gun violence in cities. Stay tuned. Joe Biden commended the US military for carrying out its mission in northern Syria last night to eliminate Islamic State leader Abu Ibrahim al-Hashimi al-Qurayshi. “Last night, operating on my orders, United States military forces successfully removed a major terrorist threat to the world: the global leader of Isis,” Biden said. “Last night’s operation took a major terrorist leader off the battlefield, and it sent a strong message to terrorists around the world: We will come after you and find you.” According to the US president, the Pentagon chose to carry out a special forces raid to minimize civilian casualties, but the Islamic State leader then chose to detonate a bomb to avoid being apprehended. “As our troops approached to capture the terrorist, in a final act of desperate cowardice, with no regard to the lives of his own family or others in the building, he chose to blow himself up -- not just with a vest but to blow up that third floor -- rather than face justice for the crimes he has committed, taking several members of his family with him,” Biden said. The Guardian’s Oliver Holmes has more updates and analysis on our other live blog: Joe Biden will soon deliver remarks on a US counter-terrorism mission in northern Syria, which resulted in the death of a top Islamic State leader. “Last night at my direction, U.S. military forces in northwest Syria successfully undertook a counterterrorism operation to protect the American people and our Allies, and make the world a safer place,” Biden said in a statement released this morning. “Thanks to the skill and bravery of our Armed Forces, we have taken off the battlefield Abu Ibrahim al-Hashimi al-Qurayshi—the leader of ISIS.” For more details on the mission and Biden’s remarks, follow the Guardian’s other live blog: Joe Biden delivered remarks at the National Prayer Breakfast this morning, and he urged the lawmakers present to embrace unity, even as Washington remains bitterly divided over politics. “Unity is elusive, but it’s really actually necessary,” Biden said on Capitol Hill. “Unity doesn’t mean we have to agree on everything, but unity is where enough of us believe in a core of basic things -- the common good, the general welfare, a faith in the United States of America.” The president also acknowledged Senate minority leader Mitch McConnell, describing him as a “man of honor” despite their many disagreements on policy proposals. “Mitch, I don’t want to hurt your reputation, but we really are friends,” Biden said. “You’ve always done exactly what you’ve said. You’re a man of your word. And you’re a man of honor. Thank you for being my friend.” Joe Biden has repeatedly urged local governments to use their Covid-19 relief money to hire more police officers and invest in crime reduction strategies such as violence interrupters and summer camps. Hosting Biden and Merrick Garland in New York is the city’s newly-elected mayor, Eric Adams, a former police captain. Together, Biden, Garland and Adams will meet with law enforcement officials at the NYPD headquarters in Manhattan, before heading to Queens, where they will meet with violence interrupters. The stops will highlight their “comprehensive approach to gun violence,” a plan that includes “smart policing community policing strategies and community violence interventions,” according to a senior administration official. Asked during the Wednesday briefing why Biden was visiting New York, a White House official said: “The president is going to New York City because it is a community where they continue, like many other cities across the country, to experience a spike in gun violence as a result of the pandemic.” The Biden administration on Thursday announced it was redoubling its efforts to combat a scourge of violent crime ahead of the president’s visit to New York, where gun violence is spiking anew. The Department of Justice is planning to announce new efforts to crack down on illegal guns and violent crime – measures that expand on a plan the administration already unveiled last summer. According to White House officials, the department will launch a national “ghost gun” enforcement initiative that aims to better train prosecutors to investigate crimes involving unserialized firearms. “As part of this new initiative, the department will train a national cadre of prosecutors on enforcement issues that are specific to the use of ghost guns and crimes,” one senior administration official told reporters, previewing the announcement on Wednesday. “These specialists will serve as a resource in every district across the country.” As part of the new push, Attorney General Merrick Garland planned to direct US attorneys to prioritize prosecutions of people who illegally sold guns used in violent crimes. The department will also expand its efforts to stem the flow of illegal guns along the so-called “Iron Pipeline,” a route along which firearms are trafficked into north-eastern cities, often from southern states with more lax gun laws. Greetings from Washington, live blog readers. Joe Biden will travel to New York today to meet with the city’s new mayor, Eric Adams, and discuss his administration’s efforts to reduce gun violence and violent crime. The president’s trip comes two weeks after a fatal shooting in Harlem, which resulted in the deaths of two New York police officers, Jason Rivera and Wilbert Mora. In New York, Biden will be joined by the US attorney general, Merrick Garland, and the New York governor, Kathy Hochul, will also participate in the president’s meetings with community violence intervention leaders. The trip appears to be part of the White House’s broader efforts to push back against Republicans’ claims that Biden is “soft on crime,” as many US cities combat an alarming rise in homicides. Asked about Biden’s position on the rise in violent crime, White House press secretary Jen Psaki noted that last year’s coronavirus relief package included more funding for Community Oriented Policing Services programs. “So if those facts are uncomfortable, I’m sorry for people who feel they need to be critical, but the President has been a longtime advocate of addressing crime,” Psaki said Monday. “He’s never been for defunding the police.” Biden will soon depart for New York, so stay tuned.1) Will Rangnick get more out of Pogba? A hugely difficult week for Manchester United ends with them facing one of the form teams in the Championship. Chris Wilder, the Boro manager, has banned his players from swapping shirts with Cristiano Ronaldo, remarking they are not on a “sight-seeing tour”. His last visit to Old Trafford came with Sheffield United, their 2-1 win a rare highlight in a doomed final season, and Wilder has always had a taste for tweaking the nose of the gilded elite. Talking of which, Paul Pogba is fit enough for selection by Ralf Rangnick. Can Rangnick find Pogba a settled role in the team where José Mourinho and Ole Gunnar Solskjær failed? Or, with the Frenchman’s contract ticking down towards a free transfer, will the interim manager even try? “He might even be in the starting XI,” Rangnick said on Thursday, though Pogba would not seem an ideal fit for Rangnick’s prescribed style. JB Manchester United v Middlesbrough, Friday 8pm (all times GMT) 2) Pilgrims bid to storm Stamford Bridge It was after last season’s fourth-round tie that Chelsea sacked Frank Lampard, despite beating Luton 3-1 with a Tammy Abraham hat-trick. Mason Mount was handed the armband that day, a pointed gesture from a manager knowing his likely fate. Now for the visit of Plymouth Argyle. On Thursday, Pilgrims manager Steven Schumacher, a one-time Everton youth-team colleague of Wayne Rooney, said: “I’m sure the lads will find the energy from somewhere to go away to Stamford Bridge.” His team have endured long recent trips to Fleetwood and Doncaster, while many Chelsea players have enjoyed a rest in the international window; Schumacher called that a “winter break”. Plymouth, seventh in League One, hope to emulate Bradford in 2015 and pull-off a famous FA Cup shock at Stamford Bridge. Perhaps Jordan Houghton, a former Chelsea youngster, can repeat the role of Filipe Morais, a goalscorer that day against his old club. JB Chelsea v Plymouth Argyle, Saturday 12.30pm 3) Ghosts of upsets past for Hammers trio There’s a scene in the 1994 documentary, “Inside Story – the Manageress” where a 24-year-old Karren Brady, then managing director of Birmingham City, jokes down the phone with club owner David Sullivan at the prospect of facing Kidderminster Harriers in the FA Cup third round: “If they beat us, we will pack it in.” Naturally, the non-league Harriers famously ran out 2-1 winners over second-tier City. Kidderminster beat a Preston side containing David Moyes in the fourth round, only to controversially lose to West Ham in the fifth round. Brady and Sullivan stayed on at Birmingham, of course, despite the third-round embarrassment. Now vice-chairman and joint chairman of West Ham respectively, they will surely have winced at the draw this time around, even if Kidderminster are the lowest-ranked side left in the draw. The National League North side put Reading out in the last round at Aggborough – Moyes will surely not be taking them lightly. MB Kidderminster v West Ham, Saturday 12.30pm 4) Lampard must find right defensive duo Frank Lampard has arrived as the new Everton manager and will be looking to make an immediate impact, and prove the doubters wrong after a year out of work following his Chelsea sacking last January. At Stamford Bridge, his teams often looked disorganised, quickening his downfall. If he can bring the discipline that was unexpectedly lacking under his Everton predecessor, Rafa Benítez, it will be a positive start for a team that consistently concedes from set-pieces. Centre-back Michael Keane has suffered all season and was left out by Duncan Ferguson for the loss to Aston Villa. He will need his confidence rebuilding by the new Goodison Park regime. Yerry Mina, Mason Holgate and Ben Godfrey are the other options at centre-back and it will be important to select the right pairing for the long-term, in order to build a base to the newly-formed spine of his team. WU Everton v Brentford, Saturday 3pm 5) U’s enjoy ‘free hit’ against in-form Hatters Cambridge’s reward for eliminating Newcastle in the third round was winning hearts and minds, rather than a lucrative away tie at a Premier League giant. Instead, the mid-table League One side have drawn Luton at home, and in the words of full-back George Williams, it feels like a “free hit”, though it will for both teams. Nathan Jones’s Luton side are within reach of a Championship playoff place, having picked 17 points in their last eight matches. That momentum began after almost a month of Covid cancellations when they crushed Harrogate in the third round. The Hatters beat Swansea in midweek and host Barnsley on Tuesday, so Jones may rest players. Their hosts welcome the BBC’s live cameras for the first time since 2015, when the U’s held Manchester United in a memorable Friday night encounter. JB Cambridge v Luton, Saturday 5.30pm 6) Mitrovic a man with point to prove Premier League leaders Manchester City face their Championship equivalents at the Etihad. Both teams are scoring at will: City have 55 goals in the league already this season but that is eclipsed by Fulham’s 74. Aleksandar Mitrovic is a key reason behind the net-bulging at Craven Cottage, thanks to his 28 goals in 26 league games. The Serb striker has rarely convinced as a top-flight player since arriving at Newcastle in 2015 but will be relishing the prospect of threatening the City centre-backs to help prove he can shine against the best, especially with a potential promotion on the line at the end of the season. Mitrovic’s best top-flight return was 11 goals with Fulham in 2018-19. It is a respectable figure but Mitrovic will feel he can do more, starting on Saturday. WU Manchester City v Fulham, Saturday 3pm 7) Chance for Spurs trio to stake claim Spurs’ FA Cup tie against Brighton will likely come too soon for Antonio Conte’s new signings Dejan Kulusevski and Rodrigo Bentancur, with the latter only meeting his new teammates for the first time on Thursday following the approval of his work permit. That means potential opportunities for Oliver Skipp, Harry Winks and Pierre-Emile Højbjerg to show that they merit a place in Conte’s new-look midfield. With games in hand on the teams above them and a top-four finish still very much a possibility, some managers might choose to protect their players in the Cup. Having not played a game for nearly two weeks, Conte would be foolish to rest any of his strongest XI here though, especially after the scare at home to Morecambe in the last round. Skipp, Winks and Hojbjerg will surely be eager to show they are not as disposable as the departed Giovani Lo Celso, Dele Alli and Tanguy Ndombele come the end of the campaign. MB Tottenham v Brighton, Saturday, 8pm 8) Forest’s flying duo could finish Foxes Arsenal found out about the double threat of Nottingham Forest’s Djed Spence and Brennan Johnson to their cost in the third round. They will once again be key to Forest’s chances of success against their East Midlands rivals Leicester. The pair have seemingly synchronised down the right flank to terrorise left-backs. Luke Thomas is the current incumbent at Leicester, having started the last two games following Timothy Castagne’s injury. The 20-year-old has impressed when called upon this season but Forest will be confident of causing problems against an inexperienced defender who will need cover from the winger in front of him. Spence and Johnson have been the subject of offers from Premier League clubs in January and will be more than happy to show prospective buyers they are worth another bid in the summer. WU Nottingham Forest v Leicester, Sunday 4pm 9) Cardiff may not match Wembley effort Cardiff travel to Anfield on Sunday in a repeat of the 2012 League Cup final, in which Liverpool ran out winners at Wembley after a penalty shootout. Things should not be so close this time around, especially with Cardiff losing their attacking talisman, Kieffer Moore, to Bournemouth on transfer deadline day. City also lost Ryan Giles, recalled by parent club Wolves and now on loan at Blackburn – only two players in the Championship have more assists than the 22-year-old. Jordan Hugill has been added to the Bluebirds front line but this feels like a tough ask for Steve Morison, who has already admitted he will make changes from the side that beat Barnsley on Wednesday. For Liverpool, this might be an opportunity to rest key players before a tricky Premier League test against Leicester in midweek. MB Liverpool v Cardiff, Sunday 12pm 10) A bad draw for Boreham Wood? It’s been quite the journey for Adrian Clifton. After serving three prison sentences as a youth, the striker has played for nine clubs, but is now a towering presence up top for Boreham Wood. The boyhood Arsenal fan scored with his third touch to seal a shock third-round win over AFC Wimbledon – celebrating with a textbook Thierry Henry knee slide. Boreham Wood have yet to lose at home this season and were disappointed by the draw away at Bournemouth. It is a bad combination: not exactly a big day out (the 11,329-capacity Vitality Stadium is smaller than some National League grounds) but also a meeting with an excellent side boosted by a string of high-profile January signings. The Cherries are pushing for promotion to the Premier League but will be wary of being turned over by unfancied opponents. MB Bournemouth v Boreham Wood, Sunday 6.30pmIt is rare indeed for a journalist to break a big story while simultaneously being at the centre of another big story – all in a space of a single day. But as Peter van Onselen prepared to ask Scott Morrison his bombshell question about the “psycho” text messages at the National Press Club on Tuesday, news was breaking that he was named in a lawsuit brought against the Ten network by political reporter Tegan George. It was a milestone day for the political academic, who was dubbed “the work experience kid” when former editor-in-chief Chris Mitchell hired him as a columnist at the Australian 13 years ago, praising him as “the next Paul Kelly”. Ten’s political editor has been accused of undermining and humiliating George, according to a statement of claim filed in the federal court, a claim he denies. With trademark confidence, PVO soldiered on, appearing on TV and radio to talk about his scoop. Later, the prime minister had a sledge of his own, saying: “The journalist who raised it is facing his own questions,” when he was asked about the texts in which the PM was called a “horrible person” by Gladys Berejiklian. When PVO didn’t appear on his usual commentary slot on RN Breakfast on Thursday many wondered: had the ABC dumped him in light of the allegations? Well, no, but he has been dumped. The new RN host, Patricia Karvelas, has replaced Van Onselen with Guardian Australia’s Katharine Murphy. Weekly Beast understands the decision has nothing to do with the lawsuit, or his much-maligned column about the former Australian of the Year Grace Tame. PK’s new team wanted more gender diversity; and will now have three male and three female commentators over the week: Michelle Grattan, Phil Coorey, David Crowe, Murph, and Samantha Maiden and David Speers on Fridays for a look back at the week in politics. Ten colleagues back Tegan George A fundraiser set up for George’s legal fees raised more than $42,000 in a couple of days, some of it from Ten colleagues who told us they had contributed anonymously. But some brave souls felt so strongly about showing their support for the political reporter they’ve put their names to their donations. A senior Ten reporter, Lachlan Kennedy, chucked in $100, as did the Studio 10 host Narelda Jacobs. Ten is yet to file its defence. Nicknames nixed The ABC News Breakfast co-host Michael Rowland has announced that the program will be a “Scomo” and “Albo”-free zone this election period. Viewers had some other requests: asking if ABC presenters could stop referring to Karvelas as “PK” and Andrew Probyn as “Probes”. They also asked if the Murdoch papers could be dropped from the media wrap of the day. Markson’s Modi moment There aren’t many journalists who would welcome a personal gift from a world leader, never mind publicising the largesse. But Sharri Markson was so “deeply honoured” to receive flowers and a “generous personal letter” from the Indian prime minister, Narendra Modi, she shared it with her followers on Twitter. In her book What Really Happened in Wuhan, and on Sky News Australia and in the Australian, Markson argued that a Wuhan Institute of Virology staffer could have been accidentally infected with Covid-19 and carried it outside. She also raised the possibility that the institute’s research is not just to “stay ahead” of possible future pandemics but to engineer viruses as potential bioweapons. Markson’s reporting on Covid’s origins got particular traction in India, where the bioweapon theory was a defence against the government’s mishandling of the country’s collapsing health system. Show’s over The Sunrise co-host David Koch was excited when he introduced Andrew Whitehouse, a professor of autism research, to discuss a “fascinating” new study which drew “a link between baby boys exposed to screen time and a greater risk of being diagnosed with autism”. Kochie told viewers that 84,000 toddlers had been monitored over three years to find that “one-year-old boys who spent more time in front of a screen were more likely to be diagnosed with the disorder”. “Andrew, how significant are these findings?” Kochie asked. “Look, Kochie, in two words, not very,” Whitehouse said, knocking the wind right out of Kochie’s sails and causing him to pretend to wind up the interview immediately. “It’s really important that we put these kinds of findings in context,” Whitehouse said. “This association doesn’t equal causation here. It could actually be caused by any number of factors and what the study very clearly does not show is a causal link between early screen time and a later diagnosis of autism.” Humble pie The first Newspoll of 2022 was bad news for the Coalition, showing popular support has slumped to the lowest levels since the 2018 Liberal leadership spill and Morrison’s approval ratings are tumbling. Not that you’d know it if you glanced at the Australian’s pie charts, posted on social media on Monday. The Australian’s graphic did not represent the pie pieces as the numbers had indicated, resulting in Morrison’s and the Coalition’s support looking more significant than it was. While conspiracy theories abounded that the Oz had tried to make Albanese’s support look smaller, the explanation is likely to be more mundane. The pie chart graphic used by the Oz has stayed largely the same for months so some genius just changed the numbers without adjusting the size of the slices, distorting the proportions. The Australian was quick to delete the posts. Sandilands’ 12-minute spray When KIIS FM newsreader Brooklyn Ross led the bulletin on The Kyle and Jackie O Show with the story about Scott Morrison being called a “horrible person” by colleagues, it infuriated co-host Kyle Sandilands who believed it was “not real news”. Kyle launched a 12-minute expletive-laden rant at the newsreader and his co-host, after which he stormed out, leaving Jackie to present the show solo for the rest of the morning. Now, it may just have been another FM radio stunt to gain attention – drama, bad language and high jinks are common – but the language the popular host used may have been blue enough to attract the attention of the media watchdog. “Actually, I’m a little bit annoyed,” he said just after at 6am on Wednesday. “This is the biggest news in Australia, and it’s all over nothing. “This is not real news. If this is the news just go on the TV and radio today and say ‘no news is good news’. Don’t make up fictitious bullshit drama over nothing.” When Jackie and Brooklyn argued that it was newsworthy, Sandilands labelled her an idiot and told the newsreader his career was “over”. “We don’t have to run around every time some cocksucker from the ABC asks a question,” Kyle said, apparently missing the fact it was Ten’s Van Onselen who asked the question. “Fuck this joint,” he said. “Do the show by yourself. What a fucking show it will be.” If listeners complain to the station and are unhappy with the response, the Australian Communications and Media Authority will investigate, a spokesperson said. While the $100m media mogul has apologised he maintains he has every right to “decide what the news is”. “Well, every right, because I run the show,” Sandilands said. “I’m not an employee ... I don’t work for anyone.”Qantas chief executive, Alan Joyce, has compared Western Australia’s ongoing border closure to the totalitarian state of North Korea. Speaking on 3AW on Friday, Joyce lamented there wasn’t a plan in WA for when the state would re-welcome domestic travellers after the initial reopening date of 5 February was scrapped indefinitely last month. “You can’t even travel around your own country … it’s starting to look like North Korea,” he told presenters Ross and Russel. “We thought we had a date for that border to be opened … but that was stepped back from, it’s disappointed tens of thousands of people that had booked to go to WA. “I think we should all be a bit outraged by it … we’re supposed to be all Australians.” North Korea – officially the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea – is widely considered to hold the worst human rights record in the world and has been repeatedly condemned by the United Nations, the European Union and the Human Rights Watch. In response to the pandemic, North Korea’s leadership ordered soldiers on the border with Russia and China to “unconditionally shoot” on sight anyone entering the state without permission. Citizens were banned from nearly all international travel, and almost all trade was limited to the movement of essential personnel and goods, preventing foods and other essentials from reaching the country and causing a shortage of basic necessities. “North Korea used Covid-19 restrictions to further oppress the North Korean people while igniting a crisis over access to food, medicine, and other essential goods,” Lina Yoon, senior Korea researcher at Human Rights Watch, said. But Joyce said the ongoing closure of Australia to some tourists and business travellers defied logic in light of the nation’s Omicron wave and was comparative to a dictatorship like that of North Korea. He said Qantas had lost “millions of dollars” in flight cancellations when McGowan made the decision to keep the borders shut to interstate travellers. “When you look at the detail of it, we have higher per capita cases of Covid than a lot of these countries … the UK, the US, most European countries,” he said. “We ask people to be fully vaccinated, so they’re less likely to end up in hospital … I don’t get the logic, and I think we should be opening up the borders … as soon as possible.” Australia’s international border is open to residents and some visa holders including students backpackers and skilled migrants, however tourists and business travellers from most countries remain unable to enter the nation. Since late November, 56,000 international students have arrived in Australia and more than 50,000 overseas student visa lodgements have been made. Around 28,000 Working Holiday Maker visas have been approved since the reopening of the border to some travellers, with a 17% increase in arrivals in the past week. Prime minister Scott Morrison has said he would like to see the international border fully operational “well before” Easter of this year. But Joyce said the continued closures were causing significant damage to businesses and the tourism sector. “It is very confusing here for a lot of people, and it is very hard for a lot of people,” he said. “We should be getting on and living with Covid like we are in the eastern states today … the fact that we can travel to London but we can’t travel to Perth, I think there’s something fundamentally wrong with the federation if that’s happening.” Earlier this week, Perth Airport announced it would close terminal 1 from Monday due to low passenger numbers. All Virgin services will move to terminal 2. Some business leaders including Qantas chairman Richard Goyder are relocating to the east coast in response to the prolonged border closure. WA premier Mark McGowan said it would be “irresponsible” to allow the borders to fully reopen on 5 February in light of the Omicron wave, and said rules would be reviewed in the coming weeks. “It would cause a surge in cases, a surge in hospitalisations, and result in thousands of people not being able to work or go to school. We know that bad health outcomes lead to economic pain,” he said. Some 91.77% of eligible Western Australians had received two vaccination doses, while 838,933 people had received their booster shot. The state recorded no new cases of community transmission on Friday and two new cases detected in hotel quarantine.Hundreds of protesters descended on Canberra this week in a noisy demonstration opposing vaccine mandates and to air a hodge-podge of other grievances. In trucks and trailers, cars and campervans, the “Convoy to Canberra” lobbied in the nation’s capital on Monday, taking loud protests to Parliament House and the National Press Club. Hundreds have camped at unauthorised sites citywide; police moved in on Friday morning to dismantle a main site, but warn that protesters could be in town at least a week. With an “Occupy Canberra” protest planned at Old Parliament House and federal parliament returning next week, experts on conspiracy movements are concerned the rallies may shift in tone. The protesters are armed with a grab-bag of grievances around vaccinations, and seem to have equal disdain for all politicians. So who are they? What are the Canberra protests? It’s called the “Convoy to Canberra”, with participants in the protest driving en masse from as far away as north Queensland and Perth. Its roots snake to several recent events in the anti-vaccination and sovereign citizen space. Inspired by large-scale truck driver protests in Canada, Australian anti-vaccine and anti-government groups began demanding a “trucker convoy for freedom” online. Dr Kaz Ross, a researcher who monitors conspiracy groups, said some involved in the convoy had links to January’s protests at old Parliament House, which saw the building’s doors damaged by fire. Since launching in late January, a Facebook group grew to 172,000 followers, and a Telegram group to 30,000. “End the mandates, end the restrictions, protect the children,” is one slogan from online posters. But as groups ballooned, protesters expanded their list of grievances. By Tuesday, hundreds yelled claims that federal politicians were “paedophiles”, and called for prime minister Scott Morrison to be “removed”. “There’s a few different strands coming together,” Dr Ross said. “They say they’re sick of protesting and going home. That’s why they’re camping, they’re saying now is the time to ‘take back the government’.” Who are the Canberra protesters? “It’s a real hodge-podge,” said Elise Thomas, open source intelligence analyst with the Institute for Strategic Dialogue. She said participants come from various backgrounds; anti-vaxxers, conspiracy theorists and people who lost jobs over vaccine mandates, but also parents and children, retirees, and “hippy” groups. Protesters waved flags or wore merchandise supporting Donald Trump, the United Australia Party, One Nation, the dangerous QAnon conspiracy theory, and anti-lockdown groups. Cars were scrawled with slogans critical of Morrison, Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, and NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, while protesters outside Parliament House demanded Labor leader Anthony Albanese “come and face us”. Albanese was in Melbourne, not Canberra, at the time. An event on the Parliament House lawns initially billed United Australia party leader Craig Kelly as a “special guest”, but Kelly did not speak at the event. Kelly MP did not return requests for comment, but he and other conservative MPs such as Gerard Rennick and George Christensen have voiced support for the anti-vaccine mandate protest movement. “It’s hard to get a handle on who belongs to which group,” Thomas said. “People might be in five different groups on Telegram. It’s a bit of a stew, it’s not super organised.” Ross also noted the presence of “sovereign citizen” groups at police stations where supporters attempted to “serve papers” on public officials, in a bizarre push to have politicians arrested. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Morrison himself was “served” with papers at an Australia Day event, while standing with his family. “They genuinely believe police will lay down arms and join them,” Ross said. But at its roots, despite the diverse backgrounds, Ross said the protests come back to one common overarching theme. “It’s vaccines. They try to cover up the anti-vax elements by saying it’s about freedom of choice, but the main motivator is the vaccine,” she said. Protesters at the rallies counter this, claiming “we’re not anti-vax, we’re pro-choice”. Why are they camping? Simply, because many of them came from far away – and plan to stay. In makeshift campgrounds near the National Library, hundreds of cars, trucks and vans have been plonked in a public park, with number plates from Western Australia and Queensland. They’re calling it “camp freedom”. Group leaders claimed it will “continue indefinitely” – but that was before dozens of police, some in riot gear, moved through the site on Friday morning to move on protesters and pack up tents. Some slept in their cars, others in rollout swags or tents. It was an unauthorised camp area, and police had tried to move them on previously, leading to tense scenes on Wednesday night, as crowds advanced and several people were arrested. “Police expect disruptions in the area to continue into next week,” ACT police said on Wednesday. Ross said many protesters had spoken of losing jobs due to vaccine or lockdown issues. It means people have time to spare, and they’re joining a pop-up village; stereos loudly blare John Farnham classics, as people play games and cook communal breakfasts. “It’s like holiday time for them,” Ross said. “Something you see in those movements is people like being in a group, doing things together, and enjoying it as a social occasion.” Thomas used the term “protest-ival”, likening the atmosphere to a festival. “They get to talk to people who agree with them, which they might not get to usually do … That social element is a big appeal,” she said. What happens next? Since big protests on Monday and Tuesday, protesters have remained relatively quiet. They had settled into camp, but following the police move-on orders, they’ve been broken up and scattered through Canberra. Some headed to a large park in Canberra’s north to set up a new home base. Many are encouraging more supporters to travel to Canberra this weekend, and expect their ranks to be swelled significantly. Why? Because some protesters are planning a rally, branded “Operation Occupy Canberra”, at old Parliament House. Details are unclear, but Ross predicts “big numbers” of new supporters will arrive. Already, new contingents claim to be assembling in Queensland, to travel down in a new convoy. Police declined to comment on how they’d respond on Saturday. Ross and Thomas were wary of making predictions, but voiced concerns about what could happen. “There’s escalating rhetoric from some parts of the groups, that this is ‘their moment’,” Thomas said. “They’re saying they want something to happen.”Three big stories dominate Friday’s front pages – and none of them are good news for Boris Johnson. Editors were spoilt for choice with the “big squeeze” in living standards, the “bloodbath” of departing Downing Street aides and Rishi Sunak’s less-than-total backing for his leader. Several papers combine the stories in what the Mail calls “Meltdown in Downing Street” above an image of a forlorn-looking prime minister and the subhead, “will the last one to leave please turn out the lights” evoking the Sun’s infamous 1992 election front page. Across the top of the page, the Mail runs through the litany of the latest disasters to strike Johnson’s ailing premiership: “Four aides go”, “Sunak puts knife into PM”, and “rates, energy bills and inflation soar”. The Sun’s splash headline says “Ouch!” and then breaks out the strands of what it dubs on what others called “Black Thursday”. “Brits £2,417 poorer”, one subhead says, along with “Partygate bloodbath” and “Rishi knifes PM”. The Mirror says “They’re all laughing” with a picture of the Tory frontbench sharing a joke in the Commons juxtaposed with some hard-hitting facts about the cost of living crisis. The Guardian focuses on the shenanigans in Downing Street as four of Boris Johnson’s senior aides left in the fallout from the parties scandal: “PM hit by No 10 exodus as four aides quit in one day”. One of them, policy chief Munira Mirza, accused the prime minister of “scurrilous” behaviour when he falsely linked Keir Starmer to the failure to bring paedophile Jimmy Savile to justice. It also reports that households are “braced for further fuel bill rises”. The i has a similar theme with “Johnson’s top team quits No 10 en masse”, while the Yorkshire Post reports “Johnson aides quit amid slur against Starmer”. The headline in the Times is “Britons facing biggest drop in living standards” and a large picture of the chancellor. It also carries a story saying that “Johnson doubts grow after aides quit and Sunak takes swipe”. The Telegraph has a similar running order with a splash headlined “The big squeeze” and another smaller story down the page saying “More pressure on Johnson as four top aides quit in one day”. Ditto the FT which has a main story saying “Household budgets suffer biggest blow in three decades”, and underneath it reports “Sunak distances himself from Johnson over Savile remarks as close aides quit”. In Scotland the Daily Record says “Half a million Scots to go hungry” because of the rising cost of household energy. The Express says “Tighten your belts … Britain in grip of biggest squeeze ever”.In the midst of an Omicron outbreak and almost two years after New Zealand shut its borders, the government has announced its latest reopening plan. For most New Zealanders, the coming months will be their first direct experience of widespread Covid-19. No one, not even the minister in charge, knows what exactly will come next. “I think we’re all nervous about what the next few months has in store for New Zealand,” Chris Hipkins, the minister responsible for the country’s pandemic response, told the Guardian. “Covid-19, and Omicron in particular, is here now – it is in New Zealand and it will spread. We know that is going to happen. The extent of that, the effectiveness of our public health measures, the effect on our health system and on our most vulnerable populations is still something that’s the subject of models rather than reality.” The border has been the linchpin of New Zealand’s Covid response, the crucial ingredient of its long virus-free stretches, and the primary reason that it is now facing down endemic infection with a highly vaccinated population. That border coming down is a symbol of how radically New Zealand’s pandemic response has shifted over the last six months: from the relentless pursuit of Covid zero, to a gradual acceptance that Covid had arrived, and would spread throughout the country. For some people, Hipkins thinks the spread of Omicron and reopening of the borders will come with a shock – that the path to rebuild normality, and travel infrastructure to and from the country will be slow. “I think there’s a view that seems to have formed amongst some people that the rest of the world is sort of back to normal,” he says. “Normal is still a way away. And not all of that’s going to be within New Zealand’s control – we’ve still got Covid-19 spreading around the world, there’s still the potential for new variants of Covid 19 … it’s not like you suddenly turn on a switch and you know, all the planes go back into the air and everything’s back to the way it was.” The drawbridge will start easing down later this month: opening first to New Zealanders coming from Australia, then a few weeks later to New Zealanders elsewhere, then Australians, visa holders, and finally everyone else. The reopening is marked by New Zealand’s now-customary caution – staggered over nearly nine months, it will not be open to all international tourists and travellers until October 2022. “Our restrictions there have served us well as a country, but they were only ever intended to be temporary. I think everybody would agree it’s not feasible to keep those kinds of restrictions in place for a prolonged period,” he says “If anything, I think most of us wouldn’t have envisioned they would be in place for as long as they have been.” A festering sore point The announcement of reopening will not come as a surprise to most New Zealanders. In the last month, pressures at the border had been boiling over. The story of Charlotte Bellis – a pregnant journalist who had approached the Taliban to stay in Afghanistan after initially being declined entry to New Zealand – had made international headlines. Other stories, of families divided, children unable to visit terminally-ill parents, people stranded without visas or jobs, had been accumulating. A group of citizens stranded overseas had brought a court case against the government, challenging the legality of barring them from entry. Finally, the spread of Omicron within New Zealand’s borders meant strict policies to keep it out looked increasingly untenable. “I don’t have any regrets about the concept of having MIQ [managed isolation and quarantine],” Hipkins says. “[But] we’re acutely aware of the pressure that’s built up while there have been these restrictions.” The border had become a festering sore point in the country’s policy, with those overseas arguing the lottery for quarantine was arbitrary, unfair, and inhumane. “I would acknowledge how difficult it’s been for them – and I’ll actually say thank you to them on behalf of the whole country, who because of the sacrifices that they have made have been able to enjoy a much greater degree of freedom,” Hipkins says. “There have been fewer funerals, because of what we’ve been able to achieve with our Covid-19 response and the sacrifice that they have made has been a big part of that. I don’t for a moment underestimate what a sacrifice [that] has been for some people.” “I think New Zealanders do accept that we can’t live a life of suspended animation indefinitely,” Hipkins says. Shift to ‘individual armour’ risks leaving people behind The change in the Covid response also means a tipping of the balance, away from New Zealand’s highly centralised, government-mandated response, to one that falls more in the realm of individual responsibility. “It is going to be a big shift. It’s going to take everybody a little while to get their heads around the new realities, and how things will be different. But we’re well prepared,” Hipkins says. In speeches, prime minister Jacinda Ardern has called it a shift toward “individual armour of the vaccine” – while New Zealand’s initial response depended on the fortress walls protecting everyone inside, its new strategy means people need to strap on their own chainmail – vaccines, boosters, isolation plans, mask supplies. Epidemiologists and health experts say the shift to individual protection also has far more scope to leave people behind – those who either won’t, or can’t don their own armour. That includes children too young to be vaccinated, marginalised groups with less access to healthcare and lower vaccination rates, the immuno-compromised, and those with multiple health issues. “The problem is that vaccine coverage is patterned by inequality,” says epidemiologist Michael Baker. So too, he says, are most protections against the pandemic: social distancing, access to high-quality masks, the ability to isolate. “Despite this rhetoric about addressing inequities and attending to the needs of Māori and the concern that Māori and Pacific people are the most vulnerable, the reality is that we haven’t really implemented programmes effectively,” says associate professor and public health specialist Dr Colin Tukuitonga. “And so we saw for example, in the vaccination rollout, huge discrepancies with the lowest rates among Māori and Pacific people.” Some of those inequities started to close when the government gave more control to Māori and Pacific providers, he said – but the same problems are now cropping up in the paediatric rollout, with uptake among Māori and Pācific children less than half the rate among European. “Because potentially half of the population will get infected over the next few months, they are going to have poorer outcomes that are unfortunately now built in – because of the sequence of events and because of longstanding inequities,” says Baker. ‘The space rocket’s ready for launch’ “We’re aware that vaccination rates have been slower in our Māori and Pacific communities,” Hipkins said – and noted that his office would be meeting with Māori and Pacific groups this week, to see how they could improve. Asked if that was too little, too late, Hipkins says the government had been meeting with iwi (tribal) and Pacific health providers throughout the pandemic, and the current stage was a fine-tuning rather than a last-minute scramble. “I guess I’d liken it to, say, even when the space rocket’s ready for launch, you can never triple-check enough to make sure that everything’s in place and that you have identified every last potential thing that might go wrong or that might need more work,” he says. Rocket enthusiasts might note that even double-checked vessels occasionally burst into flame upon liftoff, and public health experts have long been arguing that inequalities in the vaccine rollout may have devastating consequences. “It’s an avoidable problem that people have been talking about since the pandemic started – we must address these inequities,” Baker says. “I think we have failed to do that.” While some New Zealanders will be celebrating the lifting of border restrictions and the chance to celebrate with friends and family, others are anxious about what comes next. Hipkins says New Zealanders are prepared for the wave to come. “I think kiwis are at this stage now where they’re sort of saying, well, we know what’s coming. We’re ready. We kind of just want to get on with it and get to the other side. I think kiwis are ready for it.”As debate rages about the religious discrimination bill, let’s remember a simple fact: under federal law, religious schools can already expel gay and transgender students for their sexuality and gender. As Coalition attack lines have emphasised this week, this power comes from an exemption for religious educational institutions in the Sex Discrimination Act, including a version passed by the Labor government in 2013. So once upon a time, there was bipartisan support for this. The Ruddock review Fast forward to May 2018, when the Ruddock review into religious freedom, launched during the same-sex marriage debate, reported back to the Turnbull government. One of its key recommendations was: if religious schools want to discriminate against staff or students for their sexuality or gender, this must be stated in a public policy. The Turnbull government didn’t release the report right away, then in August Turnbull was succeeded by Scott Morrison, the beneficiary of a conservative push against a moderate Liberal prime minister. Turnbull quit parliament, triggering a byelection in the socially progressive, usually safe Liberal seat of Wentworth. Ten days before the byelection, the recommendations of the Ruddock review leaked. The review panel had thought they’d get a pat on the back for tightening the existing religious exemption but instead the leak triggered a backlash over the fact that schools were able to expel LGBTQ+ students at all. The Liberal candidate, Dave Sharma, rejected their right to do so. An impossible bargain Labor offered bipartisan support to fix the law, and within days Morrison committed to amendments to ensure students weren’t discriminated against on the basis of sexuality or gender. The Morrison government lost the byelection, then in November 2018 made a half-hearted effort to implement the promise which failed when Coalition senators insisted that existing religious exemptions “should not be eroded unless adequate protections for religious freedom are afforded in their place”. The government asked the Australian Law Reform Commission to study the problem, giving it a deadline of April 2020 to report back, then asked it to delay until 12 months after the religious discrimination bill had passed parliament. So bipartisan support to protect LGBTQ+ kids had become theoretical support only from the Coalition, with religious freedom first cab off the rank and LGBTQ+ children to follow. The religious discrimination bill went through its own torturous process of drafting and redrafting, during which Liberal moderate MPs asked for the LGBTQ+ commitment to be delivered. Before the bill was introduced the attorney general, Michaelia Cash, wrote to the ALRC asking for “detailed drafting” to protect LGBTQ+ students, but in terms of timing it was still religion first, LGBTQ+ kids second. Morrison introduced the bill on 25 November. On 1 December a group of four Liberal moderate MPs revealed they had a deal with Cash to remove the religious educational exemption from the Sex Discrimination Act, to protect both teachers and students. On the same day, Morrison wrote to Anthony Albanese proposing to protect students through an amendment. But Morrison sought Labor’s support to wave the religious discrimination bill through the lower house, unamended, meaning that the amendment to protect LGBTQ+ students was to follow either in the Senate or after the religious bills passed. Albanese wrote back that although “protection against religious discrimination should be a uniting, and not dividing, moment for the nation” he wanted to wait for committee inquiries to report back on 4 February, because both MPs and senators needed to know the outcome before casting their votes. Dealbreaker In mid-December, Cash then told Christian lobby group FamilyVoice protections for LGBTQ+ students would still have to wait for the ALRC review, 12 months after the religious bills – appearing to renege on the deal with Liberal moderates. Criticism of Cash was muted, as we now know because Morrison had made a commitment to the four MPs, who thought the deal might still stand. On Thursday, the firestorm around Citipointe Christian College led the prime minister to recommit to protect LGBTQ+ students, this time confirming the amendment to the Sex Discrimination Act would be contained in the religious package. Did Cash mislead Christian stakeholders? FamilyVoice’s Greg Bondar said the amendment was “inconsistent” with what Cash had said, and Morrison had “betrayed” the principles of the religious bill. After months of saying LGBTQ+ students would have to wait for protection, they finally appeared to have equal priority with the religious discrimination changes. As the Greens senator Janet Rice has noted, a child who started high school in 2018, when the commitment was first made, will graduate in 2023 when the ALRC might report back. Now, perhaps, these kids will see the change made while they’re in year 11. Disarray But on Friday, the assistant attorney general, Amanda Stoker, walked the commitment back, warning that the Sex Discrimination Act “shouldn’t be changed unless we know the final form of the Religious Discrimination Act”. “I understand that the prime minister is looking for ways that those things can be done at the same time,” she said, warning of “unintended consequences” if the Sex Discrimination Act change didn’t “integrate well” with the religious bills. At a doorstop on Friday, Morrison reasserted his intention to legislate protections at the same time as the religious bill. But why the delay at all? And what are the unintended consequences? Stoker said the government wanted to allow schools to still be able to “maintain standards of behaviour within their community”. As the attorney general’s department and the Sydney Anglican church both noted in submissions to the religious discrimination bill inquiries, religious schools have the right to sack teachers for their views on sexuality. The Sydney Anglican church defended an unnamed Christian school against the widely reported claims that teacher Stephanie Lentz had been sacked for being gay, arguing she was sacked “because of [her] belief that a person can be a Christian and be gay” – not for her sexuality itself. This is why the issue grinds on so slowly, for the Coalition and other conservatives: the legislative solution must be crafted so a gay student can’t be expelled or a teacher fired for their sexuality, but a school must be able to punish those who can reconcile their sexuality and religion and express that view. In a sense, it doesn’t matter whether the changes are contained in the same bill, or follow in time one after the other. If LGBTQ+ students and teachers can be gay or have a view about their gender identity without being allowed to express it, the logical priority enforced through law is still: organised religion first, gender and sexuality second.Hannah Arendt, the political philosopher, once wrote that “power always stands in need of numbers”. That insight, made in the context of a study into the nature of violence, is one that commentators often turn to when explaining why Māori appear to fare so much better than Indigenous peoples in other parts of the Anglosphere. Māori make up more than 15% of the New Zealand population – more than five times larger than the Aboriginal Australian or Native American share of their national populations – meaning Māori are in a better position to press for guaranteed representation in parliament and local government, for dedicated television channels and radio stations, for native language schooling, and more. Indigenous peoples in other countries, to paraphrase Arendt, stand in need of numbers. The argument is seductively simple. Social scientists sometimes call it the 3.5% rule. In other words, if enough people engage in active struggle – from workers’ strikes to street protests – the disruption they cause is almost always enough to guarantee political change. In the 1980s socialist organisers were turning out tens of thousands of people on the streets to protest the Springbok tour, nuclear warships, and racism against Māori. It’s impossible to measure whether the 3.5% threshold was met, but it’s obvious enough that the many thousands who took part in demonstrations and advocacy were enough to cancel any further Springbok tours, to prohibit nuclear warships from New Zealand waters, and to strengthen the Treaty of Waitangi’s position in the New Zealand constitution. And yet this explanation also strikes as terribly grey, reducing history to a mere numbers game. That reductiveness is probably what attracts politicians to the argument. In 2004 the then race relations minister Trevor Mallard, who is now speaker of the House, told media that Māori party co-leader Tariana Turia was encouraging Māori teenagers as young as 13 to get pregnant in order to build the base for “Māori ownership of the country”. The accusation was transparently false, but it did neatly foreshadow the political right’s obsession with birthrates a decade later. White people are having too few babies, and brown people are having too many. In this calculus politics – or rather, power – is a mere numbers game and as soon as Māori birth enough babies to outmuscle or outvote the white majority then the country is theirs. Even the most charitable reader can identify that as racist. But it’s also, as a historical explanation for why Māori enjoy the power that they do, inadequate. History so often relies on contingencies. Not in the empiricist sense that some historians enjoy – AJP Taylor once made the tickling argument that what made WWI possible was railway timetables – but in the sense that certain institutional forms and movement configurations (with numbers added in) guarantee success. In New Zealand the Māori activists of the 70s and 80s were successful not so much because they had countless thousands on their side but because they brought together a necessary coalition of iwi, trade unions, university students, and politicians. In short, enough allies to cause enough disruption. In the retrospectives to the activist groups of the 70s and 80s it’s often ignored that the people we consider movement darlings – Hone Harawira, Annette Sykes, and the many others – weren’t so popular in their day. As the scholar Linda Tuhiwai Smith explained at the Ngā Tamatoa 50th reunion “you would not have invited us to dinner. You would have been embarrassed because we would have caused a fight. We would have caused a fight about the Treaty [of Waitangi]. We would have caused a fight about the survival of our people”. That confrontational approach meant many of the more conservative kaumātua (Māori elders) and iwi (tribal) leaders were either uncertain or outright hostile to younger groups like Ngā Tamatoa. Dun Mihaka, a Marxist and one of the best-known activists of the time, memorably condemned his older, conservative opponents for exercising the “traditional tyranny of kaumatuatanga [elders]” by continually “nodding [their] heads in agreement” with Pākehā politicians and wagging their fingers at the younger people demanding better. Of course, that binary – the young v the old – is equally reductive as the numbers argument. Ngā Tamatoa was made up of more than just the broad category of “young people”. The great Ranginui Walker, who was a kaumātua even in the 1970s while in his 40s, was one of the group’s founders and intellectual leaders. Even the older, conservative leaders of institutions like the Māori Council were happy to use the younger activists when it suited contrasting the vocal outsiders with their demands (Ngā Tamatoa et al) to the insiders with their readiness to cut a good deal (the Māori Council). And that brings us closer to why Māori are perhaps in a comparatively more powerful position than other Indigenous peoples. Radical movements and conservative institutions were working not necessarily in concert, but certainly toward the same aim: recognition of the Treaty of Waitangi. In the early to mid-20th century politicians would often praise New Zealand for enjoying “the best race relations in the world”. Nowhere were two races so well “integrated”. Māori, then an even smaller minority than they are today, were leaders in politics – enjoying at least four seats in parliament at all times – workplaces, and sport. In the Pākehā (white) imagination that race relations boast was thus self-evidently true. Had it not always been so? Even in the 19th century political and intellectual leaders were extolling the virtues of Māori and their Pākehā compatriots. In his general history of the young dominion William Pember Reeves wrote of Māori as “the finest race of savages the world has seen”. This was part of a long, sleazy lineage claiming that Māori – and by extension, New Zealand – were somehow exceptional. In 1885 the surveyor Edward Treagar argued that Māori were descendants of Aryans. In a droll observation a century later one of the leading historians of his generation, James Belich, noted that Treagar’s argument was a convenient cover for colonisation allowing the British to argue that their taking of New Zealand was simply a family reunion. Māori had fallen a few branches down, the argument went, but with British tutelage they could claim their rightful place at the top of the racial tree. It’s a claim that collapses upon the slightest interrogation. And so too do all of the arguments that grew from it. Māori did enjoy guaranteed representation in parliament, to take one example, but that representation wasn’t tied to their share of the population. When the Māori Representation Act 1867 came into force the number of Māori seats in parliament was capped at four when, on a population basis, Māori were entitled to more than a dozen. To the activists of the 70s and 80s this injustice and the many others were becoming intolerable. In 1975 more than 60,000 New Zealanders put their name to a petition calling for an end to the alienation of Māori land. This protest, often framed in the press as a mere nuisance, had been bubbling below the surface for at least 20 years. In 1953, the same year Her Majesty paid her first visit to the Waitangi Treaty Grounds, the then National government made sweeping changes to Māori land law allowing, in Aroha Harris’s words, “the compulsory alienation of uneconomic Māori land interests”. This property seizure clause was the root of ongoing resentment into the 60s and 70s with several groups, from conservatives to radicals, organising protests, petitions, and pleas against it. At this point in time Māori were hardly better off than Indigenous peoples in Australia, Canada, or the United States. The New Zealand government could seize Māori land under a tissue-thin pretence. Customary practices like adoption were folded into general legislation in the same decade as well, taking the country one step closer to “assimilation” between Māori and Pākehā. But the mid-20th century is where Māori perhaps begin to diverge from their seniors in Australia and Turtle Island. In 1977 the great rangatira (Māori chief) Joe Hawke and the Ōrākei Māori Action Committee (OMAC) led hundreds in an occupation of Takaparawhā. Known to Pākehā as Bastion Point Reserve, the land was victim to compulsory acquisitions over several decades and come the 1970s the government was planning to develop a housing estate for wealthy Aucklanders. This was a typical story. Yet Hawke and OMAC made an atypical response. They went back to the land and rebuilt a pā – a village, essentially – publicly declaring their intention to take back what was their ancestral right. The letters to the editor writers were wild. The then prime minister Robert Muldoon took regular cracks at the occupiers, whipping the letter writers into a frenzy. In ordinary times pressure from the top of government might have been enough to dissuade the occupiers. But OMAC had a genuine movement on its side: first, in a large majority of Māori; second, in the local (if not necessarily national) residents who according to one poll were overwhelmingly opposed to the development; and third, in the form of the trade union movement. When Muldoon sent in the police and the army to evict OMAC hundreds of workers in Wellington walked off the job in a wild cat strike. On the same day the Auckland Trades Council reconfirmed that its construction members would adhere to a “green ban” on the site. That meant the government had no practical means to pursue its development plans. No union members would accept the job and the local residents, who weren’t necessarily pro-Māori, were anti-development. This organising model was taken up across the country in the decades following. In 1988, 10 years after the eviction, the crown made its first honourable retreat, returning the land to its rightful owners in Ngāti Whātua Ōrākei. In a rare act of contrition the crown acknowledged its breach of the principles of the Treaty of Waitangi. But that is quite a curious formulation. The government was sorry for breaching the “principles” of the treaty. What of its text? As it happens the conservatives of the Māori Council (who were generally of the older generation) had carved the crown’s tracks to retreat. In 1987 their leaders took the government to the court of appeal over its privatisation policy arguing that transferring land from public ownership to the new “state-owned enterprises” was “inconsistent with the principles of the Treaty of Waitangi”. The court agreed and in a landmark decision conferred form and content on those principles. Today the principles – known colloquially as partnership, participation, and protection – bind the crown. In the 90s and 2000s the principles were responsible for helping force the government to negotiate over rights to land, fisheries, broadcasting, and more. In this context, then, what made the victory at Takaparawhā possible was a two-track strategy. The radicals in OMAC demanding nothing less than the return of the land and the conservatives like the Māori Council and the insiders like Labour MP Koro Wetere providing the institutional means for doing so. But 30 years later this arrangement is proving increasingly inadequate. Although it was mostly successful at Ihumātao with Save Our Unique Landscape demanding the return of the South Auckland headland and institutions like the Kīngitanga and Labour MP Nanaia Mahuta working to provide the means for doing so, it comes at an unacceptable cost. Why should Māori activists submit years of their life to a cause that should happen as of right? And so Waitangi Day 2021 is marked by a new series of land battles: at Shelley Bay in Wellington, at Ōpihi Whanaungakore in the Bay of Plenty, and at iwi checkpoints across the country as Māori in the north, east, and west insist on their right to protect their borders against Covid-19. It’s this battle – against the virus and government inertia – that indicates maybe the insider-outsider strategy is at its end. No amount of Māori inside the Ministry of Health, for example, could stop that agency from monopolising vaccine procurement, distribution, and outreach. Even Māori organisations outside the ministry such as the Waipereira Trust, the largest single vaccine provider in Auckland, struggled to force the government to share data in its efforts to reach unvaccinated Māori. In the end the trust CEO John Tamihere had to turn to the courts for a partial victory. Perhaps this reaffirms Arendt’s argument that power always stands in need of numbers. This seems especially true in a majoritarian democracy. But what if, as Waitangi Day seems to remind us, we can source power in social movements? Ihumātao is a reminder that, in Linda Tuhiwai Smith’s words, there is power in causing a fight. Morgan Godfery (Te Pahipoto, Sāmoa) is a senior lecturer at the University of Otago and a columnist at MetroA kleptomaniac parrot has become the latest contributor to New Zealand cinema, after stealing a GoPro camera and taking it on a sweeping tour of remote Fiordland. Aotearoa’s native alpine parrot species, the kea, is known for its curious and mischievous nature – and for swiping wallets, jewellery, packed lunches, windscreen wipers and other valuables from unsuspecting tourists and visitors. The Verheul family told local television programme Seven Sharp they had been hiking the Kepler Track, and were staying at a hut when they were joined by some kea. They placed the GoPro out to capture footage of the birds – but one snatched the camera and flew off, filming its flight down the hillside. The GoPro captures the airborne escape, as well as the kea’s landing and brief, slightly frenzied attack on the camera – ultimately filming a closeup of the bird’s face as it strips off hunks of plastic. Alex Verheul told Seven Sharp: “We just followed the sound down there, we could see them hanging out in a tree – they’d obviously heard us coming and abandoned the GoPro … My son decided to go check the rocks where it looked like a good place for a bird to land, and there it was still sitting there, still filming.”We were walking along the hollow way when we heard it – kronk, kronk, kronk – the unmistakable, resonant call of a raven. It’s a sound I’m very familiar with from visits to the Scottish Highlands, but not one I’ve encountered on home ground, so at first I could barely believe what I was hearing. Looking up through the leafless branches, we saw the bird flying low overhead. There was no mistaking the diamond-shaped tail, heavy bill, barrel chest and long, thickset neck, which was ruffed with shaggy-looking throat feathers known as hackles. If I had any lingering doubts about the bird’s identity, they were quickly cast aside when two carrion crows left their treetop perches and began mobbing the interloper. The pair were dwarfed. With a wingspan measuring between 120cm and 150cm, and weighing up to 1.5kg, ravens are even bigger than buzzards. Following decades of persecution by gamekeepers and egg collectors, and the capture of nestlings for the pet trade, this once widespread species was pushed to near extinction throughout lowland Britain by the mid-19th century. The population slowly increased during the mid-20th century, with birds leaving their upland strongholds to recolonise much of their former range. But until relatively recently, ravens remained occasional winter visitors to this area. During the past 10 years, they have become breeding residents, with pairs nesting on Portsdown Hill, Chichester cathedral (to the consternation of the resident peregrine falcons) and the Stansted Park estate, which lies less than five miles from my local patch. British ravens are largely sedentary, but juveniles disperse during their first winter, so it’s possible that this individual came from one of these natal sites. One crow dived down, attempting to strike the raven’s back with outstretched claws. The other swooped in from the side, but both were elegantly outmanoeuvred by their larger cousin, which tucked in one wing and flipped upside down, half-rolling out of their way. Righting itself on the next flowing wingbeat, the raven soared across the fields. As it banked towards the cemetery, sunlight glanced off its wings, the glossy black plumage displaying an iridescent petrol-blue and purple sheen. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryIn writing about politics you can either try to explain what you think is happening or you can say what you think should happen. Right now, there is a complete convergence between the two. Boris Johnson’s premiership is on the slide, irreversibly so. The question is not whether Johnson will go. It is when and how – and what will come after. Simultaneously it is increasingly plain that Johnson should go. Some take this view for partisan reasons or because Johnson’s personality appals them. Fair enough. But that’s not my argument here. There is also an extremely powerful Conservative case against him remaining. In the end, this will be decisive, because he will only go only if it is in the Tory party’s interest; no one else’s. However the main reason why Johnson should depart is now moral, systemic and governmental, rather than political. His increasingly reckless, and even Trumpian, response to it has now led to the resignation of Munira Mirza, No 10’s policy chief, who described a recent attack on Keir Starmer as beyond “the normal cut and thrust of politics”. It’s about the way the current crisis shows how he sees his job, and about the way he does it. He sees himself as above the system. He should not. His approach cannot coexist for much longer with being a prime minister of a stable and healthy parliamentary democracy. There is too much at stake. Much has been said this week about how the dangers to Johnson’s position may have lifted a little. That may be true in the short run, although every time anyone says this a new danger pops up. In the longer term, the danger is as great as ever. The simple but profound truth is that the law is above Johnson, not the other way around. As Keir Starmer hinted this week, the police investigation may yet end in the conviction of a prime minister, an event without modern precedent. It is clear that Johnson would try to brush that aside. He appears ready to argue that a fixed-penalty notice for a breach of lockdown rules would no more call his position as prime minister into question than a parking fine. But the Tory party is almost certainly not so far gone that it would permit this. Tobias Ellwood’s words this week – “We’re better than this” – would become the rallying cry, and rightly so. Johnson is blind to rules and dismissive of them. But he is also more devious about why they should not apply to him than is sometimes understood. This is fundamentally because he sees himself as an autonomous individual unburdened by the obligations or conventions that others uphold. It means he believes rules do not matter, and it means that in government he is not the first among equals, as the constitutional orthodoxy would have it, but very much the first above subordinates. This is why he has constructed his government the way he has, with a cabinet composed mainly of sycophants and second-order ministers; with a centralised No 10 operation that overrides departments and undermines their ethos; and with senior civil servants, like ministers, too often chosen for their deference to the man at the centre rather than for their readiness to argue a case. It is also why Johnson governs not through his control of Whitehall or the House of Commons but through the No 10 media operation. It is why he spends so much time making photo-opportunity visits to hospitals and construction sites accompanied by his seemingly bottomless dressing-up box. It is why he built the press briefing suite in Downing Street. It is why he flew to Kyiv on Tuesday. It is why, in Jacob Rees-Mogg’s highly revealing claim, government in the Johnson era is more presidential than parliamentary. Johnson’s attitude to the ministerial code offers an example of this approach. Starmer asked Johnson last week if the code applied to him. Johnson replied that it did. But there is a good case for suspecting Johnson really believes otherwise. In the code, ministers are subject to the rules, but the prime minister himself is the code’s arbiter and guardian. It is he, and he alone, who decides if there has been a breach. Johnson knows this. It is how he overrode his standards adviser in the Priti Patel bullying case. It is also the case he would make if Sue Gray were convinced in her final report that he had lied to parliament. The ethos of the code undoubtedly means that a prime minister should resign for lying. But the letter of the code gives a prime minister the wriggle room to claim to be the judge in their own case. All of this is at one with the way Johnson conducts himself as the head of government. Constitutionally, he owes the prime ministership to the support of parliament (which is why MPs can and will in the end throw him out). But Johnson sees the 2019 election victory as a personal mandate that bypasses MPs. This is why Rees-Mogg and others have claimed that there would have to be a general election if the Tories chose themselves a new leader. It is completely untrue, but it is how Johnson thinks of it. Something similar surfaced again in Johnson’s revealing response to Gray’s interim report this week. In the face of Gray’s finding of “failures of leadership and judgment”, Johnson announced that “I get it and I will fix it.” But he doesn’t and he won’t. Beefing up the No 10 operation and centralising government around himself even more firmly are the opposite of what he needs to do. This week’s “levelling up” white paper provided an example of another systemic failing in Johnson’s solipsistic approach to government. Make no mistake, levelling up is and could be a big idea. Potentially it is as big an idea as Brexit in its importance to sustaining the electoral realignment that Johnson achieved in 2019. But the white paper shows that levelling up is still more of a phrase than a policy, rather as Brexit also was. The plans do not come close to addressing the scale and intricacy of the problems involved in the nation’s inequalities and uneven opportunities. Without new money, amid large doses of Thatcherite Tory scepticism on the backbenches, and hampered by Johnson’s preference for performative rather than effective presidentialism, it will not do the job either economically or politically. Johnson owes his prime ministership to running against Britain’s governing system. But at no time has he had an alternative system to put in place for changing Britain – beyond himself and his performance. He is now doubling down on that same approach, even though it will make all the problems worse. This is now an irreparably destructive prime ministership, not just to Johnson and his party, but to government more generally, to the public’s needs, to the country’s reputation and even to the survival of the state. Martin Kettle is a Guardian columnist • The subheading of this article was amended on 4 February 2022 to remove an incorrect statement that Tobias Ellwood had resigned.Picks of the week Welcome to Our Show It’s official: “millennial TV show rewatches with the original cast” is the podcast genre du jour. We’ve had The OC, Scrubs and Sex and the City – now it’s time for Zooey Deschanel, Hannah Simone, and Lamorne Morris to reminiscence over every minute detail that went into the making of Emmy-nominated New Girl. With seven seasons to revisit, this is one for Deschanel fans in search of a weekly hit of nostalgia to plug into. Hollie Richardson Feast is Feast with Big Zuu This food-based podcast from bubbly chef and grime MC Big Zuu is as upbeat and fun as you’d expect. Celeb-packed guest interviews see Craig David talking about his habit of eating two Boost bars on childhood bus journeys and Jermaine Jenas explaining his hunt for places to eat great Caribbean food. Alexi Duggins Female Pilot Club The team behind this podcast challenge the male dominance of TV comedy writing with a night that stages readings of uncommissioned pilot scripts written by women. Here, they bring you the hilarious highlights of those shows, with the likes of Robert Webb and Tracy-Ann Oberman reading work from talent whose credits include having written for Succession. AD Seventeen: Conversations with My Teenage Self Laura Leigh Abby turned 17 in the heteronormative world of 2002, with its acceptable cruelty and AOL messenger chats, so opening her diaries brings up a whole load of feelings. With Y2K nostalgia all around, she doesn’t always look back fondly as she’s confronted with the darker side of her teenage experiences. Hannah Verdier Normal Gossip Pandemic phone conversations made Kelsey McKinney miss gossip. Not the celebrity type, but those little morsels that you share about your workmate’s sister. So she launched a podcast celebrating damage-free gossip with guests who share tangled tales about neighbours and the backstory of pandemic boyfriends. HV Producer pick: Dr Gilmer and Mr Hyde Chosen by Madeleine Finlay Recently I went back to This American Life, having not listened in a good few years. It felt a little bit like returning to the town you grew up in, as even now, so much of the way podcasts are narrated and constructed – from the music to the “I’m just going to switch my recorder on, is that okay?” b-roll tape – originates from This American Life. Luckily, the episode I happened to click on, Dr. Gilmer and Mr. Hyde, would definitely be described as a This American Life classic. Dr. Gilmer and Mr. Hyde tells the story of two doctors; Dr. Vince Gilmer, who worked at a rural clinic in North Carolina before killing his own father and going to prison, and Dr. Benjamin Gilmer, who later joined the clinic only to discover he shares his name with the previous physician. As Benjamin learns more about his predecessor’s kindness and generosity, he finds it harder and harder to understand. How could this man have committed murder? Joined by reporter Sarah Koenig, they try to investigate who Vince really was, and what really happened. The result is a fascinating and surprising journey into a small town, medical diagnoses within the justice system, and how one man’s life can radically change another’s. The episode is actually a repeat, first broadcast in 2013. This is pre-Serial Sarah Koenig, although it will sound very familiar to any Serial fans. But, there’s a good reason to listen now – almost a decade on there’s been an update on Vince’s case (I won’t spoil it for you). Talking points Don’t read anything into Cate Blanchett’s recent role as a blithe TV anchor in climate crisis satire Don’t Look Up. She’s about to launch a podcast devoted to her love of the environment. Climate of Change sees her team up eco entrepreneur and activist Danny Kennedy and will launch on Audible in April. Why not try: Hit Parade | DeepMind Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about Hear Here or any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to the Guide, our weekly look at the best in pop cultureThere is a jokey meme that captions a picture of Mitski with “Therapists HATE her”. Her songs can make you doubt what love, happiness and stability are even for. Over the course of six albums, the 31-year-old has become the US’s best young singer-songwriter, stating her feelings with dry amusement or real pain. Her songs are vignettes heavy with painterly symbolism. She connects squalling indie-rock to ambient ballads with plenty in between; her chords never resolve in the way you think they will, rather like life. Perhaps therapists hate her because she is putting them out of a job – as well as being troubling, her music is often uplifting, cathartic and compassionate. It turns out she is in therapy herself. “I love therapy! Having someone to talk to, who you don’t feel like you’re burdening, because it’s their job – it really eases up all your friendships,” she says, laughing. “You’re saying it out loud, giving it words; it clears things up. In America, there’s still this notion that you’re not good until you’re happy. I hope we can get away from that.” We meet in a very posh London hotel in November and sit in a sort of elite smoking area, for maximum ventilation: “I should have a cigar,” she says. Masked up, she occasionally widens her eyes for emphasis. Mitski’s frankness has made her a cult figure among millennials and gen Z – generations that have rejected emotional repression with such enthusiasm – but her new album, Laurel Hell, should carry her into the mainstream. It is an immediate pop record, but with complex songs that continue to grow on you. Her touchstones while making it were “Scott Walker, Vangelis, Giorgio Moroder, Iggy Pop during his Berlin years, Arthur Russell and a secret reference that we perhaps shouldn’t reveal: Hall &amp; Oates”. She recalls her wilfully naive mindset while making it: “When was a time when everyone felt hopeful and everything is happening and everything is good? The 80s bubble! That feeling of possibility, having lots of money. I wanted to channel that feeling, just to get out of the fog of the pandemic.” A lot of the songs were written in or before 2018, so she and her producer-instrumentalist Patrick Hyland “had time to consider every detail, for better and for worse. It’s not good for mental health to have no limitations and just be focused for so long.” In other ways, the pandemic has been a positive time for her. Mitski Miyawaki was born to a Japanese mother and an American father, whose work as a diplomat took them all over the world. She studied music in New York and her career took off soon after, sending her into another itinerant life of touring. The strictures of the pandemic, spent in a new base in Nashville, allowed her to “learn how to live like a regular person. I started baking; I learned how to garden. It turns out I don’t have a green thumb, because I’m so used to getting things done on the fly. But, with plants, you can’t force them to grow in a soil they don’t like; you can’t rush their growth. Each thing needs its own amount of water, its own environment.” It is a very Mitskian comment, employing the type of double meaning that crops up in her songs, whether it is alluding to panic via turbulence on a plane, or telling a potential lover on the Laurel Hell track Valentine, Texas: “Let’s step carefully into the dark / Once we’re in, I’ll remember my way around.” To expand on her metaphor: did she lack roots? “I did. For sure. It’s just too difficult to go from one place to another and continue to lose things, or lose people; it’s been nice to teach myself it’s OK to become attached.” She gives the example of touring: “Every day, the audience is different. You love them that day, but then you can’t form attachments to anyone there, because you go to the next show. I’d found that I needed to guard my heart, so that I didn’t just feel loss every day. So it is nice to be in this position where I have a home to miss. It feels really dear to me, actually, that I am expected back.” She played dozens of brilliantly theatrical gigs for her 2018 album Be the Cowboy, her first masterpiece. Working with the choreographer Monica Mirabile, Mitski cycled through female archetypes – including coquette and housewife – on stage as she sang, posing across kitchen furniture. The kneepads she chose to wear let us know she was protecting herself, holding something back, even at her most cartoonishly sexy. “I was dealing with being an object that’s looked at,” she says. “Being a woman, an Asian woman, there are all these different projections that people put on me, and I guess the choreography was me trying to figure out how to deal with that. And playing with it: I would signify to people that I’m being sexual, but I would have a stone face.” She loved wearing the kneepads. “There’s a sense of security, like you can go out and take risks.” No doubt her therapist has noted them. Mitski is open about her need for self-protection, which played out on Be the Cowboy as a series of personas that she hid behind and through which she sang the songs, “accentuating parts of myself”. The title of that album was a mantra for self-confidence when she didn’t always have it. “Putting on that guise of being a brash, confident person was a way to protect the vulnerable parts of myself that I didn’t want to world to get at,” she says. “The flipside was that it really hardened me, because I didn’t allow myself to be soft, ever. I always had the masks on.” Even in friendships? “I didn’t even have time for friendships! But it affected my writing, because in writing you have to be vulnerable.” The cultish keenness of her fans, though, can make vulnerability difficult. “I am a musician, but the reason they really pay me the big bucks” – she smiles wryly – “is to be the place where anybody can put all of their feelings, their ugliness, that doesn’t have a place in their own lives. I’m like the black hole where people can dump all their shit, whether it’s a need for love, or it’s hatred and anger. So I’ve seen a lot of the ugliness of people … I’ve put myself in this position where anyone can really do anything they want to me. I’m always fearful of somebody who might not have good intentions finding me and doing something to me.” She recalls finishing a solo show in a small venue without security where she needed to make her way through the crowd to reach her dressing room. “People were unrelenting. Everyone needed a piece of me, whether it was a photo, or my autograph, and then I was so overwhelmed being surrounded by hands grabbing at me that I was crying, but they still didn’t seem to see my crying face. People started to grab at my shirt and, by the time I got out, my shirt was basically off. It was an emblematic moment – that has been happening to me in different ways.” Another one of these ways, which she won’t discuss, is the virality of an unproved fan theory that her father was in the CIA. For extremely online people, who are suspicious of policing and yet enforce absolute moral purity, this would be a failing on her part. “It almost doesn’t matter what music I write and put out into the world. At the end of the day, I’m a woman in public, allowing myself to be consumed. I put out songs, but really what people are buying is the product that is me.” What product do people think they are buying? “I genuinely don’t know.” Being Asian complicates things further. “Even completely private citizens who are Asian women are more objectified, fetishised and expected to be submissive. There’s more a feeling of ownership towards people of my identity, in general. My being in public has made that assumption more extreme.” Nevertheless, she says, “I don’t want to continue to make music that is protective of myself. The music I love, that has saved me, is the kind that really gets to the heart of myself and the person performing it. And so I decided that even if more harm may come to me, I would be serving my purpose better if I actually wrote something that felt closer to my heart.” Laurel Hell, then, is Mitski with the kneepads off: less filtered, more frank, more poppy. She will sing to tens of thousands as support for Harry Styles at Wembley stadium this summer; the big single, The Only Heartbreaker, was co-written by Semisonic’s Dan Wilson, who wrote Someone Like You with Adele. Another single, Working for the Knife, addresses “how I have to navigate really exploitative capitalism in order to serve my purpose”. Has she pondered what a better society might look like? “Every single day, I wish I were smart enough to figure it out. I just know that the way it is now is terrible and I feel my soul dying every day. [At least] I still have the privilege of being able to complain about my soul, you know? Because I’m middle class, I get to talk about my existence – a lot of people don’t have the room to do that. I only seem to be wired to write my little songs about my feelings. It really makes me sad how useless and unintelligent I am. It’s really terrible.” Her biggest (and, indeed, best) song yet, Love Me More – think Flashdance’s Maniac given 21st-century oomph – is about getting validation from that one skill: “Please take this sole thing that I’m able to do and please love it. It is very desperate, and when you’re desperate you don’t have much time or space to think about how embarrassing it is to be desperate.” There are 81,000 people following a Spotify playlist called “Mitski songs ranked in order of sadness” and the artist is just as droll; she has that rare quality of making self-deprecation endearing. I had assumed that much of the album was about a breakup. The absurdly buoyant That’s Our Lamp gets at a particular dissonant feeling I have never heard expressed in decades of pop heartbreak – the simultaneous horror and exhilaration that your relationship is ending – while a line on I Guess (“It’s been you and me since before I was me”) is a devastating truism of young love. But she says these songs aren’t lifted wholesale from a single breakup, rather crafted from “tiny moments”. “I never want to say my songs are fictional, because they all come from my feelings and things I’ve seen – it’s just a matter of putting together different parts to make them tell a story and evoke a feeling.” She calls “the human romantic relationship the best metaphor, the best narrative vehicle; this album is about a feeling of ending, a feeling of resignation, and often using the narrative of the ending relationship is the easiest way to convey that emotion.” Given how specific and true the romantic strife she sings about feels, I find this a bit cool and evasive, especially when she adds that the new song Should’ve Been Me “is about your partner maybe cheating, but because you love this person and you know yourself, you understand their perspective. You understand your part in it. And, through somebody straying and betraying you, weirdly understanding that they loved you so much. You just weren’t there for them – they needed something and you couldn’t give it to them, so they tried to find it elsewhere. I wanted to portray a narrative of compassion, even after being lied to.” Has she been betrayed in this way? She makes an exaggerated shrug. “I’m not going to say.” Perhaps I am behaving like that audience, too determined to get a piece of her pain. She is polite as she draws boundaries around her romantic history: “I’m more than willing to share my feelings, or things that happened to me. [But] I feel like I don’t have the right to tell someone else’s story.” Whether betrayed or not, her willingness to share blame is radical in our flamboyantly punitive culture. “This album in general has been a process of me trying to figure out how to forgive myself and other people,” she says. “In my actual moments of tragedy or joy, I do tend to turn towards black-and-white thinking, and often that hasn’t served me.” Writing Laurel Hell, she says, “has been a process of learning how to be kinder to myself and, through that, be kinder to other people. I want to get out of being a hero of the story and being the villain.” • Laurel Hell is out now on Dead OceansWaitrose and Lidl are the most sustainable supermarkets, according to a Which?’s eco-friendly grocer ranking. Iceland finished last, according to the research, which tracked supermarket policies on: plastic waste and food waste, which shoppers have reported are the biggest issues for them; and greenhouse gas emissions, which most experts say poses the greatest environmental threat. In its first such ranking, the consumer magazine pointed out that supermarkets respond to customer demand, so if shoppers make eco-friendly choices and demand sustainable options, this can influence shops to improve. Harry Rose, editor of Which?, said: “We know that consumers increasingly want to shop sustainably and our in-depth analysis of three key areas shows that all the big supermarkets could be looking to make some improvements. “The good news is shoppers can make a big difference themselves by adopting more sustainable habits, such as buying loose fruit and vegetables, buying seasonal local produce, eating less meat and dairy and limiting their own food waste.” Lidl performed above its rivals on greenhouse gas emissions but fell short on food waste, though it said this is because it serves more fresh food in-store than many other comparable shops. Waitrose has strong policies on plastic and food waste compared with other supermarkets, and scored reasonably for greenhouse gas emissions. Iceland fell short because it was unable to report how much of its own-brand plastic is recyclable, so scored zero points. It also faces disadvantages as a frozen food specialist, as this made it the worst performer on operational greenhouse gas emissions due to its energy-draining in-store freezers. However, it does buy 100% renewable electricity for its UK sites. Marks &amp; Spencer was found to use a lot of plastic compared with other supermarkets. It was also the only one unable to provide its food waste data in a comparable format, so scored zero points for this, and was in the bottom half of Which?’s table for emissions. For plastic use, the Co-op did best, while Ocado was the frontrunner in terms of food waste, as it redistributes almost all surplus food, leaving just 0.04% as waste. Which?’s ranking of supermarkets’ green measures 1. Lidl – 74% 1. Waitrose – 74% 3. Asda – 71% 3. Sainsbury’s – 71% 5. Tesco – 69% 6. Morrisons – 68% 7. Aldi – 66% 8. Co-op – 65% 9. Ocado – 63% 10. Marks &amp; Spencer – 48% 11. Iceland – 29%Generally speaking, I’m a fan of what we might call the unlocked room mystery. The kind where someone is murdered or otherwise indisposed and we are then introduced to a wide variety of characters who may or may not have something to do with it or each other. Then all you have to do is wait patiently for the doughty police officers in charge to sniff out any red herrings and present you with the individual or web responsible. But ya gotta keep things tight and urgent if you’re going to pull off this kind of caper. The latest, Suspicion (Apple+ TV), is a loose, baggy thing that only begins to approach the necessary slickness a good quarter of the way through its eight-episode run. It starts with a dramatically squandered kidnap. In the corridor of a New York hotel, a young man is quietly nabbed by three figures, wearing replica masks of the royal family, and unobtrusively stuffed in a suitcase – so unobtrusively that I didn’t notice until a second viewing – and wheeled out. He, we eventually learn, is Leo Newman, the student son of Katherine Newman, head of one of the world’s most influential communications companies and controversial nominee for a UK ambassadorship, possibly the two positions least likely to inculcate any feeling of fondness for a character. She is played by Uma Thurman, who appears so fleetingly that the PR team who made her role headline news deserve a special award for chutzpah. A video of the kidnapping is uploaded to the internet. While we wait for that to go viral, we are introduced to the quartet of apparently unconnected characters upon whose octet of shoulders the plot will hang. There is Oxford academic Tara (Elizabeth Henstridge), who has an activist streak born of her working-class and/or Mancunian origins (Suspicion seems to think these are more or less synonymous), a messy private life (according to her ex-husband), and an unrewarding tweenage daughter, Daisy. There is Nat (Georgina Campbell), who lives in Peckham, is about to get married and has a wad of cash and a burner phone hidden in her bedroom. She uses some of the former to pay off the loan shark pursuing her mother. She gets into a small, unexciting car chase with him for no narratively good reason but it fills an unforgiving minute or two. Then there’s Aadesh (Kunal Nayyar), who gives us our first link to Manhattan and the suitcase-based events therein. His furious wife questions why he made a secret trip to New York when he was supposed to be in Birmingham visiting family. I think the real question is why would you not go on a secret trip to New York rather than go to Birmingham to visit family, but Aadesh says he went to pitch his cybersecurity talents to a big US communications company which had asked to see him and who paid for him to stay in a posh, as yet unnamed, hotel. As his wife knows that he is ambitious and frustrated by his dead-end job in her father’s family business, and apparently doesn’t know how vanishingly unlikely this behaviour from a big US communications company would be, she accepts his account. Finally, there’s Sean (Elyes Gabel), who transforms his appearance on a plane from New York to Belfast by peeling off a fake beard and putting on a cap to evade the police waiting for him when he touches down. At the same time, local forces are fronting up to the other three with more success. By the second episode, they are under arrest and being interrogated, too lengthily to hold anyone’s interest but their own, but further links to the hotel, Newmans Leo and Katherine and potentially to each other are gradually revealed. As is the kidnappers’ demand, which turns out to be more numinous than the traditional “hundreds of thousands of dollars in used bills and a duffel bag, ma, or the kid gets it” and will take the National Crime Agency and FBI agents (Angel Coulby and Noah Emmerich) a bit longer to get together. Things liven up after that, and Suspicion finds more of its groove. If it never becomes more than a jigsaw – done by others, you just sit back and watch the picture take shape – that’s OK. It never promised to be anything else. Apart from an Uma Thurman vehicle, of course – but we should never have let ourselves be fooled by that at this late stage in the television viewing game.Social workers are warning of a rise in the number of children with mental health problems since the start of the pandemic, with official figures recording a 25% increase as successive lockdowns and school closures take a toll. Councils said they have “grave concerns” over the growing demand for help, with nearly 1,500 children a week presenting with mental health problems – an increase that could cost councils an extra £600m a year. There were 77,390 children who had been assessed as having a mental health need by councils on 31 March 2021, an increase of 25% on the 61,830 seen two years earlier, according to statistics from the Department for Education. The pandemic has triggered increased pressure from gangs, through county line drug dealing networks, as well as sexual harassment, social workers reported. The most common problems remained the impact of a parent being subject to domestic violence and a parent’s poor mental health. The increase may be an undercount as there has also been a 31% slump in the number of referrals from schools – 36,000 fewer cases – reflective of the restrictions on school attendance in place for parts of the year to April 2021. “Hundreds of children every week are seen by social workers because they need help with their mental health and we expect these numbers to grow as the full impact of the pandemic is felt,” said Cllr Anntoinette Bramble, chair of the Local Government Association’s children and young people board. “This reinforces the importance of fully funding the whole system of children’s mental health support, including councils and the NHS, to make sure that children get the help they need, when they need it. That includes early help to prevent children reaching crisis point.” A pastoral care officer in a school in the south-west told the Guardian that on Thursday there were no social workers to whom to refer urgent cases. They said that more year 11 students than ever before, including the typically most successful, are asking for help with anxiety and stress triggered by exams. “These children were 14 when home schooling started,” they said. “At that age a lot of them weren’t capable of learning remotely effectively. Students are suffering, breaking down, fearing they’re not going to achieve in subjects they want to do well in. Others have simply switched off.” Rebekah Pierre, professional officer with the British Association of Social Workers, said an increase in domestic abuse during lockdowns was made worse for children by the lack of a safety net provided by schools. She said social workers had seen more referrals when lockdowns or school holidays ended. Online child sexual exploitation has “never been worse” and may have resulted in increases in self-harm. “Children are feeling anxious and there is almost a grief about what they have lost through Covid,” she said. Separate NHS figures showed that in 2021, one in six children in England had a probable mental disorder, up from one in nine in 2017, with girls aged between 11 and 16 more likely to have experienced a decline in mental health than boys the same age. The proportion of 11- to 16-year-olds with eating problems almost doubled from 2017 to 2021. Thirteen per cent of 11- to 16-year-olds and 24% of 17- to 23-year-olds felt their lives had been made “much worse” by coronavirus restrictions. The most common factors recorded by social workers handling cases of children in need were concerns a parent was subject to domestic violence, the parent’s mental health, emotional abuse, neglect, concerns about the mental health of the child, drug use by parents and domestic violence against the child.Landsat 9 has completed its post-launch assessment and begun its operational phase. Launched from the Vandenberg Space Force Base in California on 27 September 2021, Landsat 9 is a joint venture between Nasa and the US Geological Survey (USGS). The Landsat programme has been running since the 1970s and will pass its 50th anniversary of unbroken images of Earth from orbit later this year. Landsat 1 was launched on 23 July 1972 and was initially called the Earth Resources Technology Satellite. Landsat 8 was launched on 11 February 2013. To prepare Landsat 9 for operations, it has been working in tandem with its predecessor, taking simultaneous images of the Earth so the datasets can be compared and the instruments calibrated to give identical readings to each another. This allows the data to be used as a seamless timeline in environmental and climate research studies. Nasa led the commissioning phase, and the USGS will handle operations, archiving and distribution of the data. Landsat 9 carries two instruments. The Operational Land Imager 2 takes images at visible and certain infrared wavelengths. It covers the entire Earth’s surface every 16 days. In tandem, the Thermal Infrared Sensor 2 measures the land surface temperature at two infrared wavebands.Children in England with a rare and fatal genetic condition will soon be able to get the world’s most expensive drug after NHS bosses negotiated a substantial cut in its £2.8m price. NHS England hailed the deal that will make the “life-saving” therapy, called Libmeldy, available to the small number of babies and young children who have metachromatic leukodystrophy (MLD). Those who receive it will be able to enjoy a normal life, it said. The inherited neurodegenerative disorder severely damages a child’s nervous system and organs. Sufferers experience progressive disability similar to that caused by multiple sclerosis. Symptoms include spasticity, seizures and difficulty talking, swallowing, hearing and seeing. The condition is fatal and children diagnosed with MLD usually only live for five to eight years. NHS England said it will make Libmeldy available from this spring after talks with its manufacturer, the drug company Orchard, led to it securing a “significant confidential discount”. Around four children a year are born in England with the condition. Those who receive the therapy will do so at the Centre for Genomic Medicine at Saint Mary’s hospital in Manchester. “This revolutionary drug is a life-saver for the babies and young children who suffer from this devastating hereditary disorder and will spare their families untold heartache and grief”, said Amanda Pritchard, NHS England’s chief executive. “The deal we have struck is just the latest example of NHS England using its commercial capabilities to make good on the NHS Long term Plan commitment to provide patients with cutting-edge treatments and therapies at a price that is fair to taxpayers.” NHS England said that clinical trials “have shown this treatment will deliver substantial health benefits, drastically improving the patient’s quality of life and life expectancy, giving them the prospect of a normal life”. Babies and young children who have not yet shown clinical signs or symptoms of MLD will be able to receive Libmeldy, as will those showing early signs, provided that they can still walk independently and show no signs of cognitive decline. Nicola Elson from Cumbria’s daughter Connie and son Joe were both found to have MLD. They were referred to a clinical trial of Libmeldy taking place in Milan. Connie did not meet the entry criteria and deteriorated. But her brother – now 11 – was treated during a five-month stay in Italy and now attends school and is both a physical and academic match for his peers, his mother said. “When I found out the treatment was being offered on the NHS I was so emotional and cried happy tears. I’m overjoyed and, having witnessed the suffering my daughter has endured, I don’t want another family to go through this,” she said. However, Prof Andrew Hill, a drugs expert at Liverpool University, warned that NHS England had struck the deal despite the evidence for Libmeldy’s effectiveness being questionable. “This is a very high price, but MLD has a very poor prognosis”. He added: “The main clinical trials used for approval [of Libmeldy] are not randomised. There are many examples of misleading results from other non-randomised trials. So it is not clear if the results are reliable. “Approving drugs at high prices without properly randomised trials sets a dangerous precedent. Long-term follow up will be required to ensure that this drug is truly cost-effective at this high price.”A second serving member of the SAS has told a court he saw an Australian soldier shoot an unarmed disabled man during a 2009 raid in Afghanistan. The soldier, anonymised before the court as Person 14, said he saw an Australian soldier, wearing distinctive camouflage facepaint worn by the Roberts-Smith’s five-man patrol, throw an Afghan man to the ground. “Then a soldier raised their Minimi F89 Para [machine gun] and fired an extended burst,” Person 14 said. “It was loud, like a ‘BRRRRRT’ for one second.” Later in the raid, Person 14 told the court he saw Roberts-Smith carrying a Minimi machine gun, a distinctive weapon carried by few Australian soldiers on the raid. Most of the soldiers carried M4 rifles. “Later, I saw who had the Para Minimi [machine gun],” he said. “It was Ben Roberts-Smith.” The evidence of the anonymised soldier follows testimony from another soldier, Person 41, who said he saw Roberts-Smith “frog-march” a man outside a village compound, throw him to the ground and machine-gun him to death. The court has previously heard that the man had a prosthetic leg, which was later souvenired by another soldier and used as a drinking vessel at the Australian soldiers’ unofficial bar on base, the Fat Ladies’ Arms. The slain man was allegedly found hiding inside a tunnel inside the compound, but he was captive and unarmed at the time he was shot, the testimony before court has said. Roberts-Smith is suing the Age, the Sydney Morning Herald and the Canberra Times for defamation over a series of reports he alleges are defamatory and portray him as committing war crimes, including murder. The newspapers are pleading a defence of truth. Roberts Smith denies any wrongdoing. Before giving his evidence, Person 14 sought, and was granted by the judge, a certificate under section 128 of the Evidence Act, providing him immunity against prosecution based on self-incrimination. Person 14 was part of a raid by Australian soldiers on a compound – given the codename Whiskey 108 – on 12 April 2009, in the village of Kakarak in Uruzgan province. Person 14 said when other Australian troops became engaged in a firefight in the valley around Kakarak, the SAS soldiers provided “overwatch” and “battlefield commentary” to assist. Engaged in the battle all day, in the late afternoon, the decision was taken for the SAS troops to infiltrate Kakarak and “clear” two compounds of particular interest – known as Whiskey 108 and Whiskey 109 – checking for insurgents, weapons, and bomb-making materials. Person 14 gave evidence of leading his six-man patrol into Kakarak village in fading light, across watercourses, through poppy fields, and down narrow alleyways between buildings, before reaching the compounds. Person 14 “engaged” and killed a fighting aged male upon approach to the compounds and then set up an overwatch post while the assault patrols entered the compounds. Person 14 said the light was fading when he heard heavy footsteps to his right. “As I turned my head to my right, there were three Australian soldiers and a black object, which was similar to a human, that was thrown to the ground.” Person 14 said the person made a thudding, “expulsion of air” noise as they hit the ground. “Then a soldier raised their Minimi F89 Para and fired an extended burst. It was loud, like a ‘BRRRRRT’ for one second.” “That person turned and walked away out of sight back into Whiskey 108.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Person 14 said he turned to his patrol’s second-in-command and said “what the hell what that?” He said he did not recognise the soldier who fired at the time. But Person 14 said the soldier who shot the man was wearing a distinctive new camouflage paint, worn only by one SAS patrol in action that day, the five-man team of which Roberts-Smith was a member. Person 14 later checked the body of the slain man – he had gunshot wounds to the centre of his torso and blood coming from his mouth and nose. Person 14 saw that the man had a prosthetic leg. Later in the day, Person 14 told the court he saw Roberts-Smith carrying the distinctive Minimi weapon at the troops’ lay-up point. “I saw who had the Para Minimi [machine gun],” he said. “It was Ben Roberts-Smith.” The events at Whiskey 108 on 12 April 2009 have emerged as central to the allegations made against Roberts-Smith, a Victoria Cross winner, and one of Australia’s most decorated soldiers. Earlier this week, another still-serving soldier in the SAS, Person 41, gave evidence he saw Roberts-Smith order another subordinate soldier to execute an elderly man also found in the same tunnel as the disabled man. He gave evidence he later saw Roberts-Smith kill the man with the prosthetic leg outside the compound. Roberts-Smith, in his evidence to the court last year, said “there were no people in the tunnel at Whiskey 108”. He said he never gave an order to execute anybody, and that killing never happened. Roberts-Smith says he killed the man with the prosthetic leg, but that the man was an insurgent, running outside the compound, and carrying a weapon. Roberts-Smith insists the man was a legitimate target, a threat to soldiers’ safety, and was killed within the laws of war. The trial, before Justice Anthony Besanko, continues.Winter Olympics – Today at the Games 7pm, BBC Two Can Scottish curlers Jen Dodds and Bruce Mouat turn their world mixed doubles title into an Olympic gold medal? Will Lancastrian skier Dave Ryding grab the men’s slalom gold? Let the Winter Olympic Games 2022 begin. After the opening ceremony at 11.30am on BBC One, turn to the highlights show on BBC Two at 7pm. Clare Balding will be hosting from the Beijing event over the next two weeks, along with Hazel Irvine, Jeanette Kwakye, Ayo Akinwolere and JJ Chalmers. Hollie Richardson Your Garden Made Perfect 8pm, BBC Two Home improvement tips with a dash of therapy. Tonight’s focus is Steph, a recently divorced yoga teacher from Lancashire, who sees her garden as symbolising a new start. Can Pip or Manoj utilise her space and, as host Angela Scanlon grandly puts it, help her “hit the reset button on her life”? Phil Harrison Death in Paradise 9pm, BBC One There are worse places to go to rehab than sunny Saint Marie, but the experience ends badly for one young UK pop star. Was her death a tragic accident or something more sinister? Dogged DI Neville (Ralf Little) is on the case, even if the arrival of his chaotic sister Izzy (Kate O’Flynn) upsets his usual humdrum routine. Graeme Virtue A Discovery of Witches 9pm, Sky Max Mysterious vampire Benjamin has a distraction from his mission to ruin the De Clemonts when Lena the fire-touting witch escapes his clutches. Meanwhile, it all kicks off at the twins’ christening, when proud parents Matthew and Diana are rudely interrupted by Baldwin announcing his plan to take the babies to Venice. Hannah Verdier The Last Leg 10pm Channel 4 A firm favourite fixture on Friday night telly, Adam Hills, Josh Widdicombe and Alex Brooker are back to review the last seven days of news with their own brand of no-holds-barred wit. HR The Graham Norton Show 10.35pm, BBC One Oscar-nominated actor Uma Thurman, who leads new Apple TV+ thriller Suspicion, joins Norton for a chinwag tonight. Ariana DeBose, who recently dazzled in Steven Spielberg’s West Side Story, also joins in with the chatty fun. HR Film choice True History of the Kelly Gang (Justin Kurzel, 2019), 11.20pm, Film4 Justin Kurzel’s impressionistic period adventure takes on Peter Carey’s Booker prize-winning novel about Australia’s near-mythical antihero, Ned Kelly, and makes a good fist of the attempt. George MacKay plays Ned, whose hardscrabble upbringing in a poor Irish immigrant family leads him inexorably into criminality – events he writes down in an effort to keep control of his own narrative. Essie Davis is a fierce presence as Ned’s mother, Ellen, while Russell Crowe has a nice cameo as Harry Power, Ned’s mentor in the ways of the bushranger. Simon Wardell Live sport FA Cup football: Man United v Middlesbrough 7.30pm, ITV. Fourth-round tie at Old Trafford. Winter Olympics 12.25am, BBC One. Coverage of the first full day from China, including women’s slope-style qualifying and women’s ice-hockey.Top story: Sunak joins criticism of PM Hello, Warren Murray here, endeavouring to provide the answers you need. Four of Boris Johnson’s key staff have quit, led out of the blue by his longstanding policy chief Munira Mirza who used a stinging resignation letter to accuse the prime minister of “scurrilous” behaviour. She was followed by Dan Rosenfield, the No 10 chief of staff; Martin Reynolds, Johnson’s principal private secretary; and his director of communications, Jack Doyle – all three of whom have been implicated in Downing Street’s response to the lockdown parties. Reynolds sent a widely shared email urging staff to “bring your own booze” to one event on 20 May 2020. Mirza rebuked Johnson for falsely linking Keir Starmer to the failure to bring the paedophile Jimmy Savile to justice. Rishi Sunak also criticised the prime minister for his jibe – asked about the comments, the chancellor and possible Johnson successor said: “Being honest, I wouldn’t have said it.” Meanwhile a leaked Cabinet Office memo reveals civil service bosses may never know which of their staff are fined over partygate. Those concerned have been told it is “unlikely” their security clearance would be revoked if they were given a £100 fixed penalty notice. * * * Southend West elects new MP – The Conservatives have as expected held on to the seat of Southend West after a byelection triggered by the killing of Sir David Amess. Anna Firth ran out as a comfortable winner with 86% of the vote after Labour, the Liberal Democrats and other mainstream political parties stood aside from the contest. Amess was killed on 15 October during a constituency surgery. Firth, a barrister, vowed to “work tirelessly to build on everything” achieved by Amess. Southend West, with its 66,354 registered voters, has been held by the Conservatives since its creation in 1950. * * * Sunak promises bill relief – Rishi Sunak has told households suffering from Britain’s worsening cost of living crisis to brace themselves for further increases in energy costs later this year. Prompted by the average household paying an extra £700 a year for gas and electricity, the chancellor announced temporary, repayable discounts and council tax rebates that he insisted would help soften the blow. Critics said the £9bn emergency package was insufficient. The Resolution Foundation said millions more would plunge into fuel stress, where more than 10% of the household budget is spent on energy. The Bank of England meanwhile raised interest rates to 0.5% while warning that living standards were headed for their biggest hit in at least 30 years. The Bank predicts annual inflation – already 5.4% – will peak at more than 7% this spring. * * * Next stop: road pricing – Motorists will have to pay by the mile to make up a £35bn tax shortfall as fuel duty revenue declines with the shift to electric vehicles, the Commons transport committee has said. MPs saw “no viable alternative” to road pricing and said work on bringing it in should start immediately. The MPs said new charges should entirely replace fuel duty and vehicle excise, with most motorists ending up paying the same or less. Drivers of electric vehicles should pay to maintain and use the roads, the MPs said, like petrol and diesel drivers do – although incentives to purchase cleaner vehicles must remain. The RAC Foundation backed the call but said the system must not be too complex or expensive. It suggested charges could be calculated and collected alongside vehicle insurance premiums. * * * ‘Act of desperate cowardice’ – Joe Biden said US special forces had “successfully removed a major threat to the world” after the leader of the Islamic State, Abu Ibrahim al-Hashimi al-Qurayshi, blew himself up in a pre-dawn raid in Syria. Thirteen people were killed, including women and children, according to the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights. Unicef has confirmed that at least six children died. Biden said that “as troops approached, in a final act of desperate cowardice”, Qurayshi blew up the third floor of a house, killing his own family members. Biden called Qurayshi “Haji Abdullah” and said he had been “the driving force” behind the genocide of the Yazidi people. Thursday’s raid was the most significant by the US since Qurayshi’s predecessor Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi was killed in October 2019. * * * ‘Life-saving’ – Children in England with the rare and fatal genetic condition MLD will soon be able to get the world’s most expensive drug after NHS bosses negotiated a substantial cut in its £2.8m price. The “life-saving” therapy called Libmeldy will go to the small number of babies and young children who have metachromatic leukodystrophy. Those who receive it will be able to enjoy a normal life, the NHS says. The disorder progressively and severely damages a child’s nervous system and organs. Around four children a year are born in England with MLD and usually only live for five to eight years. NHS England said clinical trials “have shown this treatment will deliver substantial health benefits”. Prof Andrew Hill, a drugs expert at Liverpool University, said it was is not clear if results upholding Libmeldy’s effectiveness were reliable. “Long-term follow up will be required to ensure that this drug is truly cost-effective at this high price.” * * * Green grocers – Waitrose and Lidl are the most sustainable supermarkets, according to Which?’s eco-friendly grocer ranking. Iceland finished last, according to the research, which tracked supermarket policies on plastic waste, food waste, and greenhouse gas emissions. Waitrose has strong policies on plastic and food waste compared with other supermarkets, and scored reasonably for greenhouse gas emissions. Marks &amp; Spencer was found to use a lot of plastic compared with other supermarkets. For plastic use, the Co-op did best, while Ocado was the frontrunner in terms of food waste, as it redistributes almost all surplus food. The full rankings are in our story. Today in Focus podcast: Joe Rogan’s learning experience The freewheeling, inquisitive style that made Joe Rogan so influential turned into a liability during the Covid pandemic. What’s next for the world’s most famous podcaster? Lunchtime read: ‘A black hole where people dump their feelings’ With songs about heartbreak and capitalism, the cult pop singer Mitski is on the brink of the mainstream – but the intensity of her fandom has her fearing for her safety. Sport The Beijing Winter Olympics officially open today with a dose of realpolitik, but also plenty of sport to look forward to, including a return for the Jamaican bobsleigh team. Yorkshire County Cricket Club have been plunged into an ugly civil war with Kamlesh Patel, the new chairman, claiming a group of individuals are seeking to delay and derail reform. England’s disastrous Ashes tour claimed a second scalp on Thursday night after Chris Silverwood was sacked as head coach, just a day after his old boss, Ashley Giles, was removed from his role as director of cricket. Eddie Jones has attempted to pile the pressure on Scotland before Saturday’s Calcutta Cup clash by billing Gregor Townsend’s side as “red-hot” favourites. Formula One sprint races could be deleted from the calendar this year due to a row over money. Manchester City breezed to a 3-0 victory over Spurs in the Women’s League Cup semi-final thanks to an inspired performance from Lauren Hemp. And Magnus Carlsen was a class apart from his rivals last week at Tata Steel Wijk aan Zee, the “chess Wimbledon”. Business Asian stock markets have rallied after the spectacular fall in the price of shares in Facebook parent Meta caused big losses on Wall Street. The tech company lost more than $230bn of its market value, easily the biggest one-day loss in history for a US company, after it reported its first ever drop in daily user numbers. Stronger figures from Amazon helped investors recover some poise but the dawn of a new era of higher interest rates around the world continues to shake confidence, with Brent crude oil pushing up to $91.45 a barrel overnight. The FTSE100 looks like climbing 0.3% or so, while the pound was up to $1.360 but slipped against the euro to €1.187. The papers Three big stories dominate Friday’s front pages – and none of them are good news for Boris Johnson. We have a separate wrap, of which a summary follows. The Mail says “Meltdown in Downing Street” above an image of a forlorn-looking prime minister and the subhead, “will the last one to leave please turn out the lights” evoking the Sun’s infamous 1992 election front page. Its front page also runs through the litany of disasters to strike Johnson’s ailing premiership: “Four aides go”, “Sunak puts knife into PM”, and “rates, energy bills and inflation soar”. The Guardian says “PM hit by No 10 exodus as four aides quit in one day”. It also reports that households are “braced for further fuel bill rises”. The Sun’s splash headline says “Ouch!” and then breaks out the strands of what is being dubbed “Black Thursday”. “Brits £2,417 poorer”, one subhead says, along with “Partygate bloodbath” and “Rishi knifes PM”. The Mirror says “They’re all laughing”, with a picture of the Tory frontbench sharing a joke in the Commons juxtaposed with some hard-hitting facts about the cost of living crisis. The i has a similar theme with “Johnson’s top team quits No 10 en masse”. The headline in the Times is “Britons facing biggest drop in living standards” and a large picture of the chancellor. It also has “Johnson doubts grow after aides quit and Sunak takes swipe”. The Telegraph has a splash headlined “The big squeeze” and another smaller story down the page saying “More pressure on Johnson as four top aides quit in one day”. Ditto the FT which has a main story saying “Household budgets suffer biggest blow in three decades”, and underneath it reports “Sunak distances himself from Johnson over Savile remarks as close aides quit”. The Express says “Tighten your belts … Britain in grip of biggest squeeze ever”. Sign up The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekend.The Morrison government’s hopes of passing its contentious religious discrimination legislation before the election have been boosted with Labor MPs and Senators offering conditional support. Labor has joined the Coalition in calling for the bills to be passed suggesting only minor and technical amendments when the bill comes back to the lower house on Tuesday. The conditional support was outlined in two inquiry reports into the legislation that were released on Friday. But the bill still faces an uncertain path through parliament, with at least three Liberal MPs stonewalling, and Liberal senator Andrew Bragg using the report from the Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs committee to call for broader changes. Labor has not ruled out amendments that could see it teaming up with Bragg, moderate Liberal MPs, the Greens and crossbench to add protections for LGBTQ+ teachers and students, or remove the bill’s other contentious clauses. The two reports were released as Scott Morrison confirmed on Friday it was his intention to add a prohibition on discriminating against students based on sexuality and gender in this legislation. In both the Senate inquiry and the joint human rights committee, Labor MPs and senators recognised the need to protect people from discrimination on the grounds of religion. Labor urged the government to reconsider two clauses overriding state laws, one allowing discriminatory statements grounded in religious belief or non-belief, and the other strengthening religious institutions’ ability to hire and fire staff based on faith. Submissions from state and territory anti-discrimination bodies, even in the Liberal states of Tasmania and New South Wales, warned the religious discrimination bill would override laws that prevent speech that offends, insults or humiliates people on the basis of protected attributes. States that had more limited powers for religious schools to hire and fire teachers based on their beliefs, such as reforms recently passed in Victoria, would also be overridden. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning In the human rights committee, Labor MPs and senators urged the government “to work across the parliament – if not across the federation – to address the serious concerns that have been raised” about the clauses but recognised there was a “legitimate concern” that both were intended to address. “The Australian Labor party has a long history of fighting to prevent discrimination against people of faith,” they said. “The legislation that prime minister Morrison introduced should unite our nation, not divide.” The Senate committee recommended that the government consider constitutional concerns raised by Prof Anne Twomey about the statements of belief and employment clauses, but noted Prof Nicholas Aroney had supplied drafting to correct the issue without removing the clauses. The committee said if the constitutional issue was addressed, the Senate should pass the bills. The Public Interest Advocacy Centre’s policy manager, Alastair Lawrie, warned the new drafting would mean that statements that “offend, insult, or humiliate” people based on race – currently banned by section 18C of the racial discrimination act – would be legal, if grounded in religious belief. The Greens, through senator Janet Rice, dissented in both committees and called on Labor to help block the bill. “It’s time for Labor to stop the double-speak about this dangerous legislation,” the Greens leader, Adam Bandt, said. “If they side with Scott Morrison they’re selling out the LGBTQ+ community.” Morrison’s recommitment to prevent discrimination against LGBTQ+ students was designed to win over four Liberal moderates – Angie Bell, Katie Allen, Dave Sharma and Fiona Martin – who made the SDA amendment a condition of their support. But a remaining trio of holdouts – Liberal MPs Bridget Archer, Warren Entsch and Trent Zimmerman – have indicated the amendment would not be sufficient for their support. Their numbers in the lower house, and the crossbench in the Senate, could be crucial for further amendments to the bill, if Labor took on the task of fixing the bill from the opposition benches. But some in Labor argued it should use the moment to be rid of an issue that hurt it engaging with religious communities at the 2019 election. “There’s an opportunity to draw a line in the sand and have this behind us once and for all,” one Labor parliamentarian told Guardian Australia. “We need to stop talking about things the public don’t want us to talk about.” The bills were listed for debate in the lower house all day on Tuesday, and in the Senate, subject to introduction, on Wednesday. Anna Brown, the chief executive of national LGBTIQ+ organisation Equality Australia, said the reports left the bills with no clear pathway to pass parliament. Brown said the committees were “left with the pieces of a broken and friendless bill” after the government spent three years trying to solve problems of its own making as the bill was redrafted. “It’s no wonder they failed to find a way to fix it,” she said. “It is time to throw out this failed, experimental bill.”Tucker Carlson has been accused of promoting “antisemitic tropes” in his documentary Hungary vs Soros: The Fight for Civilization, which attacks the billionaire Democratic donor – and frequent target of antisemitic hate – George Soros. The film, which aired last week, sees Carlson, a Fox News host with a long history of inflammatory rightwing rhetoric, travel to Hungary, where he tees up a selection of politicians and commenters to attack Soros, a wealthy philanthropist who has donated billions of dollars to Democratic causes. Soros, who is Jewish and was born in Hungary, has been subjected to antisemitic attacks from conservatives for decades. Far-right activists and believers in the QAnon conspiracy theory have accused Soros of funding violent protests, of supporting an imagined global ring of pedophiles and of driving illegal immigration, a recurring theme in Carlson’s film. Carlson claims in the documentary that Soros has “spent decades” waging “a kind of war, political, social and demographic war on the west”. Carlson’s narration is accompanied by black and white images and screeching, dystopian music. “Unlike the threats from the Soviets and the Ottoman empire, the threat posed by George Soros and his nonprofit organizations is much more subtle and hard to detect,” Carlson says. Later, he claims that Soros has plotted to “oust democratically elected leaders” and “install ideologically aligned puppets”, nodding to antisemitic tropes about a global cabal which controls the world’s politics and finances. Soros has given at least $18bn to his Open Society Foundations organization, which offers financial grants to groups around the world, and has been a key donor to Democratic politicians and causes. He has long been a target of the political right, which has projected an array of conspiracy theories about the billionaire. In 2018 a pipe bomb was delivered to Soros’s home in Bedford, about 40 miles north of New York City. “This so-called documentary, reviewed by Anti-Defamation League’s Center on Extremism, is nothing more than far-right propaganda at best, and at worst a dangerous antisemitic dog-whistle sure to be heard loud and clear by a large audience,” Jake Hyman, a spokesman for the ADL, said. “Throughout the program, Carlson promotes antisemitic tropes that Soros controls world events and influences the global media, that Soros and the NGOs he funds are responsible for changing demographics in Europe, bringing in non-white immigrants and subsequently with that crime and violence to Europe.” Hyman added: “It’s totally fair to criticize Mr Soros’ support of partisan policies or candidates, but casting a Jewish individual as some sort of puppet master who manipulates national and international events for malign purposes has the effect of mainstreaming antisemitic tropes and giving support to bona fide antisemites and extremists who disseminate these ideas knowingly and with malice.” In the film, Carlson explains Hungary to his audience in easily understandable terms. It’s in Europe, he says, and is “about the size of Indiana, about the population of Michigan”. Carlson adds: “Like the midwest, it’s pretty flat here.” Hungary, Carlson goes on to claim, is “an outpost of western civilization in the middle of Europe”. But for all Carlson’s fawning over the country’s direction under Viktor Orbán, its authoritarian prime minister, Hungary has lurched into political territory that demonizes immigrants, LGBTQ individuals and other groups. In 2018 Orbán, who came to power in 2010 and was interviewed by Carlson in Hungary last year, described refugees as “Muslim invaders”, and also said: “We must defend Hungary as it is now. We must state that we do not want to be diverse ... We do not want our own color, traditions and national culture to be mixed with those of others.” Jonathan Greenblatt, CEO of the Anti-Defamation League, previously wrote an open letter to Lachlan Murdoch, executive chairman and CEO of Fox Corporation, which owns Fox News, after Carlson’s previous documentary Patriot Purge aired on Fox Nation in October 2021. That film sought to sanitize the January 6 insurrection, airing conspiracy theories and attempting to absolve Donald Trump’s supporters of blame. Two Fox News contributors quit the network in protest against the film. After Soros vs Hungary aired, Greenblatt tweeted: “On the eve of #HolocaustRemembranceDay, it’s appalling to see Tucker Carlson &amp; FOX invoke the kind of antisemitic tropes typically found in white supremacist media. There’s no excuse for this kind of fear mongering, especially in light of intensifying #antisemitism.” The documentary aired on Fox Nation, Fox News’s sister channel, which is a streaming-only service. But Fox News promoted it, too, in a tweet, while the documentary was given an uncritical write-up on the Fox News website, complete with an embedded video of a trailer for the film. A Fox News spokesperson pointed to remarks Carlson made in previewing the film, in which the host said, “Orban may be the only world leader who stood up to Soros directly”. “And so we thought that was interesting enough, enough of a metaphor for the struggle that is going on globally between nationalists and people who oppose them. We thought it was worthy of our season finale documentary for our series Tucker Carlson Originals,” Carlson said. The film does not address the decades-long antisemitic attacks on Soros, although at one point in the documentary Carlson claims that the media is quick to “claim any attack on George Soros is antisemitic”. In a statement to the Washington Post, Laura Silber, the vice-president of Open Society, said Soros and the group “have worked for more than 30 years to support vibrant and inclusive democracies whose governments are accountable to the people they serve”. “Mr Carlson appears to prefer authoritarian rule, state capture of media and the courts, crony corruption and rigged elections,” Silber said. Some prominent Fox News hosts, including Carlson, have a history of making comments or advancing arguments that have been deemed antisemitic or xenophobic. In September Carlson was criticized for promulgating the “great replacement” theory about immigration. Carlson denied that he was being antisemitic. As recently as 27 January, Holocaust Remembrance Day, Laura Ingraham displayed a mocked-up image of Soros clutching bank notes on her show, as she claimed Democrats were using “dark money” to control the Supreme Court. In December 2021 Fox News removed a cartoon from its Facebook and Instagram which showed Soros as a puppet master manipulating a Democratic district attorney and Democratic attorney general.Dr Brian Resler, an emergency physician in the San Francisco Bay Area, recently polled a group of doctors on an overnight shift about their jobs. “Everyone of us said if we could go back, we would choose a different career,” said Resler, who spoke on the condition that the Guardian does not identify his hospital. Resler and his fellow doctors feel that way although California has recently seen a sharp decrease in the number of Covid-19 cases after the spike due to the highly contagious Omicron variant. That slump in cases has largely been mirrored across the US as the Omicron wave has peaked and many parts of the US are firmly on its downslope. But, while some health experts have predicted that the worst of the pandemic is behind us, the ripple effects of the virus, such as its impact on patients needing care for other issues, continue to test the limits of the US healthcare system and its providers. “Most people got into healthcare because they wanted to help people and make a difference, and I think at this point, it’s just broken beyond repair,” said Resler, 36, who has worked in emergency medicine for seven years. Across the country, the daily average of Covid-19 cases and daily average of hospitalizations due to the virus has decreased by 49% and 16% respectively over the past two weeks, according to New York Times data. Despite those positive trends, 80% of US hospitals in the last week of January were under “high or extreme stress”, meaning that more than 10% of their hospitalizations were due to Covid-19, according to data compiled by National Public Radio using a framework from the Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation at the University of Washington. California was the tenth worst in the country with 69% of hospitals under extreme stress, meaning that more than 20% of those facilities’ hospitalizations were due to Covid-19. “Even though the odds of getting very sick with Omicron and the odds of getting sick once you are vaccinated and boosted are lower, the sheer number of infections means that there are still going to be a lot of sick people,” said Resler, who explained that most of the Covid-19 patients who were hospitalized were unvaccinated. Also, because of the threat of the virus, many people earlier in the pandemic were afraid or unable to seek care for their health issues. Now that delay is catching up with patients, Resler said. “That leads to a lot of overwhelming of the system and a lot of angry patients. A lot of patients hear that things are overwhelmed, but when faced with long wait times and an overwhelmed emergency department, it’s a lot different to see it for yourself when you are sick and seeking care than hearing about it,” he said. In Missouri, 79% of the hospitals are under extreme stress, which is the second highest percentage in the country. At Mercy hospital in Springfield, in the south-western part of the state, about 28% of their hospitalizations are Covid-19 patients, according to Erik Frederick, the hospital’s chief administrative office. Even if patients were admitted for other reasons but happened to test positive for Covid-19, “those patients require the same amount of resources, as far as isolation and all the personal protective equipment and human resources,” said Frederick. The high transmissibility of the Omicron variant means that the hospitals also have a significant number of staff who test positive for the virus and must then quarantine. This creates an increased patient load for the providers that are left, and hospitals must offer incentives to encourage staff to pick up additional shifts and hire nurses from outside agencies, Frederick said. “It creates a lot of stress on the healthcare system,” Frederick said. Children’s hospitals have also not been immune from the strain caused by the Omicron variant. Over two weeks in January, there was a 20% increase in the cumulative number of child Covid-19 cases, according to the American Academy of Pediatrics. Every few hours at University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, the house supervisor, who coordinates care for patients, sends out alerts about the numbers of available beds in particular units. “When those numbers get small, it means that we have to make some hard decisions,” said Dr Rachel Pearson, assistant professor of pediatrics and the medical humanities at UT Health San Antonio. “Sometimes that means kids who I would prefer to be upstairs with my hospital pediatrics team are stranded in the [emergency department].” Sometimes the hospital has to stop accepting transfer patients from smaller hospitals or clinics or had to have those patients wait in the emergency department. “We are stretched. It seems like we have been able to find creative solutions to safely care for kids for the most part, but I really feel for those rural doctors out there because I know sometimes they are on the phone and making call, after call, after call, trying to find a hospital with a higher level of care that can accept their sick patient,” said Pearson. Still, Pearson is encouraged that the Food and Drug Administration could soon authorize the Pfizer vaccine against Covid-19 for children under five. And Frederick, who also sees patients from rural areas with low vaccination rates, said he is optimistic about the future of the pandemic. “I’m optimistic about the numbers, but most of my optimism comes from my team and how they have responded and continue to respond,” he said. Resler isn’t so optmistic. His early interest in emergency medicine came from the rewarding nature of providing care to patients, some of whom don’t initially have a heartbeat. Now he and colleagues talk about the “thank you” to “[expletive] you,” ratio, and the former is consistently outweighed by the latter, he said. “I spend most of my day apologizing and being yelled at,” said Resler. “We had similar issues years ago, but it’s just gotten much worse, to the point where anytime I go see a new patient, it’s a pleasant surprise when they are not angry at me.” This article was updated on 4 February 2022 to clarify that Missouri has the second highest percentage of hospitals under ‘extreme stress’, according to NPR data.Pick of the week Inventing Anna “This whole story is completely true. Apart from the parts that are totally made up.” In terms of constructing a narrative about a con woman, this is a good place to start. Until her arrest in 2017, Anna Sorokin (AKA Delvey) posed as a wealthy German heiress in order to infiltrate and defraud New York high society. This new serial drama from Shonda Rhimes tells her startling story – through the eyes of Vivian Kent (Anna Chlumsky), a journalist struggling to write a feature about her. Julia Garner plays Sorokin as an odd, unsettling enigma – pivoting unpredictably between brittle vulnerability and extreme arrogance; defying any attempts to categorise or explain her. PH Netflix, from Friday 11 February *** Ms Pat: Y’all Wanna Hear Something Crazy? For Georgia comedian Ms. Pat, the road to a Netflix special has a been long and bumpy one. She’s a survivor of sexual abuse who was selling crack cocaine on the streets of Atlanta by the age of 15. She was encouraged to attempt standup comedy by a caseworker and, since 2002, has been firmly establishing herself on the scene. This hour-long set turns a turbulent life story into dark humour, even when dealing with poverty, juvenile detention and the drugs game. Not for the faint-hearted but bracing, incredibly funny and eventually redemptive stuff. PH Netflix, from Tuesday 8 February *** Disenchantment Unmistakably Matt Groening in every way, the Simpsons and Futurama creator’s satirical medieval fantasy adventure cartoon for adults continues into part four. Fans last saw Luci (Eric Andre) being decapitated, Elfo (Nat Faxon) being taken away by ogres, and Bean (Abbi Jacobson) being dragged to hell (well, taken down in an elevator) by her mother Queen Dagmar (Sharon Horgan) to marry a mysterious man. Plenty of action to dive straight back into, then. The gang races to reunite over the course of 10 episodes. HR Netflix, from Wednesday 9 February *** Magpie Murders “A whodunnit without an ending? It won’t even be worth the paper that it won’t be printed on.” Susan Ryeland (Lesley Manville) heads to Suffolk to find the ending herself in this adaptation of Anthony Horowitz’s 2016 bestselling murder mystery within a murder mystery. Cue a parallel tale spanning two time periods: 50s and contemporary Britain. With Tim McMullan (Foyle’s War), Daniel Mays (Line of Duty) and Pippa Haywood (Bodyguard, Bridgerton) joining the cast, this six-part series is set to be a satisfying dose of armchair detective fun. HR Britbox, from Thursday 10 February *** Rooney “He wanted to destroy everything that was in front of him.” That is Thierry Henry’s verdict on his encounters with Wayne Rooney – a terrifyingly precocious footballing prodigy who, touting a mixture of sublime ability and tangible menace, barged on to the scene in 2002. This documentary looks at Wayne’s world in its entirety, from his rough and ready childhood in Croxteth to his colourful private life. Chapter two – the management years – unfolds in a surprisingly promising style, creating a timely film albeit a fairly generic one. PH Amazon Prime Video, from Friday 11 February *** Best in Miniature In the last few months alone we’ve had a televised snowman-building contest and pottery competition where contestants had to make gnomes. The next step is, naturally, a competitive show for miniaturists. Hosted by standup comedian Aba Amuquandoh, this sweet new concept sees 11 highly skilled artists attempt to build their dream home in miniature form. It actually sounds like quite a therapeutic watch, but don’t be fooled: this is a small yet mighty battle for the winner to take home a cash prize and be crowned Best in Miniature. HR Discovery +, from Friday 11 February *** Love is Blind Reality telly continues to aimlessly but endlessly swipe right, trying out the multiple formulas and tones that can be encompassed by dating shows. Now it’s time for a second series of this voyeuristic, exploitative, jarringly unpleasant and wildly addictive nightmare of a series in which contestants live in pods, converse with potential mates without seeing them, then decide whether to propose or not. It’s a recipe for tears, tantrums and traumas, and as such, it’s hard to watch. But if staged human melodrama is your thing, it’s just as hard to switch off. PH Netflix, from Friday 11 FebruaryThe Covid-19 pandemic has seen two pernicious trends emerge as to how Americans are getting around their country: public transit is struggling with a reduced number of paying customers, while there has been a sharp increase in car crash deaths. The shuttering of businesses, the rise of working from home and a fear of contracting the coronavirus saw public transport use plummet across the US – commuter rail alone reported a 79% decline in ridership in the year to September 2020. Despite a slight resurgence in 2021, trips taken on all modes of public transit are still around half of what they were before the pandemic, federal government figures show. Meanwhile, transport officials have also been alarmed by a surging number of car-related deaths. The first half of 2021 saw more than 20,000 people die in car crashes, according to federal government data, up 18% on the previous year and the highest since 2006. Pete Buttigieg, the US transportation secretary, called the death toll, which is claiming the lives of about 3,000 people a month, “a national crisis” as he unveiled a new road safety strategy last week. Transport experts say that these trends, while complex and not necessarily linked, are slowing progress on road safety while also hampering efforts to improve the livability of cities and to reduce air pollution and greenhouse gas emissions from the US transportation system, which is the country’s largest contributor to dangerous climate change. “I think, long-term, if we don’t see major changes in transit ridership and road and land uses, we will have huge problems,” said Tara Goddard, an expert in transportation safety at Texas A&amp;M University. “We will see emissions as horrible as they are now, road safety numbers as bad as now, inequities and social problems as bad as they are now. If we aren’t committed to serious change, we will have a lot of problems.” The reasons behind the increase in traffic fatalities aren’t fully understood but a prevailing theory is that people have been speeding more, and therefore involved in worse crashes, due to roads that were cleared of the congestion when the pandemic hit and people stayed at home more. “The roadway system in the US is built for speed, so when the traffic disappeared when Covid hit, traffic fatalities went off the chart,” said Benito Perez, policy director at Transportation for America. “People are also spreading out their trips during the day and more people are walking and biking on roads designed for cars. So you’re getting this constant conflict. It’s a recipe for fatal crashes.” There has also been an “alarming” increase in people dying after being ejected from their cars during crashes because they weren’t wearing seatbelts, Goddard said, along with a rise in crashes because of drug and alcohol use by drivers. This is building upon trends seen since before the pandemic, such as the soaring popularity of hulking SUVs that are far more likely to kill pedestrians when they hit them. “We have big, wide roads, very poor pedestrian crossings, a lack of lighting and we are buying bigger cars,” said Goddard. “It also seems there is more aggressive, distracted driving now. There is a lot going on in society that Covid has brought to a head.” The increasing death toll on the roads has played out while public transit, long underfunded and politically overlooked in the US, has suffered from a steep drop in users that only partially rebounded as pandemic restrictions eased last year. Many bus and train routes across the US have been curtailed, with the recent surge in infections from the Omicron variant stripping the system of a large number of sick drivers and other transit staff. Six subway lines in New York City were suspended during December and January due to a lack of available staff. The slump in fare revenue has imperiled some public transit lines. “Unfortunately public transit has to justify its existence by showing a profit margin, whereas no such questions are asked of highway funding,” said Perez. Although low-paid yet essential workers continued to use public transit during the pandemic through necessity, many people who could afford to work from home or take other modes of transport have stayed away from trains and subways. “Transit is so poorly resourced in the US that it makes it very fragile to disruption,” said Goddard. “If it already doesn’t work well for people, it doesn’t take much to push them off it.” Goddard said there was a “glimmer of hope” in the Biden administration allocating $109bn in grant funds for public transit projects from the bipartisan infrastructure bill – which is the largest single investment in public transport in US history – but that the administration’s greater focus on electric vehicles won’t solve the deep-rooted problems in how America’s towns and cities are structured. “We need to focus on land use solutions so people don’t have to travel as much because things are closer to them, where driving isn’t the only option,” she said. “EVs certainly have a role to play but if you get hit at 45mph it doesn’t matter if it’s an EV or gas-powered car. We shouldn’t just replicate our existing problems but with new technology.”As a young boy in Chad, Mahamat-Saleh Haroun grew up surrounded by women – mother, aunties, four sisters, one formidable grandmother. The day after he was beaten by a teacher at Koranic school, his grandmother marched up to give the man a piece of her mind: “My grandson will never come back to your school.” Haroun mimics her angry finger jabbing and smiles warmly. “She had a very strong personality. Normally, a woman would never do this. The shame!” Haroun’s boyhood instilled in him, he says, a respect for women. But in his career as Chad’s only prominent film-maker – and one of Africa’s best known cinematic exports – he has told stories about men and boys. His gorgeous film Abouna is about two young brothers searching for their father. A Screaming Man told the tale of a hotel pool attendant who packs his son off to war; after it won the jury prize at Cannes in 2010, the government in Chad rebuilt the country’s only cinema (it has been closed since the beginning of the pandemic). Now in his early 60s, Haroun has directed his first film with female leads. Lingui, the Sacred Bonds is the story of a single mother, Amina, who is shocked to discover her 15-year-old daughter is pregnant and wants an abortion. At first, she refuses. Abortion in Chad is illegal; they are Muslim – religion forbids it. But she comes round to the idea, and the question becomes: how to get the abortion done? It’s a film about women’s resistance and a forthright challenge to Chad’s patriarchy. The idea for making a film about an unwanted pregnancy came to Haroun after reading a newspaper story about an abandoned newborn found dead in a pile of rubbish. Articles like this appear with grim predictability in Chad. This time something clicked. “When I read it, I said: ‘I have to do something.’ I wanted to be on the side of women, because it’s a huge problem.” What about the men? Haroun sighs. “Men are always out of the frame. The guilty one is always the woman.” In cases where the pregnancy is a result of rape, women and girls are rarely believed. He adds: “There is the feeling that the female body belongs to men. It’s at their disposal.” Haroun is speaking from his home in Paris; he has lived in France since the early 80s, after fleeing civil war in Chad. Like his films he is gentle, thoughtful and sincere. Dapperly dressed in a suit, very starched white shirt, beautifully knotted tie and yellow waistcoat, you could easily mistake him for a politician. Actually, he did briefly turn his hand to politics. In 2017 he was appointed Chad’s minister of culture. “I resigned after a year,” he shrugs wearily. “I thought in a naive way I could change things. I was wrong.” One of the pieces of legislation he backed would have legalised abortion; it failed to pass through parliament. So, back in his day job, Haroun directed Lingui. The story follows Amina on her mission. The clock is ticking. A sympathetic doctor tells Amina that he risks five years in prison if he’s caught performing an abortion; his price is impossibly high. Amina also investigates the backstreet option – unsafe abortions in Chad put the lives of women and girls at risk. Lingui sounds like a difficult watch. But it’s not bleak in the slightest. Like all Haroun’s work this is beautifully observed and deeply humane film-making. And it is satisfyingly feminist. Amina is herself a single mother, who has raised her daughter, Maria, out of marriage. For years she has sucked up the disapproving stares of her moralising neighbours, lived with the shame. We watch as Amina takes control of life. “Because she is marginalised she doesn’t have anything to lose,” says Haroun. “She is ready to struggle to save her daughter, and by saving her daughter she saves herself.” He peers into the screen. “Do you understand me very well?” He often does interviews with an interpreter, but today is translating from French himself. Lingui is a film about women joining forces, linking arms; coming together to help Amina. It features a wonderful midwife, played by Hadj Fatimé Ngoua, a pharmacist in real life, who is a friend of Haroun’s. (There is no film industry in Chad, no infrastructure, and few professional actors. So, Haroun casts friends, and people he spots out and about.) We also watch Amina help her sister, whose husband is insisting their little daughter – Amina’s niece – undergo female genital mutilation. Amina knows a woman who performs fake FGMs (to hoodwink men who insist on getting their daughters cut). FGM is illegal in Chad but still widely practised. “I grew up seeing the solidarity of women,” says Haroun. He tells me about a tradition in Chad of women forming mutual associations. Every month each member hands over money and the total is given to whichever of them is in most need: to start a business, or help make ends meet. “Because you cannot just wait for men. Women find the solution. That’s the traditional way.” He pauses, and chuckles to himself: “It’s the invention of insurance.” This is how is feminism is done in Chad, he says, a society in which there are things you can’t discuss or negotiate. “It’s pragmatic feminism. Women don’t have the theory – they just have to find a solution. There is a problem, and you have to act, or else you disappear. That is how I think women can survive in this society in Chad.” The title of the film, lingui, he adds, is a Chadian word that translates as “living together”. “Which means if you belong to the same community, if you live in the same space, you have to take care of each other, in a spirit of solidarity and kindness.” I ask Haroun if there has been a backlash to the film in Chad. He shakes his head. “When we had the first official screening with the authorities, the minister of culture was so moved. She said to all the women in the cinema: ‘Each of us here knows this story. This is our reality, we have to change that.’” A couple of days later, I speak to Achouackh Abakar Souleymane, the actor who plays Amina. Talking over Zoom from Chad, she says that, like all the women who appeared in the film, she was nervous beforehand about its topics of abortion and rape. “But at the same time, I wanted to do it because people make movies to talk about their problems. Everything is taboo in Chad. So, someone has to do it.” She’s been overwhelmed by audience responses: “People keep telling me: ‘You’re brave …’ Or they say: ‘This is our life, our story.’” Souleymane met Haroun when she worked as a costume assistant on his 2013 film Grigris. The day he called her to meet for an audition for Lingui, she was in hospital, and had just woken up after giving birth to her son by caesarean. “I didn’t tell Haroun that because I didn’t want him to know. I was like: ‘Maybe I can meet next week,’” she tells me, laughing. She ended up shooting the film when her baby was three months old, pausing every hour or so to breastfeed. “At the beginning we had to do the makeup to give me dark circles but after a while we didn’t need it any more.” If Haroun stopped making films, cinema would lose its only glimpse of life in Chad, and Chadians would lose a mirror to their society. That gives him a sense of purpose: he wants his films to give people a prod, to wake them up – make them look at the future of their continent. It’s about showing the world a true image of Chad, too. “The first representations of Africans were made by others. So my cinema consists of trying to break down this false image. It’s a duty and a responsibility. My films couldn’t just be entertainment.” • Lingui, The Sacred Bonds is released in the UK on 4 FebruaryAs many Texans endure another harsh cold snap this week when a winter storm hits the state, some 50,000 people have been hit by power outages in a grim reminder of last year’s big freeze in the state. While this week’s experience will probably not rival the 2021 winter storm that left much of Texas in darkness and was responsible for several hundred deaths, it is a test for the state’s capacity to handle the challenges of more severe weather as a result of the ongoing global climate crisis. Governor Greg Abbott has already caught flak for backtracking on the promise he made just two months ago that power outages would not occur this winter. This week, as power began to fail in some Texas homes, it prompted condemnation from prominent local politicians that not enough had been done over the last year to protect Texans’ access to power. Former presidential candidate Julián Castro told the Guardian: “Greg Abbott and Texas Republicans sold our state’s power grid to the highest bidder, and as a result, five million families lost power and hundreds lost their lives. Rather than working to fix the grid, they let energy lobbyists write their own laws and collected millions in political donations in return. We need new leadership that will work to modernize our grid and prioritize sustainability, not more corrupt politicians who line their pockets with money from special interests.” In a statement to the Guardian, the Electric Reliability Council of Texas (Ercot), which operates the state’s electrical grid said it was taking early action to try to head off any outages: “Ercot will deploy all the tools available to us to manage the grid effectively during this winter weather.” But such statements might not alleviate all fears in a state where the impact of winter storm Uri – which saw at least 246 deaths – is still keenly remembered. At that time, the grid that powered nearly the entire state began to fail, forcing energy regulators to roll out blackouts in order to avoid a complete shutdown. In the end some 4 million households were left without power in freezing temperatures for days. Here is a look at the problems, how they have been tackled and what needs to still happen: Bureaucratic failure and improvements As far as seeing a repeat on the scale of last year’s disaster, experts predict Texas is better prepared now as some upgrades to the infrastructure powering the state have either been made or are under way. But there is also still much to be done, according to Kenneth Medlock, an energy economist and fellow at Rice University’s Baker Institute for Public Policy. He called the state’s capacity to handle last year’s winter storm “a failure on all fronts”. “[The power supply chain] actually got cut off during the winter storm last year which contributed to the downward spiral in the state. You had capacity outages experienced by virtually every form of generation,” said Medlock. In addition to being structurally unprepared for the extremely cold weather, the lack of communication between the the Public Utility Commission (PUC) and the Texas railroad commission, the state agencies overseeing power and oil and gas, respectively, proved to be both inefficient and dangerous. Hospitals, for example, never had their power cut because they were automatically deemed “critical infrastructure”, but other entities in dire need of constant power, like waste management and water treatment plants, needed to apply for the designation. The power blackouts at water treatment facilities forced nearly every major city in the state to issue a “boil water” notice before consumption. In order to be designated as critical infrastructure, power suppliers needed to fill out a form found on Ercot’s website. However, the form was not publicized and therefore not completed, meaning those who most needed power, went without when forced outages began to roll out. “It’s literally a two-page form. As long as you fill it out, being deemed critical means electricity can be directed to a specific consumer,” said Medlock. “The biggest failure that we saw last year was bureaucratic.” As a result of this bureaucratic failure, the PUC also unintentionally turned off the lights at natural gas facilities, which deliver power to much of the state. As of today, most gas supply infrastructure in the state has been designated as critical, which prioritizes their power supply in the event power outages are ever required again. “This by itself adds a lot of capacity back into the mix that we didn’t have last winter. Even if there’s no additional winterization requirements fulfilled, that’s going to bring anywhere from 7 or 9 gigawatts of capacity back to the grid,” said Medlock. Early warnings and weatherization In June 2021, the summer following the winter storm, the state passed Senate Bill 3, a new law “relating to preparing for, preventing, and responding to weather emergencies, power outages, and other disasters …” One provision of the new law mandates the creation of an emergency alert system that will notify residents of upcoming power outages via text rather than cutting off power without notice and literally leaving millions of Texans in the dark. More importantly, the law now requires power plants to “weatherize” or update their equipment to withstand extreme weather to prevent outages in the first place. However, these weatherization regulations do not apply to oil and gas production and distribution facilities like wellheads and pipelines, which serve as the fuel supply chain to the power plants. “[The legislation] didn’t go far enough,” said Cyrus Reed, the conservation director of the Lone Star chapter of the Sierra Club, a US based environmental organization. “The gas supply has not been required to winterize yet. Even in these recent freezes [in January 2022], we’ve had some problems. We did have some power plants in the Permian Basin that couldn’t operate because they couldn’t get the gas supply, so it did impact power production.” Energy market changes, higher bills Unlike some other states that have designated utility providers, the energy market in Texas is open. This means customers can select any electricity provider within their supply area. Most electricity providers offer fixed-rate contracts for a limited period of time. If the contract expires, customers are charged a variable rate at their provider’s discretion. In February 2021, that rate was astronomical because demand was so high and the providers from which Texas companies bought power could charge whatever they wanted, engaging in price gouging practices that left some Texans whose power stayed on with electricity bills for thousands of dollars for the week of the winter storm. Now, regulators have made it so wholesale electricity customers will not have bills quite so high, but they stopped short of regulating electricity prices. Still, energy customers – nearly every Texas resident and business – will see their bill increase significantly with energy providers citing the necessary infrastructure updates as the culprit for the higher prices. In San Antonio, the city’s public energy provider, CPS Energy, increased their base rate by 3.85%, saying “the pass-through fee will help CPS Energy recover $418m it has already paid in fuel costs from the winter storm in February 2021”. Customers of private energy providers like CenterPoint, NRG, or TXU, for example, could see even higher bill increases. Plans to use state funds to subsidize necessary and expensive upgrades to power plants did not advance. Instead, customers are left footing the bill. “It’s corporate welfare, basically,” Reed said. Reed believes the state could do more to protect customers, or rather average Texans, by also addressing the high demand due to energy-inefficient building codes. “We didn’t have enough [power] supply, but you could look at it the other way. The other thing you could say is that we had too much demand,” Reed said. “Either the gas didn’t get to the power plants or the wind turbines froze. We have all these old buildings and old homes, some of which are using resistance strip heating (electric heaters) … Unlike other states, we as a state haven’t put a lot of investment and goals and programs into energy efficiency and demand response.” Texas’s climate future Could Texas see another winter storm of that scale? According to the Texas state climatologist, John Nielsen-Gammon, another severe “Arctic blast” hitting the state, like the one seen in 2021, is not so likely, though not impossible. “[A big freeze is] less likely for two reasons: Arctic temperatures are warming faster than the rest of the planet. As the weather patterns that lead to cold air become more common, the cold air itself will be milder.” Nielsen-Gammon said because of global heating and the increase in temperature across the Arctic, the frequency of severe weather events is likely to increase but temperatures will not be as extreme. “Regarding the snow, that’s less likely to occur in the future. Also because we’re far enough south, the main determining factor is not whether we get a storm. It’s whether it’s going to be cold enough to snow.”The Northern Territory court of appeal has upheld a ruling that state-owned housing must be reasonably comfortable to be considered habitable, in a decision that advocates say should result in better housing outcomes for remote communities across the territory. Friday’s decision follows a six-year legal battle brought by residents of the Ltyentye Apurte or Santa Teresa community 85km south-east of Alice Springs. The community said inadequate and inhumane housing was due to repeated failures by public housing authorities to conduct necessary repairs. Seventy residents took the territory government to the Northern Territory civil and appeals tribunal over the state of housing in the Eastern Arrernte community in 2016. One of the claimants lived with a blocked toilet and a leaking shower for 269 days and many homes had missing doors, faulty stoves and leaking air conditioners. One resident, Enid Young, went without an air conditioner for 540 days. The tribunal found in favour of the residents in 2019 and agreed the government, as landlord, had an obligation to provide habitable housing, but said that under the NT Residential Tenancies Act a house just had to meet standards of health and safety to be considered “habitable”. The tribunal said it applied a “very high test” for finding a premise uninhabitable, and that to be uninhabitable the state of the premises must have been such that there was a “threat to the tenant’s safety, going to both structural and health issues”. Two community members, Enid Young and Mr Conway, whose first name is not used as he has since passed away, then challenged that decision in the supreme court, arguing that they were owned further compensation due to the condition of their homes, which in Young’s case included going without a back door for six weeks. They also argued that the definition of habitability should be expanded, resulting in the supreme court ruling that the question of habitability should include an “overall assessment of humaneness, suitability and reasonable comfort of the premises … judged against contemporary standards”. In February 2021, the housing authority appealed the supreme court decision, arguing that the definition of habitability adopted by the court was too broad. It also disputed a ruling that the case be remitted to the civil and appeals tribunal to determine compensation. On Friday, the full bench of the NT court of appeal upheld the government’s appeal on two grounds, challenging the tribunal’s ability to determine compensation for an invalid rental agreement and a failure to replace Young’s door in a timely manner, but dismissed an attempt by the government to narrow the definition of habitability. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The court also heard evidence presented by the Australian Human Rights Commission which intervened in the case as amicus curiae. In a written judgment, the court said that while the criteria for assessing habitability of housing adopted in the supreme court decision – that housing be both humane and suitable – was “insufficiently precise”, the requirement that a house must be reasonably comfortable should stay. It found there were provisions in the act “which indicate a legislative intention that the considerations which inform the determination of habitability are not coextensive with matters of health and safety”, and said that “an accumulation of defects in the property may so undermine its comfort and amenity as to render it unfit for habitation, even where those defects do not constitute a threat to health and safety”. Daniel Kelly, a solicitor with the Australian Lawyers for Remote Aboriginal Rights, which represented community members with funding from Grata Fund, said the judgment “confirmed that the territory government has a legal responsibility to improve the standard of housing for remote communities”. “This is validation for the people of Santa Teresa, who have spent more than six years fighting for housing they can actually live in,” Kelly said. “Our thoughts are with Mr Conway’s family today, who unfortunately did not live to see his fight deliver better outcomes for his community. The onus is now on chief minister [Michael] Gunner to work with Aboriginal peaks to implement community-led solutions to the housing crisis.”Germany’s new chancellor Olaf Scholz is waving goodbye to the honeymoon period of his tenure, as his “inaudible” stance over the brewing crisis on the Ukrainian border is failing to impress not just Russia-hawks abroad but also more ambivalent voters at home. Scholz, whose liberal-left “traffic light” coalition was sworn in less than two months ago, has been criticised by Kyiv and other east-central European capitals for sticking to his country’s restrictive stance on weapons export to crisis regions and looking slow to spell out the potential sanctions that could be triggered by a Russian invasion into Ukraine. This week, Scholz has also had to face similar criticism in Berlin, however. “How does it feel when allies are classifying Germany’s attitude as unreliable?”, the Social Democrat politician was asked in an interview on German television on Wednesday night. When Scholz denied this was the case, the host interrupted him, pointing out that even his ambassador in Washington had warned in a leaked memo that “Germany, we have a problem”. While Angela Merkel rarely excelled as an orator or rhetorician, Scholz “seems to want to surpass her in the art of disappearance”, wrote weekly Der Spiegel, describing her successor’s performance over the last few weeks as “almost invisible, inaudible”. A survey by pollster Infratest Dimap published on Thursday saw support for Scholz’s SPD drop to 22%, overtaken by the conservative Christian Democratic Union (CDU) on 27%. His personal approval rating dropped by 17 percentage points in the same poll. One factor that has undermined the chancellor’s authority in particular is the behaviour of his last centre-left predecessor in the chancellory – and former boss – Gerhard Schröder, who continues to comment on global affairs in his role as chair of Russian energy companies Nord Stream and Rosneft. In his television interview, Scholz was urged to clarify that he was not taking the ex-chancellor turned lobbyist’s advice. “If I understand the constitution of the federal German republic correctly, there is only one chancellor and that is me,” Scholz said with characteristic understatement. Yet another factor that may explain the German leader’s paralysis is that he is catering towards often contradictory views on Russia held by the German public. The US is traditionally identified by Germans as their most important partner – a November 2021 survey by the Körber Foundation found a resurgent faith in transatlantic relations after the election of US president Joe Biden. Less than 5% of those surveyed believed Russia to be an important partner. But as a whole the German public does not perceive Vladimir Putin’s Russia to be a direct threat either. The same poll, carried out before the buildup of Russian troops on the Ukrainian border last December, has only 16% of Germans surveyed identifying Russia as a threat to German values. More than 80% said the country was a minor threat or no threat at all. On the conflict on the Ukrainian border, German doveishness is not merely a party-political compromise: Infratest Dimap’s poll of the public saw a clear majority in favour of granting Russian security assurances from Nato and even a slim majority against economic sanctions. Restricting arms exports into crisis regions on principle is not only backed by every party in the Bundestag – from the far-right Alternative für Deutschland to leftwing Die Linke – but also a 71% majority of the electorate. Such tendencies are even more pronounced among older generations and those living in the eastern regions of the country. A survey by pollster Forsa published this week found 43% of those living in the former states of socialist East Germany hold the US responsible for intensifying the conflict in eastern Ukraine, while only 32% blamed Russia. In western Germany, 52% held Russia responsible, and only 17% said the problem lay with the US. Holding such differing views in balance is a particular problem for Scholz and his party: the SPD currently governs in all five states of the former east, whose premiers wield influence via the Bundesrat, the upper house of the German parliament. One of these states, Mecklenburg-Vorpommern, where the SPD scored a clean sweep of direct mandates at last year’s election, is also where the Nord Stream 2 pipeline arrives from Russia. The completed-but-unapproved infrastructure project, criticised by most of Europe for making Germany reliant on Russian gas, is highly popular among the local population and supported by Social Democrat politicians in the region. Scholz’s disappearing act is not going to satisfy these voters, however, said Liana Fix, a Russia expert for the Körber Foundation and resident fellow at the German Marshall Fund. “Again and again, what we found when we surveyed the German public on attitudes to Russia is that independence matters: people don’t like the feeling they’re being talked into something,” Fix told the Guardian. “German voters may not want their country to supply weapons, but they want their leader to be visible in the diplomatic effort. And that is something that should be within Scholz’s reach.”In 1822 Susannah Wright stood before the Lord Chief Justice accused of blasphemy. Despite her limited education, she was determined to conduct her own defence and duly began to read out a carefully prepared statement. Her “blasphemy” had nothing to do with being a potty mouth. Rather, Susannah was found guilty of selling a pamphlet that challenged the right of the Established Church to meddle in secular matters. Infuriated by the effrontery of this young lacemaker from Nottingham, the judge attempted to cut her off. Sharply, she told him to be quiet: “You, sir, are paid to hear me.” It is a thrilling moment. It is also, suggests Nan Sloane, one that deserves to be far better known. The same goes for the many other occasions on which working-class women dared to speak truth to power during the first third of the 19th century, a time of bitter unrest when it looked as though Great Britain might follow France and America into revolution. There is, for instance, Mary Fildes, president of the Manchester Female Reform Society, who stood on the hustings alongside Henry Hunt at Peterloo in 1819 and only narrowly escaped death in the state-sanctioned carnage that followed. Or Jane Carlile who, like Susannah Wright, was found guilty of blasphemy for selling her husband’s newspaper The Republican, and was sentenced to two years inside Dorchester prison with her newborn baby. One of the reasons why these women have been “hidden from history” to use Sheila Rowbotham’s seminal phrase from nearly 50 years ago, is because working-class women generally left less of a paper trail than well-to-do activists. Mary Wollstonecraft and Anna Laetitia Barbauld, who both get a chapter, published polemics that set off political fireworks and attracted vicious personal attacks in the process (Horace Walpole famously dubbed Wollstonecraft “a hyena in a petticoat”). With the likes of Wright, Fildes and Carlile, by contrast, all we get are oblique glimpses of them in narratives written by and about the men with whom they shared their lives. The problem with this fragmentation is how difficult it makes it to recover a reforming woman’s particular journey, and see her full complexity. For instance, in 1832 Yorkshire woman Mary Smith presented parliament with a petition (or, rather, Henry Hunt did on her behalf) calling for the forthcoming Reform Bill to deliver female suffrage. In the process Smith tried to bolster her cause by dropping broad hints that William Cobbett, the great reformer who was a staunch advocate for male suffrage only, had recently been caught in a clinch with another man. As repugnant as this homophobia seems today, it is a reminder that real women living in historical time will not always think and act in ways that we find easy to understand. There is another reason, suggests Sloane, that this early generation of female radicals still gets overlooked. All too often feminist history gets written exclusively in terms of the slow march towards female voting rights, which was not finally achieved for another 100 years. But many of the women from this earlier period were more concerned with the immediate challenge of keeping their families fed and warm. One of the saddest things about Sloane’s narrative is its heavy load of infant mortality, against which background desperately poor women march for bread and smash machinery in protest at the consequences of unregulated capitalism. The vote, for them, is a luxury that will have to wait. • Uncontrollable Women: Radicals, Reformers and Revolutionaries by Nan Sloane is published by IB Tauris (£20). To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.And that is it for Friday’s blog. Before we go into the weekend, let’s recap the big stories from today: The assistant attorney general discussed the Coalition’s religious discrimination bill ahead of the release of reports from two parliamentary inquiries into the government’s Religious Discrimination Bill. Amanda Stoker said religious schools have the right to exercise beliefs “even if it might offend some others”. Novak Djokovic said his detention in Australia was “unexpected to say the least”. Anti-vaccination protesters gathered in Canberra. NSW recorded 31 Covid deaths and 10,698 new cases, Victoria recorded 36 deaths and 11,240 cases, Tasmania had 570 cases, Queensland had 13 deaths and 6,857 cases, the ACT recorded one death and 449 cases, the NT reported 1,004 new Covid cases, WA recorded 18 new cases and SA reported three Covid deaths and 1,363 cases. Police attempted to clear the ACT anti-vaccine protest camp. The government sought Labor support to pass the religious bill unamended. Victoria announced a $1.4bn funding package for the state’s health system. The prime minister backed a slow reopening of Western Australia. With that, it is time to put this blog to bed. We will be back tomorrow to go through Saturday’s news with you. LGBTQ+ advocacy group Just.Equal Australia has also released a statement in relation to the release of the religious discrimination report, saying both major parties are ignoring the views of the Australian people. Spokesperson Rodney Croome said: A recent national poll by YouGov Galaxy found that 77% of Australians oppose special exemptions to allow harmful speech in the name of religion while 62% oppose religious schools being allowed to sack LGBT teachers. Yet in the two parliamentary reports both major parties have either endorsed, or left the door open to, a federal Religious Discrimination Bill that would do exactly that. Both reports gloss over the key problems with the Federal Bill, problems that have been raised by a wide array of legal experts, community organisations, professional bodies and state governments. In their effort to chase the votes of the tiny number of Australians who want special legal privileges for religion, Scott Morrison and Anthony Albanese have abandoned the vast majority of Australians who want equal treatment for all. The Public Interest Advocacy Centre has expressed its “extreme disappointment” that two parliamentary committees have failed to “adequately address any of the fundamental problems in the government’s proposed Religious Discrimination Bill 2021”. PIAC policy manager Alastair Lawrie said: The majority reports have not grappled with the serious problems created by the Bill’s extraordinary and excessive religious exceptions. This includes exceptions that apply to a far broader range of organisations than any other Australian anti-discrimination law, and which adopt a far more lenient test to determine when discrimination will be permitted. Amongst the biggest losers will be Muslim, Jewish, Hindu, Buddhist, agnostic and atheist workers in religious hospitals, housing, aged care and disability services, who will be able to be discriminated against on the basis of their faith. Entrenching discrimination against workers from minority faiths is a perverse outcome from any Religious Discrimination Bill. Chief executive of the ASRC, Kon Karapanagiotidis, tweeted this out earlier: From AAP: NSW music venues are in urgent need of funding, or lovers of a beer and a live band can expect to see more closures. It was a “devastating blow” to hear this week that three Sydney music venues would close, said state Labor spokesman for music, John Graham, who also said there were additional venues on the brink. Venue 505, The Lansdowne Hotel and Giant Dwarf announced this week they would close their live music operations. “Our worry is we will lose these bits of the social infrastructure of the city when we get through to a better day,” Graham said. “We will lose more venues, that’s the sad truth at the moment.” Many live music venues have been under pressure for years, which operators have attributed in part to various government restrictions including the city’s now defunct lock-out laws, designed to curb alcohol-fuelled violence. A second serving member of the SAS has told a court he saw an Australian soldier shoot an unarmed disabled man during a 2009 raid in Afghanistan. The soldier, anonymised before the court as Person 14, said he saw an Australian soldier, wearing distinctive camouflage facepaint worn by the Roberts-Smith’s five-man patrol, throw an Afghan man to the ground. “Then a soldier raised their Minimi F89 Para [machine gun] and fired an extended burst,” Person 14 said. From AAP: A specialist task force has been set up to ensure all recommendations from a landmark review into the toxic workplace culture at Parliament House are implemented. The task force, chaired by a former public servant, Kerri Hartland, met for the first time on Thursday, and will oversee the implementation of all 28 recommendations from the Jenkins review. The review was set up last year in the wake of allegations the former Liberal staffer Brittany Higgins was raped in a ministerial office in 2019. The review found one-in-three people working in Parliament House had been sexually harassed, with 11% reporting it. About one quarter of workers told the review their harasser was a politician. The Sex Discrimination Commissioner, Kate Jenkins, made 28 recommendations in the review, among them calls for gender diversity within parliament and setting up an independent complaints body. The task force – made up of government, Labor and crossbench MPs – discussed delivering a statement of acknowledgement of the harms that have been caused in the parliamentary workplace. However, it is not known when such a statement would be made. Here are some more reactions to the PM trying his hand at hair washing: A kleptomaniac parrot has become the latest contributor to New Zealand cinema, after stealing a GoPro camera and taking it on a sweeping tour of remote Fiordland. Aotearoa’s native alpine parrot species, the kea, is known for its curious and mischievous nature – and for swiping wallets, jewellery, packed lunches, windscreen wipers and other valuables from unsuspecting tourists and visitors. As debate rages about the religious discrimination bill, let’s remember a simple fact: under federal law, religious schools can already expel gay and transgender students for their sexuality and gender. As Coalition attack lines have emphasised this week, this power comes from an exemption for religious educational institutions in the Sex Discrimination Act, including a version passed by the Labor government in 2013. So once upon a time, there was bipartisan support for this. Heads up! I have some First Dog for you – this week looking at the price of milk. The number of serious incidents reported in early learning and childcare has jumped by 24% in the previous year, according to the Productivity Commission’s Report on Government Services 2022. “Serious incidents” include death, trauma, illness, injury, emergency service attendance, and children locked in/out, unaccounted for or taken away. Chief executive of Minderoo Foundation’s Thrive by Five initiative, Jay Weatherill, said these figures reflect a sector in crisis. The early learning and childcare sector has long faced workforce shortage issues, and now Covid-19 has made them worse. Currently, 11% of long day care services hold a staffing waiver because of difficulty meeting staffing requirements. We’ve got a situation where children’s safety is at risk, costs of early learning and childcare services are going up, many parents who want to work are being kept at home, and all while our economy is reeling from a global pandemic. If we want Australia to build back better, we need to support parents back into the workforce by ensuring an affordable, safe environment for children to thrive in. From AAP: South Australia has reported three Covid-19 deaths as the premier, Steven Marshall, promises to ease more health restrictions to get people back to work. A man and a woman aged in their 80s and a woman in her 70s died. There were also 1,363 new infections recorded on Friday, which was a decrease from the 1,538 detected a day earlier. The number of active cases has also fallen from 18,308 on Thursday to 17,199, with 228 people in hospital. This includes 15 people in intensive care and five people on ventilators. Of those hospitalised, 124 people are fully vaccinated, 36 are either unvaccinated or partially vaccinated, and 63 have an unknown vaccination status. Victoria’s opposition has slammed the Andrews government’s $1.4bn funding boost for the state’s health system, saying it is an admission of failure and mismanagement over the past two years. The funding includes $938m for public hospitals to help cover Covid-related costs, support dedicated frontline workers and continue surge payments for healthcare staff. The opposition’s health spokeswoman, Georgie Crozier, says the announcement is “too little too late” for a healthcare system that has “fallen apart” under the Andrews government: More spin won’t cut essential surgery wait times or get mothers and new babies the basic support services they deserve. Daniel Andrews has run Victoria’s health system as premier or health minister for 11 of the last 15 years – he has failed to act and must take responsibility. We need a real plan, not more spin, to get our healthcare back on track and better managed to ensure it delivers the services that Victorians deserve. The shadow attorney general, Mark Dreyfus, has also released a statement: Labor welcomes the reports on the Government’s Religious Discrimination Bill and thanks the committees for their work. As these inquiries have confirmed, this legislation raises a number of complex issues, and already we’ve seen the government indicate that changes to the legislation introduced by the Prime Minister are necessary. Labor will now carefully consider these reports as Caucus finalises the party’s position on the legislation. The Liberal senator Andrew Bragg has called on the Morrison government to remove the controversial statements of belief clause from the religious discrimination bill. Although Bragg signed onto the majority report with Labor and other Coalition senators on the Legal and Constitutional Affairs committee, his additional comments go much further than Labor in calling for further changes. Bragg recommended: The statement of belief clause be removed in its entirety; and The Sex Discrimination Act should be amended to “end discrimination against students and teachers”. “Unfortunately the Bill departs from orthodox anti-discrimination law by including a ‘statement of belief’ [clause],” Bragg said. He attacked the clause for: Giving preference to religion over other attributes; Employer groups’ warning the clause would expose people to discrimination in the workplace; Overriding of state law; Constitutional issues; and The question of costs – as simple state-based claims could be forced into federal courts by people raising a defence that allegedly discriminatory statements were statements of belief. Bragg noted “deeply upsetting case studies” of teachers who were sacked for their sexuality. In the second inquiry, by the Senate’s Legal and Constitutional Affairs committee, Labor senators have also signed up to a joint report with the Coalition calling for the religious discrimination bills to be passed. In this inquiry, both Labor and the Liberal senator Andrew Bragg made additional comments. The recommendations of the report are: The government should consider constitutional concerns about the statement of belief clause and overriding states’ laws on hiring and firing practices; but Subject to the first recommendation, “the committee recommends the Senate passes the bills” The constitutional concerns by Prof Anne Twomey related to the way the bill went about overriding state laws, but the committee also noted that Prof Nicholas Aroney has proposed amendments to drafting to overcome these. So the committee is not saying these contentious sections of the bill should be removed, only reworded. In their additional comments Labor senators said: Labor senators wholeheartedly endorse the many laudable sentiments in the committee’s report, particularly about the need to protect people of faith from discrimination. Labor senators also criticised the statements of belief and employment practices clauses, which it said were “complex, divisive and novel provisions”. They concluded: Labor supports the notion that the Commonwealth’s anti-discrimination framework should be expanded to ensure that Australians are not discriminated against on the basis of their religious beliefs or practices. In doing so, Labor has made clear that it is important that such an extension does not remove existing protections Australians already enjoy against other forms of discrimination. Throughout the course of the committee’s inquiry, it became clear that whilst most of the measures contained in the bills were welcome and worthy of implementation in law, certain provisions are highly contentious. We accept the calls of certain key stakeholders for action, however it is important that the bills which do pass the Parliament are as well constructed as they can be. Thus, we implore the government to work with the Opposition, crossbench and key stakeholders to address the concerns of submitters to this inquiry with a view to ensuring that the religious discrimination bills are fit for purpose. The first of two inquiry reports into the religious discrimination bill has just landed, from the joint human rights committee. As foreshadowed this morning, Labor members have joined the Coalition in agreeing to a report that calls for the parliament to pass the bill, if a series of changes are made. Concerningly for LGBTQ+ advocates who wanted Labor to take a stronger stance against the bill, the changes are technical and do not address concerns about the statement of belief provision, and the provision overriding state laws limiting religious exemptions to hire and fire staff. The Labor members made “additional comments” criticising these aspects of the bill. In them, they said “Labor members urge the government to work across the parliament – if not across the federation – to address the serious concerns that have been raised” about both the statement of belief clause and the employment clause. But Labor members said there was a “legitimate concern” that both clauses were intended to address. The Greens issued a dissenting report – they want the bill blocked. The Labor MPs and senators said: There is consensus from many stakeholders, the Attorney-General’s Department, other members of this committee, and even the Prime Minister that the religious discrimination legislative package requires amendments before it can be passed. The Australian Labor Party has a long history of fighting to prevent discrimination against people of faith. The legislation that Prime Minister Morrison introduced should unite our nation, not divide. Labor members urge the Government to work with Labor and the State and Territory governments to resolve the outstanding issues identified in these Additional Comments and in the majority report of this committee as a matter of urgency. ACT police have arrested a man involved in Canberra’s anti-vaccine protests after allegedly finding a loaded rifle in his car. Officers moved in on the protest area at the National Library early on Friday morning to dismantle the unauthorised camp and push hundreds of demonstrators out of the area. Police said they made no arrests over crowd behaviour, describing the operation as “peaceful”. However, a 44-year-old man was arrested at the area. ACT police said in a statement: A loaded modified rifle was located in his vehicle and he is expected to be charged with the possession of an illegal firearm. ... He will also face multiple traffic offences in relation to the roadworthiness of his vehicle. Protesters were forced to leave the area, but most seem to have remained in Canberra, moving to new camping areas at a large park in Canberra’s north. Many hundreds of protesters are expected at a rally in Canberra on Saturday, with large numbers of extra demonstrators claiming in online groups they will arrive overnight and tomorrow. Police have warned of “planned and unplanned events in the area”, advising Canberra residents that “traffic disruptions may continue to occur in the Parliamentary Triangle area in the coming days”. The Transport Workers Union has today written to the prime minister demanding a wage subsidy for truck drivers who will experience loss of work due to the flooding on the Trans-Australian railway. Thousands of West Australian truck drivers are expected to be out of work after 80% of food supplies into WA have been disrupted due to severe flooding on the only lifeline that connects WA to the rest of the country. “The people of WA have been made involuntarily dependent on this rail line for 80% of our food and supplies and our truck drivers are dependent on this rail line for their employment” said TWU WA state secretary, Tim Dawson. The livelihoods of truck drivers are at stake, at a time when there is a national shortage of truck drivers. Our members who own fleet and run their own businesses have mortgages to pay and truck repayments to meet. Costs don’t stop just because of flooding. This morning we reported that Labor is set to join the Coalition in joint reports in two committee inquiries examining the religious discrimination bill. The reports recommend the bill be considered for passage by parliament. This isn’t quite the same as unqualified support – because we understand there are some additional comments suggesting Labor will seek amendments, and the Senate legal and constitutional affairs committee, in particular, had constitutional concerns about the statement of belief provision and hiring and firing powers. But the Greens aren’t happy, and want Labor to take a firmer stand. Greens leader, Adam Bandt, said: The Liberals’ division gives Labor the opportunity to join the Greens, block the bill and stop discrimination against LGBTQ+ kids. It’s time for Labor to stop the double speak about this dangerous legislation. If they side with Scott Morrison they’re selling-out the LGBTQ+ community. Moderate Liberals have been taking the fight to their leader, and Labor needs to join the Greens and back LGBTQ+ communities. The Greens LGBTIQA+ spokesperson, Janet Rice, said: Morrison’s bill is deeply unpopular with the vast majority of voters, and is so bigoted that even moderate Liberals are prepared to cross the floor. Increasing discrimination is at the heart of this bill. Both Labor and the Liberals are deeply divided within their own ranks, yet both parties appear to be working in unison to pass this bill. The Liberals are wedged, Labor are equivocating, and neither can get their own house in order to come up with a clear position on a bill that is a Trojan horse for hate. Victoria’s teachers union has struck a new enterprise agreement with the state government, giving public school teachers a reduction in face-to-face learning hours and a 2% pay rise. From next year, teachers will have a 90 minute reduction of face-to-face learning time each week, allowing them more time to plan lessons. The Australian Education Union’s Victoria branch said the government would also hire 2,000 more public school teachers. It comes after the state government last month unveiled a plan to create a pool of retired teachers and principals as fill-in staff as schools prepared for Omicron-related work shortages. AEU Victoria branch president, Meredith Peace, said it was the first time in 30 years members had achieved a reduction in face-to-face teaching hours: The one and a half hour decrease to be phased in during 2023 and 2024 will mean teachers have more time for preparation and planning for student learning within paid hours. This is an historic agreement that will ultimately see our students receive greater support to achieve their full potential. Victoria’s deputy premier and education minister, James Merlino said the state’s teachers had “given so much to school communities” during the pandemic. When we support our school staff properly, Victorian kids see better education outcomes – this proposed deal will cement our state as the best place in the nation to work as a teacher, and the best place to send a child to school. From AAP: The Northern Territory has reported 1004 new Covid-19 cases as hospitals cancel elective surgery to make room for more virus patients. More infected Territorians were admitted to hospital overnight, bringing the total number of Covid-19 patients to 148 on Friday, up from 141 a day earlier. NT chief minister, Michael Gunner, said 16 of those in hospital require oxygen and six “are really sick receiving acute care in an (intensive care unit)”. These are the people we are seriously worried about. Gunner said the number of infected patients in intensive care would rise over the next few days. “For this reason in line with other jurisdictions we are pausing elective and day surgery in our hospitals to help our clinicians manage the current Covid cases and prepare for a potential increase in the next few weeks,” he said. Gunner also called out “people, some with very loud voices, who would like you to think that every case of Covid is a catastrophe and everybody should be taken out of their home and put into a hospital”. “Their heart is in the right place but a response like that would be the medical equivalent of panic buying.” Well, this should be interesting: From hairdressing to horses: a tale of two very different leaders and their media stunts. There is an emergency level bushfire threatening lives and homes on Western Australia’s south coast. The emergency warning is in place for parts of Shadforth in the shire of Denmark. The blaze started near the intersection of Bayview Rise and Mcleod Road. The Department says there is a threat to lives and homes and firefighters are on the scene. Former television host Andrew O’Keefe is now facing a drug charge as well as multiple counts of assault and choking, reports AAP. O’Keefe was charged with possession of a prohibited drug when his assault case was briefly mentioned in Sydney’s central local court on Friday. The former Seven Network presenter remains in custody as he did not apply for bail and it was formally refused. Last Thursday, O’Keefe – already on bail for a separate alleged incident of assault – was charged with two counts of intentionally choking a person, three of common assault, and assault occasioning actual bodily harm. Police alleged O’Keefe grabbed a 38-year-old woman by her throat, pushed her to the ground, and punched and kicked her in a Sydney CBD unit. But his lawyer said he acted in self-defence after the woman turned up at his Kent Street apartment uninvited and caused “substantial injuries” to O’Keefe during the fight. A medical report tendered in court last Friday outlined the former Deal or No Deal host’s clinical depression, post-traumatic stress disorder, and “severe” methamphetamine use disorder, among other conditions. O’Keefe, 50, was ordered to appear by video link in court again next Friday. • In Australia, the national family violence counselling service is on 1800 737 732. The crisis support service Lifeline is on 13 11 14 and the national family violence counselling service is on 1800 737 732. The National Alcohol and Other Drug Hotline is at 1800 250 015; families and friends can seek help at Family Drug Support Australia at 1300 368 186. 1800 RESPECT (1800 737 732). With that, I’ll hand the blog over to my colleague Cait Kelly, whose capable hands will steer us through the next period of the day. In Melbourne, Morrison was also asked if his recent comments supporting Western Australia’s hard border were due to the popularity of the measures among voters in the state. He denies this, saying: I am backing that because the premier [Mark McGowan] believes that if he were to take that step at this point the Omicron variant would be of great risk of overwhelming the health system. I am pleased that in Western Australia the rate of booster doses is equivalent. That was not the case before and this time they are keeping up on a booster doses. I think that is terrific. The Western Australian government is working to get themselves in a position where those borders can open and it is important to have a plan to do that because we want to see the country open again. We have seen at the hospital system in Victoria and New South Wales and Queensland for that matter and South Australia, under a lot of pressure but they have been able to push through, and the Western Australian premier would need to be feeling as confident as at the other premiers have been. Scott Morrison has asked the defence minister, Peter Dutton, to consider how the defence force can have a more involved role in the “crisis” unfolding across the aged care sector. The prime minister said he had asked Dutton to work with the health minister, Greg Hunt, to progress plans to “see how the defence forces can further support” the sector. Morrison described the situation in the sector as a “crisis”. Morrison is asked if he intends to to pass an amendment to the Sex Discrimination Act at the same time as the religious discrimination bill. He confirms it is his intention to do them both at the same time, and that it will happen before the federal election. Morrison is asked why Richard Colbeck should remain as aged care minister. He defends Colbeck, saying that he spoke to him today and that “even as recently as yesterday afternoon, [Colbeck] has been in constant contact with the aged care sector to understand their needs”. Responding to calls for Colbeck’s resignation, Morrison said: I understand those seeking to make political points about this. Scott Morrison is speaking in Melbourne, where he is announcing a skills and jobs recovery program. While speaking about pandemic-related employment issues, Morrison makes special mention of aged care workforce shortages. This is an incredibly complex and difficult challenge. Our aged care sector, as we move through this pandemic, has been the most vulnerable. Our most vulnerable Australians live in the aged care sector ... We have been through several waves of this pandemic now. As it has reached into our aged care sectors, we have seen the terrible results for those that have lost their lives.” Morrison echoes messaging that many of the deaths in aged care are among residents with serious existing health issues: Now it is true that one of the home truths of many aged care facilities, the people that are in care there, many of them are in end-of-life care. 61% of those that we have lost during the course of this pandemic were in end-of-life care, and palliative care ... They have had Covid when they have died.” He adds: As a government, we have been doing everything we possibly can to mitigate and prevent the terrible impacts of the pandemic in our aged care facilities. It has been a challenge all over the world. The rate of outbreaks in our aged care facilities that we are seeing here in Australia, Canada, 13 times greater. The aged care workers now who can’t work [because they] have Covid, that was inevitable that we would see people contract Covid and that would prevent them from going to work. There are no easy solutions to this. There are no simple answers. This is not a pandemic that does not have impacts. Anybody who want to suggest that, particularly for aged care, doesn’t understand this pandemic.” Here’s a breakdown of the $1.4bn package Victoria’s health minister, Martin Foley, has just announced: $938m for public hospitals to help cover Covid-related costs, support dedicated frontline workers and continue surge payments for healthcare staff. $161m for an extra 40m N95 masks, 30m surgical masks, 10m gowns and 10m face shields. More than $30m for critical medicines and equipment used to treat patients including pulse oximeters, humidifiers and air purifiers. $196m to expand the Covid Positive Pathways program, which helps people recover from the virus at home. $21m to implement a state-wide virtual triage service, after a successful trial at Northern Hospital, which led to 87% of virtually assessed patients avoiding transportation to hospital. Almost $8m to fund eight additional GP respiratory clinics and establish five urgent care centres. $35m to extend Ambulance Victoria surge measures put in place last year, while the recruitment of 120 paramedics will be brought forward. $11.5m to reduce the delay in discharging medically-well Covid-positive patients from hospital by improving patient transport across 13 sites. Hundreds of protesters descended on Canberra this week in a noisy demonstration opposing vaccine mandates and to air a hodgepodge of other grievances. In trucks and trailers, cars and campervans, the “convoy to Canberra” lobbed in the nation’s capital on Monday, taking loud protests to Parliament House and the National Press Club. Hundreds have camped at unauthorised sites citywide. Police moved in on Friday morning to dismantle a main site, but warn that protesters could be in town at least a week. With an “occupy Canberra” protest planned at Old Parliament House, and federal parliament returning next week, experts on conspiracy movements are concerned the rallies may shift in tone. The protesters are armed with a grab bag of grievances around vaccinations, and seem to have equal disdain for all politicians. So who are they? Read more: The Reserve Bank of Australia has today released its quarterly statement on monetary policy. Given the RBA board meeting was on Tuesday, and the governor Philip Lowe’s National Press Club address a day later, the monetary tea leaves have already had a good poring over. The main interest is the central bank has lifted its forecast for inflation, with the consumer price index expected to peak in the June quarter of this year at 3.75% before easing back to 3.25% by December. The previous forecast for “headline” inflation was 2.75% and 2.25%, respectively. Perhaps that’s not a surprise, and if anything may be a little conservative since CPI for the December quarter “printed” at 3.5%. The inflation measure that we should care more about is the “underlying” or “trimmed mean”, which is trimmed off its more volatile components. The RBA targets this measure to be between 2% to 3% over the medium term if it can. Anyway, the RBA lifted its expectations for this gauge to be at 3.25% and 2.75% for the June and December quarters, respectively. That compares with the forecast in the November statement on monetary policy of 2.25% for both mid- and year-end quarters. At the end of 2021 it was running at 2.6%, or the fastest since mid-2014. Should the RBA’s forecasts understate the economy’s strength and the resulting inflation by as much as they did in 2021, then we might expect the rise in the official cash interest rate to come sooner than the market (June-ish) or economists (August-ish) now predict. In the RBA’s purple prose: “Upstream cost pressures in housing construction and durable goods are expected to push underlying inflation higher in the near term, but moderate over time.” “There are, however, considerable uncertainties surrounding this outlook, not least because the effect of very low unemployment rates on wages and other prices is uncertain, given there is little recent historical experience to draw upon.” (Think, early 1970s.) And how about those wage rises? “Most employers in the Bank’s liaison program are not anticipating wages growth to move beyond the 2% to 3% range this year. It circles back to what we said yesterday: that on current settings wages are going to struggle to keep up with inflation in 2022 unless something else gives. Victoria’s health minister, Martin Foley, has just announced a $1.4bn funding package for the state’s health system to help cope with the impact of Covid-19. Foley said: What this package recognises is that there is pressure right across our system. There is 24/7 pressure on our people who are those frontline health care paramedics, nurses and physicians, allied health professionals, pathology teams, our cooks, our executives. The entire public health system is under pressure day in, day out. Foley also announced a plan to resume all elective surgeries. From Monday 7 February private hospitals and day procedure centres will be able to resume day surgery at up to 50% of normal levels. He said two years into the pandemic, with hospitalisations beginning to decline, it was critical to allow the health system to continue. With that, I shall hand you back over to the incredible Elias Visontay, who will be with you for the next little while. See you! Qantas chief executive, Alan Joyce, has compared Western Australia’s ongoing border closure to the totalitarian state of North Korea. Speaking on 3AW on Friday, Joyce lamented there wasn’t a plan in WA for when the state would welcome domestic travellers after the initial reopening date of 5 February was scrapped indefinitely last month. Joyce told presenters Ross and Russel: You can’t even travel around your own country … it’s starting to look like North Korea. We thought we had a date for that border to be opened … but that was stepped back from, it’s disappointed tens of thousands of people that had booked to go to WA. You can read the full report below: Two luxury cars owned by conwoman Melissa Caddick are set to be auctioned off, with liquidators saying they are continuing work on selling other assets that could help offset the millions of dollars stolen from her investors. Caddick went missing in November 2020 after authorities investigated whether she had used her financial services business to scam investors. The Australian Securities and Investments Commission (Asic) later found she had swindled more than $23m from investors. Human remains belonging to Caddick were found early last year, and police suspect she took her own life within hours of being confronted about the fraud. Jones Partners, the liquidators appointed by the federal court to investigate Caddick’s personal and business assets and seek to return as much as possible to investors, said in a statement on Friday that a 2016 Audi R8 V10 and 2016 Mercedes-Benz CLA45 owned by Caddick would be auctioned on 21 February. Bruce Gleeson, a principal at Jones Partners said it was also hoped properties at Dover Heights and Edgecliff, and Caddick’s share portfolio, would soon be sold. He said in a statement: Significant work has been undertaken during December and January and we are taking legal steps to expedite the sale of these assets to progress being in a position to return monies to investors. The ACT has recorded another Covid-related death, bringing the territory’s death toll for the pandemic to 27. Another 449 new infections were also detected. Ooft, I have to give it to Labor, this is a pretty sick burn. Here are the latest coronavirus numbers from around Australia today, as the country records at least 84 deaths from Covid 19: ACT Deaths: one Cases: 449 In hospital: 65 (with one person in ICU) NSW Deaths: 31 Cases: 10,698 In hospital: 2,494 (with 160 people in ICU) NT Deaths: 0 Cases: 1004 In hospital: 148 (with 6 people in ICU) Queensland Deaths: 13 Cases: 6,857 In hospital: 732 (with 50 people in ICU) South Australia Deaths: 3 Cases: 1,363 In hospital: 228 (with 15 people in ICU) Tasmania Deaths: 0 Cases: 570 In hospital: 13 (with two people in ICU) Victoria Deaths: 36 Cases: 11,240 In hospital: 707 (with 79 people in ICU) Western Australia Deaths: 0 Cases: 18 locally acquired, 14 travel-related OK, looks like we will be getting a Covid update from the Victorian health minister in about 20 minutes. Wozzahs, this drone footage of flood-damaged roads in SA is worth a watch. It’s Weekly Beast time, party people! Get around it! Queensland’s chief health officer, Dr John Gerrard, has given details on the state’s 13 Covid deaths. Sadly we have 13 deaths to report today. One person in their 60s, three in that 70s, five in their 80s and four in their 90s. Two of these people were not vaccinated. Eight had received two doses of vaccine and only three had received a booster. Nine of these were aged care residents. Miles says the Queensland government has procured 32.5 million rapid antigen tests with more than a million coming over the weekend. It is more than a month is the prime minister declared the Australian government would not assist Australians to help get rapid antigen testing. We are still experiencing a shortage of Rats in Queensland and Australia and it is driving many of the shortages right across the economy and grocery stores, in aged care, in other settings and the Queensland government has been working hard to ensure that we have the rapid antigen tests we need for the public, for our healthcare settings and importantly for school students going back to school next week and we have on older 32.5 million rapid antigen tests. 4.6 million have already been received. There are some delays at the Sydney airport but we anticipate receiving 1.2 million over the next couple of days. That is 100 pallet loads of rapid antigen test. Queensland has recorded 13 Covid-19 deaths in the latest reporting period. Deputy premier Steven Miles says nine of these were patients in aged care. The state also recorded 8,857 new infections. Tasmania has released its daily figures and has recorded no deaths and 570 new Cvodi infections. There are still 13 people in hospital and two in the ICU. We are just standing by now to hear from the Queensland leaders with their daily Covid numbers. OK, Matilda Boseley here and I’m back from my cup of tea. Thanks so much Elias for keeping the blog safe for us all. Yesterday, we reported that Scott Morrison wrote to Anthony Albanese on 1 December proposing an amendment to the Sex Discrimination Act preventing schools discriminating against LGBT students for their sexuality or gender. We’ve now obtained the full correspondence and it reveals that – despite flagging this amendment to the Sex Discrimination Act – Morrison also sought Labor’s support to wave the religious discrimination bill through the lower house, unamended. Morrison said: Prior to the commencement of the debate I seek your agreement to ensure that these bills can be considered and passed, without further amendment, or change to the intended procedure, in a bipartisan way by the House before the end of this week. So, the government wanted Labor to pass the religious package on the promise that in future the Sex Discrimination Act would be amended, possibly through Senate amendments, or possibly in the future only after the religious bills passed both houses. Remember, the government’s biggest revolt on the religious bill is coming from its own backbench MPs in the lower house: from a quad of four demanding protections for students (Angie Bell, Fiona Martin, Katie Allen and Dave Sharma) and a trio who are still holding out over that and other concerns (Trent Zimmerman, Bridget Archer, Warren Entsch). Labor support would have been handy, but was not forthcoming. Albanese noted the joint human rights committee was due to report by 4 February and said: “The opposition believes both members and senators should be informed by the outcome of the inquiry before being asked to vote on the bills.” That’s where we are now – waiting for two inquiries to report back this afternoon. Guardian Australia understands the legal and constitutional affairs committee will call for the bill to be considered for passage, after constitutional concerns with the statements of belief and hiring and firing clauses are fixed. Labor and Liberal senator Andrew Bragg both made additional comments. The majority of Australians would support restoring funding to the ABC, according to a new poll, after new figures showed funding has been cut by $526m since the Coalition’s first budget. The poll of 1,000 voters conducted by the Australia Institute found that 52% want the $84m cut from the ABC in the last three years to be restored, more than double those who oppose it (25%). Despite being elected after promising no cuts to the ABC and SBS, the Abbott government reduced funding to the ABC in the 2014 budget, with a further pause in the indexation of funding imposed in 2018 under Malcolm Turnbull. There have been $526m in cuts to the ABC budget since 2014, with an ongoing reduction to base funding of $106m per year by 2021-22, the ABC has told Senate estimates in reply to questions on notice. In that time, the ABC has slashed 640 jobs, from 4,704 staff to 4,064. In addition to staff cuts, the ABC’s savings have come from discontinuing the 7.45am radio news bulletin, reducing spending on independent production and discontinuing ABC Life. Read more: Western Australia’s food supply crisis is “the worst in living memory” with the state’s umbilical cord to the eastern states severed, not by Covid or border closure, but by extreme weather. Flooding in South Australia has washed out more than 300km of the only rail line that brings food and supplies into WA from the east coast. With border closures already isolating WA from the nation and the world, a one in 200-year weather event is squeezing inbound supplies, leaving many supermarket shelves bare. Staples such as pasta, sugar, toilet paper, medicines, sanitary items, some meats and frozen foods are running low but fruit, vegetables and milk that are locally produced are less affected. Major supermarket chains, including Coles and Woolworths, were forced on Thursday to introduce buying limits on some products and the Independent Food Distributors Australia chief executive, Richard Forbes, said the crisis could continue for up to six weeks. Read more: I’m going to pop out and make a cup of tea, but don’t worry, the wonderful Elias Visontay will look after you while I’m gone! The New South Wales government will not seek to mandate booster shots for healthcare workers, despite calls from Victoria to change the definition of a fully vaccinated person to include a third dose. The Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation (Atagi) is currently preparing advice for national cabinet that is expected to recommend expanding the definition of full vaccination against Covid-19 to three shots. The Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, has pushed hard for the change. Essential workers in that state have already been told they must get their third dose to continue working on site, and Andrews suggested last week the requirement may be expanded to people wishing to access hospitality venues. You can read the full report below: First Nations barrister Tony McAvoy SC and former law council president Fiona Mcleod SC have been appointed to the role of senior council assisting the Yoorrook Justice Commission in Victoria. McAvoy, a Wirdi man, is currently the acting Northern Territory treaty commissioner and also acted as senior council assisting the royal commission into the protection and detention of children in the Northern Territory and was acting commissioner of the NSW land and environment court. McLeod is a former chair of the Victorian Bar Association and the Australian Bar Association and former president of the Law Council of Australia. She is also a member of the national co-design group on the national Indigenous voice to parliament. The pair will advise the five commissioners on the strategy adopted for commission hearings and lead the cross-examination of key witnesses. Yoorrook chair Prof Eleanor Bourke said: In addressing the broad scope set out in our letters patent of investigating historical and ongoing injustices experienced by First Nations people, it is vital we have a broad range of legal experience to pull from. Mr McAvoy and Ms McLeod both bring a unique set of skills which will help the commission towards achieving truth and justice in Victoria and we are happy to have them on board as notable figures in the industry. The commission’s interim report is due in June. An update on the (slightly cursed) HMAS Adelaides work in Tonga, which is finally back on track after a Covid outbreak and a serious power during their journey. Defence minister Peter Dutton says the military will be brought in if that’s what is required to alleviate pressure on the aged care sector, AAP reports. But Dutton told the Nine Network that Australians needed to face the realities of the virulent Omicron variant but there was no limit on what the government was willing to spend to improve the situation. You can’t argue on the one hand that people feel isolated and you want to allow loved ones in, which is the natural reaction, but then say, ‘We’re surprised when Omicron is introduced into aged-care facilities’. It’s a witches’ brew. We need to face the realities of Omicron, the way in which it targets older people and the way in which we want older people in aged care facilities to see their loved ones and grandkids. But Wayne Swan says the federal government’s handling of Covid-19 outbreaks in aged care facilities amounts to “lethal incompetence”. The national Labor president and former treasurer backed calls for the aged care services minister, Richard Colbeck, to be sacked and for the government to better protect the vulnerable residents. This just churns the stomach because there is lethal incompetence here. We need an acknowledgement from the government that this crisis exists and real action will be taken. The government has announced a new task force will look into aged care deaths – more than 560 Covid-19 deaths since the start of the Omicron wave – to gather more details. Deputy Labor leader Richard Marles said there was an enormous amount of distress and anger from Australians over how their loved ones in residential facilities are being treated. We’ve got a situation now where one in four shifts aren’t being filled by those working in aged care because they’re not in a position to do that. I just find that so distressing. Does that mean people are left in their rooms? Does that mean people are not being bathed? Marles said it was “heartbreaking” and the government wasn’t focusing on what needed to be done. The one thing that you hope is that when you’ve got a loved one in aged care, they’re being looked after in their most vulnerable moment and what we’re seeing here is that that’s just not happening. Back to those Canberra protests for a moment: Protesters in Canberra are now slowly filing out of their unauthorised camp site as police gradually move their line through the area. Some holdout stragglers are still standing firm and staring down police, but most are packing up and driving out – destination unknown. From talking to a few protesters, there seems to be a fair bit of confusion in the campers and on their online groups after the camp got rumbled. Some are talking about new rally in Canberra today; some are looking for a new campsite (with police on loudspeakers recommending people try one of the city’s “family-friendly” legal campsites), while some plan to cruise the city all day blasting their horns in their vehicles. Others are talking optimistically about further protests on Saturday, with further “convoy” demonstrators expected to arrive today and tomorrow. The assistant attorney general, Amanda Stoker, has muddied the waters about whether LGBTQ+ students will be protected at the same time as the religious discrimination bill potentially passes federal parliament. Despite the prime minister, Scott Morrison, suggesting on Thursday amendments to protect LGBTQ+ students would be contained in the same set of bills, Stoker said on Friday the Sex Discrimination Act “shouldn’t be changed unless we know the final form of the religious discrimination bill”. Stoker’s intervention comes ahead of the release of two inquiry reports. Stakeholders think Labor will join the Coalition in joint reports for both, calling for the religious discrimination bills to be considered for passage through parliament, although Labor will also express concerns about hiring and firing powers and the contentious statements of belief clause. You can read the full report below: Experts have developed a Covid-19 vaccine status document for Australians going overseas, after a domestic version was slammed for being so flawed it could be forged within minutes, Marion Rae, from AAP reports. Verizon Business Australia said on Friday it worked with the Australian Passport Office in the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade to develop the International Covid-19 Vaccination Certificate. More than 1.3 million certificates have been downloaded in the first month as people look forward to travelling. The international certificate features a QR (Quick Response) code, which is generated from vaccination information in the Australian Immunisation Register and the traveller’s passport details. The digital signature provided by the QR code is a strong defence against fraud. Each individual QR code is digitally signed to help protect against tampering and can be validated by most immigration authorities as well as at airline check-ins, Verizon said. The new international certificate can capture your vaccine status, but it’s up to the individual traveller to meet the requirements of what “fully vaccinated” means at your destination. National vaccination certificates can be found through Medicare Online via myGov, the Medicare Express Plus app or your My Health Record. Tech expert Richard Nelson found a weakness last year in the Express Plus Medicare application’s national Covid-19 digital certificate. But Services Australia insisted the certificate was robust enough. Along with forgery by anti-vaxxers wanting fake credentials, identity theft remains a concern with cyber criminals here and abroad seeking access to your bank accounts. Remember, no one legitimate will ask for your sign-in details, or watch you sign in, Scamwatch says. “They were all saying she was coming home,” Bec Rees says. Her mother, Sue, had gone into hospital in Melbourne with a burst ear drum. She also had cancer. Then she got Covid. She didn’t come home. Sue Rees was 74, and when she died on 8 January she became one of more than 1,500 deaths reported in Australia in this latest surge of the global pandemic. As Australia’s death toll grows, we know very little about who has died. Daily press conferences reveal the rising number, often accompanied by the disclaimer that those who died had “underlying conditions”. You can read the rest of Tory Shepherd’s beautiful story about Sue Rees below: ACT police have moved in on a makeshift camp illegally set up by anti-vaccine protesters in Canberra, demanding demonstrators move on from their spot outside the National Library. Hundreds of protesters had parked cars and camper vans, or set up tents and swags, on the banks of Lake Burley Griffin on Monday, ahead of a week-long series of rallies against vaccine mandates and Covid rules. Other protesters had a grab-bag of other grievances, from calling for the resignation of politicians, or supporting the dangerous QAnon conspiracy theory and falsely claiming certain public officials were paedophiles. The camp had set up portable toilets, communal cooking and eating facilities, and entertainment areas to play music and games. Following an attempt to move campers on Wednesday, police had flagged further action on Friday morning. Around 7am, a large number of police – including some in riot gear – began broadcasting orders to leave on loudspeakers. At 8.30am, police began gradually advancing and dismantling structures like tents and shades. Protesters with their own loudspeakers refused to leave, encouraging their supporters to “hold your ground”. But others began packing their sites and leaving in their vehicles. The majority of protesters made no attempts to leave, playing The Last Post and I Am Australian on their own PA systems. “Protest peacefully. Do not give the police any reason to turn on us. We are not criminals,” one protester told supporters on a loudspeaker. “Park the vehicles up somewhere else and get back here.” Albanese seems to be happy with his interview on ABC news breakfast this morning as his media team have been busy clipping it out. Here he is chatting about aged care if you wanted to see and hear his quotes to get the full picture. In terms of hospitalisations, NSW now has 2,494 Covid positive people in hospital – that’s down 84 from yesterday – and 160 are in the ICU, the same number as yesterday. Victoria’s hospitalisation number is down 45, with a total of 707 Covid positive people in wards. Seventy-nine of those are in the ICU, three less than yesterday. Victoria has recorded more deaths and more cases than NSW today. Sadly 36 Covid-19 positive people in the state have died in the latest reporting period and another 11,240 infections were detected. You’ll recall that earlier this week we received the annual dump of donations data from the Australian Electoral Commission. It told us, among other things, that Anthony Pratt’s Pratt Holdings was the biggest political donor in the last year, tipping $1.3m into Liberal party coffers ahead of the 2022 election. But there’s a lot the AEC’s data doesn’t tell us. New analysis from the Centre for Public Integrity estimates that $68m in party income came from an unknown source in 2020-21. That’s almost 40% of total party income. Experts call this “dark money”. It’s party income that we know about, due to the party’s reporting obligations, but cannot explain. The analysis suggests that, since 1999, the Coalition has received $757.8m in dark money, while Labor has received $433.9m. Centre for Public Integrity director Geoffrey Watson said: This secrecy needs to stop. The last election set records for money raised and money hidden. Reform is needed now so that the funding of the coming election is transparent. Voters deserve to know who is funding our political parties now, not nine months after they vote. The commonwealth has the weakest donation laws in the country. Most states have a disclosure threshold of $1,000. The commonwealth’s disclosure threshold of $14,500 is out of line and leads to the transparency void into which almost $1.4bn has fallen since 1999. OK, here are the numbers. Thirty-one more Covid-19 positive people have died in NSW and the state recorded another 10,698 new cases. Hmm, no Covid number released from NSW or Victoria yet. Stand by. Guardian reporter Josh Butler is down at the ACT National Libary where police are now attempting to move along a crowd of anti-vaccination protesters. He will be bringing us all the updates here on the blog. The principal of a Brisbane school that demanded families sign anti-gay and anti-trans enrolment contracts previously lobbied senators to allow employers “the right to discriminate” against homosexuals. Citipointe Christian College principal Brian Mulheran, a Pentecostal pastor who has led the school for four years, does not hold teaching qualifications or registration, Guardian Australia can reveal. While such qualifications are not required by principals in independent schools, a group of furious parents is now calling for Mulheran to be sacked over his attempt to introduce the contracts. Mulheran released a statement on Thursday saying the school would withdraw demands that parents sign enrolment contracts that called homosexual acts “immoral” and “offensive to God”, and implied transgender students would not be recognised at the college. You can read the full report below: It’s now 8.30am (AEDT), which means ACT police have moved in on the anti-vax protesters lingering outside the national library. I’ll bring you some more updates from that situation as soon as possible. Just going back to assistant attorney general Amanda Stokers’ comments about transgender children for the moment. I think it’s worth revisiting this piece written by my colleague Josh Taylor analysing why medical treatment for transgender children, despite being cautious and evidence-based, has become a target in a rightwing culture war over gender. Host Michael Rowland: Before we go. Peter Dutton on 7.30 last night took a shot at you. He said that you’ve been in politics for a long time, you’ve been deputy prime minister, but he said you’ve never held a national security or economic portfolio and he argues you are ill-equipped to be prime minister. What do you say to that? Opposition leader Anthony Albanese: (Chuckles) Doesn’t that say it all about Peter Dutton and this government? He doesn’t think that minister for infrastructure for six years is an economic portfolio. Infrastructure drives the economy and drives productivity. It’s the key, one of the keys to driving productivity. Look, I have been in politics for a while. I’ve been the deputy prime minister. I’ve been leader of the government in the House of Representatives for six years. I chaired the parliamentary business committee. Every single piece of legislation that was debated in the parliament during the Rudd and Gillard years, I was responsible for putting through the House of Representatives. And I’ve been acting prime minister on two occasions. Peter Dutton, of course, wanted to lead the Liberal party. I understand his disappointment. I understand he’s out there undermining the prime minister at the moment. And we see the chaos that’s there. It will be an interesting couple of weeks. I’ll say that, Michael, when everyone gathers in parliament. There’ll be the little discussions in the corner. It’s all there, the disunity, for all to see, not just in the New South Wales branch, but in the caucus as well. Albanese also called for the federal minister who sent the “psycho” texts to just come forward already. (He would love that, wouldn’t he!) Well, it’s time for someone just to come forward and fess up as to who sent that text message. We know that one-half of the exchanges was Gladys Berejiklian. And, for me, it wasn’t the personal abuse that is there and the character assessments. The most damning indictment of the prime minister was the premier of New South Wales at the time who was doing a job each and every day on the bushfire crisis, saying that the prime minister was more concerned about politics than he was about people at that time. Now, we have heard from the government so it’s time we check in with the leader of the opposition, Anthony Albanese, who is still fuming about Morrison’s handling of the Covid aged care crisis. (In case you missed it he yesterday called for the resignation of the aged care services minister, Richard Colbeck.) Albanese has stated that he would support a wage increase for aged care workers but on ABC News Breakfast this morning he was asked to provide a figure that he feels would be reasonable. I’ve been asked this and I give the same answer I gave yesterday. The government should put in a submission supporting a wage increase. That’s what we did when we were in government for social and community service workers. And that led to a substantial pay increase, which has led to retention in that workforce. If we don’t deal with the issue of wages, then we won’t be able to retain a workforce in the aged care sector. The other thing we need, of course, is we need more workers and more carers, but we need a nurse in every nursing home, 24/7. We used to call them nursing homes for a reason – because nurses were there. It’s extraordinary that we have these aged care facilities that can go for considerable periods of time without having a nurse right there when they’re needed. Host Michael Rowland: But not putting a figure on a proposed wage increase – isn’t the prime minister right when he says nobody knows how much it will cost the government, and therefore taxpayers? Albanese: No, the prime minister is not right. The prime minister is wrong. The prime minister is wrong by not supporting a nurse being in every nursing home. The prime minister is wrong by not saying to the Fair Work Commission that he supports a wage increase for the aged care workforce. The prime minister is wrong by not having 80,000 aged care residents get their booster shots. The prime minister is wrong by not ensuring that every aged care worker and every aged care resident who needs one can get access to a rapid antigen test. This is a crisis in the sector and this minister has failed before and he continues to fail. What do you have to do to lose your job under this Government? If Richard Colbeck had any integrity, he would resign, but if the prime minister had any leadership, and wanted to actually show some instead of always going missing and always blaming someone else, he would sack this minister and put someone in charge who wants to do the job. Novak Djokovic has described his detention and deportation from Australia that prevented him from defending his Australian Open title as an “unfortunate event” – and thanked the Serbian president for his support, reports AAP. The 11-day saga over Djokovic’s entry visa ended with the Serb being deported for failing to meet Australia’s strict Covid-19 vaccination requirements. The top-ranked tennis star met with Serbian president Aleksandar Vucic on Thursday and described the events in Australia as “unexpected to say the least”. I wanted to meet with you today because, primarily as a citizen of Serbia, I felt a great need to thank you for the great support that you, as the president of Serbia, gave me, as well as all state institutions during the unfortunate events in Australia. Although I was alone in detention, and faced with many problems and challenges, I wasn’t feeling lonely. I had huge support primarily from my family, all of the close people in my life, entire Serbian nation, many people with good intentions from the region and the world. Djokovic did not speak about details of the events in Australia but promised to give his “version” later. The tennis player’s meeting with the increasingly autocratic Vucic drew criticism from some of his fans in the Balkan country where he is generally considered an icon and a hero. The critics say Vucic used the event to boost his popularity ahead of general elections scheduled for April. The meeting happened a day after Serbia’s state prosecutors rejected suggestions voiced by some western media that Djokovic used a fake positive test for Covid to try and enter Australia. ACT police have given a group of anti-vaccination protesters located near the national library until 8.30 am to leave. It seems they are preparing to mount an operation to clear them out if they refuse to move on. Oh wow. Stoker is now arguing that gender-affirming surgeries for transgender people don’t necessarily have the health benefits that people claim. ABC radio host Patricia Karvelas: A major study of the health of transgender people in Australia last year found 43% of those surveyed had attempted suicide. That’s a staggering and shocking figure, minister. The researchers said that only the only way to change this is to reduce discrimination to provide more mental health support. Do you accept that allowing discrimination on the basis of gender is a key factor behind those rates of self-harm? Stoker: I think that there are a lot of studies that have shocking figures in relation to people who are transgender. I share the concern for the well being of people in that situation. There’s also other information of that kind that says things like, you know, many of the medical procedures that we provide to try and help transgender people feel much more mentally healthy aren’t actually providing the improvements in health and well being that are so desirable. Karvelas: But a school that asks, for instance, for gender conforming, right? If you’re a trans kid that has an incredibly negative impact on your mental health. Do you agree with them? Stoker: I agree that if a trans kid is facing a whole lot of social and personal challenges and they need support. I also think that there are lots of different styles of school in our community and there are lots of schools that will support and encourage and give that child what they need. The real question is, do you really want to, you know, as a parent, send to a trans kid to a school that has really very traditional and disclosed upfront beliefs on this subject*. It’s matter for parental choice, and it’s about parents doing the right thing by their kids. And it is important that we maintain a whole range of different options in our education system, so that the different needs of all those families can be there. I feel obliged to point out that there are vast swathes of medical research and studies that show there are significant health benefits of these procedures. For example, the 2o15 US transgender survey showed “a 42% reduction in psychological distress and a 44% reduction in suicidal ideation when compared with transgender and gender-diverse people who had not had gender-affirming surgery but wanted it”. *Also just noting, it is incredibly common for children to come out as trans after already entering high school, so parents may not know this while making schooling decisions at age 11 or 12. Stoker: It’s very important we don’t inadvertently take more tools out of the box that is available to schools to be able to manage their affairs in accordance with their beliefs and to maintain standards of behaviour within their community that reflect what the parents of that environment want to see. It’s if you just take out section 38 Carte Blanche without having regard to all the other things that provision does, you could have a bunch of unintended consequences and we don’t want to see. Stoker says that the government intends to protect LGBT+ students from discrimination at religious schools, but says religious communities should be able to exercise their beliefs “even if it might offend some others in our community”. Quite frankly, it’s not my decision alone. It’s a team effort. And we’re working through the ways that we can make [those protections] happen. We are trying to make it happen and I expect will make that happen, but I’m not going to I’m not going to sign it in blood for you, Patricia. But the important thing here is that while we want to make sure we’re doing the right thing by these kids, we also acknowledge the fact that religious schools are the education choice for 1000s of Australian families. They have a right to exercise their genuinely held religious beliefs even if it might offend some others in our community. And the reason they are prepared to put the kids in environments like religious schools, whether they be Christian, Muslim, Jewish, any range and others is because the tenants of that faith have value important to that family or they will the school culture that comes from it. I wouldn’t want to... stop that the ability to do that. Yesterday Brisbane’s Citipointe Christian school announced that it would withdraw its demand that families sign anti-gay and anti-trans enrolment contracts before the new school year. Scott Morrison promised on Brisbane radio station B105.3 that his religious discrimination bill, designed to shield religious people from discrimination claims, will be accompanied by changes to stop schools discriminating against same-sex attracted and gender-diverse students. I’ve been saying that for years, that’s always been my view,. But the attorney general, Michaelia Cash, last year told Christian lobbyists the government supported exemptions in the Sex Discrimination Act that let religious schools discriminate based on sexuality and gender identity. So what’s the go? Well, the assistant attorney general, Amanda Stoker, is chatting to ABC RN now trying to clear the air. And, well, she isn’t really making anything less confusing. Host Patricia Karvelas: Can you clarify the prime minister’s comments yesterday? Will the government introduce changes to the Sex Discrimination Act next week to repeal the section [section 38] allowing religious schools to discriminate against LGBTQ students? Stoker: There is certainly a group of people in our community who are pushing for that and I can understand the enthusiasm for seeing that done quickly. But, I would suggest the original plan to make sure that we legislate the religious discrimination act first, and then change section 38 of the Sex Discrimination Act, which is the provision that was inserted by Mark Dreyfus under Labor to empower the kinds of behaviours we’re trying to correct here. That provision shouldn’t be changed unless we know the final form of the religious discrimination bill. So it’s important that is integrated well, because if you change one, without knowing the final form of the religious discrimination act that emerges from the Senate, you could actually end up creating problems rather than solutions. Ummm... OK? When Gwen Kong lost her job in sales and account management in February 2020, she became one of the many women thrust into economic insecurity by the pandemic. During the following 12 months and amid several lockdowns, she left a long-term relationship, moved in with a family member, and picked up some contract work but missed out on many opportunities, some because she was “too qualified”. “It got to the stage where I took my CV to the supermarket and they just turned around and said, ‘What are we going to do with you?’” Kong said. By the time Victoria was on to its fifth lockdown, her confidence had taken a hit. You can read the full report below: Good morning everyone, it’s Matilda Boseley here and let’s kick off this lovely Friday with the deputy prime minister, Barnaby Joyce, having to go on TV and tell us that Scott Morrison is “not a psycho and not a fraud”. So safe to say it’s been a rocky start to the morning for the government. In case you missed it, Ten news recently reported that a current serving cabinet minister texted the then New South Wales premier, Gladys Berejiklian, during the black summer bushfires saying that the prime minister was a “complete psycho”, and a bizarre game of Guess Who has ensued. Joyce claimed that the content of the text messages wasn’t the problem, it was the fact that it was (in his opinion) intentionally leaked in order to cause harm to the government. Well, I think the most important thing is with the text messages, is the fact that people write texts, God knows have been enough text messages written about Malcolm Turnbull whilst he was prime minister, but the fact that someone releases them, that is the issue. The fact that someone uses them to damage the government. That is the issue. Because that’s done with malice. It is done with vengeance and it is done with the purpose of creating hurt and that’s really a question for the person who released them and their motivations and the context in which they decided to release the text messages. He is not a psycho and not a fraud. Joyce once again called for the mystery texter to come forwards and reveal themselves. It is up to the person [to stand up] if they’ve – all you can do is say ‘a person who does something anonymously, who leaks something anonymously, who doesn’t stand behind it, is doing it for the purpose of malice and a personal grudge’. It is always not so much what is said – excuse me while I put my earpiece back in. It is always not so much what is said, it is the motivation of the person who did it. The Australian people aren’t stupid. They’ll say ‘Yeah, I could show you texts between brothers and sisters’ but we never expect you to show them to mum or dad. And with that interesting start to the morning, why don’t we jump right into the day?Justin Langer’s fate remains unknown after the Cricket Australia board met on Friday but were unable to end six months of speculation about his future in the head coach role. After a marathon seven-hour meeting in Melbourne, the board failed to reach a resolution on the main item on the agenda. “Cricket Australia can confirm that the CA board met today and part of that meeting involved significant discussions about the men’s head coach Justin Langer’s contract,” a statement on Friday evening read. “We will now enter confidential discussions with Justin and the outcome will be announced as soon as possible.” Langer’s contract was due to expire in June, and it was always Cricket Australia’s intention to address his future once last year’s T20 World Cup and the recent Ashes series had been completed. Both trophies were banked, but despite his on-field success, Langer’s old-school, direct style of man-management has been under scrutiny since a meeting between senior players and CA CEO Nick Hockley last August. During Langer’s time as coach since May, 2018, Australia have won 15 of 27 Tests, including retaining the Ashes in England for the first time in 18 years. In all, he has been the second most successful coach in the country’s history, behind only John Buchanan with wins in 55.5% of Tests. It was after last summer’s second home defeat to India in three years that the pressure first began to mount on Langer. White-ball series losses in West Indies and Bangladesh only added to that, before the situation seemingly reached boiling point last August amid claims he was too intense. It prompted high-powered meetings between senior players and cricket administrators, with Langers agreeing to loosen his grip on the team. Australia went on to claim their maiden T20 World Cup title in what players claimed was an enjoyable team environment. The recent 4-0 Ashes domination that followed gave Langer hope of retaining his position, before separate meetings between players, administrators and the coach last week. Friday was expected to be D-Day for the coach, however Hockley’s statement now gives them three weeks to sort the issue before the Australian team leaves for the tour of Pakistan, which was rubber-stamped on Friday. It will be the first time Australia’s men have travelled to Pakistan since 1998. Hockley said: “I would like to thank the PCB and both the Pakistan and Australian governments for ensuring the tour will proceed for the first time in 24 years. This is a historic occasion and important for the global growth and health of the game. The first of three Tests begins on 4 March, with three ODIs and a one-off T20 to be played over the course of a month in Pakistan.Maya Shenfeld trained as a guitarist, learning classical guitar at university in her native Jerusalem and later playing electric guitar in assorted art projects in Berlin. You can see her online, playing her instrument through a laptop and a host of effects pedals; improvising over tape loops; or leading an ensemble of 11 guitarists to rework Julius Eastman’s minimalist classic Gay Guerrilla until it sounds like a Sonic Youth track. But Shenfeld’s debut album doesn’t feature any guitar. Instead it explores texture and grain using analogue synths, brass and human voices. A lot of music rooted in drone-based minimalism can be quite harmonically tedious, but Shenfeld’s compositions go places. Sadder Than Water, the longest track here, sounds like a Bach fugue being played in slow motion by Wendy Carlos; Body, Electric is a series of descending, constantly modulating synth arpeggios over a warm blanket of drones; Voyager sounds like one of the more compelling instrumentals from David Bowie’s Low. Shenfeld also creates space-age soundscapes using acoustic sources: the opening and closing tracks create sepulchral tones by exaggerating the natural resonances of brass instruments; while Mountain Larkspur sees her getting a youth choir to sing in ghostly, microtonal harmonies. In Free Fall was apparently inspired by the German-Japanese artist Hito Steyerl, whose essay of the same name discusses the disappearance of the horizon and the dismantling of linear perspective. But, in finding ways of representing disorientation, Shenfeld often invokes the numinous and the transcendent. She has written about the rivalry in Israel between Jerusalem and Tel Aviv – the tragic, ancient holy city versus the groovy beachside party town – and how she identifies strongly with the former. Weirdly, that austere spirit of Jerusalem haunts the entire album – this is music that uses 21st-century technology to conjure up images of liturgical chants and ancient temples. Also out this month Two New York jazz musicians, bassist Mat Muntz and drummer Vicente Hansen Atria, have collaborated as the Vex Collection (18 February, Carrier Records) to explore assorted double reed instruments, from Croatian and Highland bagpipes to instruments that they’ve invented and created using a 3D printer. The result is a series of ecstatic punky improvisations filled with a wild, distorted energy. On Temporality of the Impossible (11 February, Huddersfield Contemporary Records) Serbian-born, Brussels-based violinist Dejana Sekulić plays seven pieces by likeminded composers, a series of angular, mutilated violin solos in slow motion, sometimes accompanied by her whispering, sighing and screeching vocals.If you are a parent of young children who browses parenting websites, you will at some point have been pitched to about talent. You may be invited, via targeted advertising, to enrol your child in a Future School Global Maths Skill Assessment – “to see how they compare to peers globally”. You may be urged to consider the possibility – nay, probability – that they are “gifted” in some way, if not in maths, then in music or art. It’s window-dressing for lame subscription services, but the other day, assailed by this stuff, a line caught my eye that I haven’t been able to forget. “Talent isn’t everything,” read the copy. “The important thing is to teach your child to be kind.” This positioning of “kindness” as oppositional to “talent” – and the impossibility, by implication, of a predisposition towards kindness itself being regarded as “talent” – is rife once you start looking for it. Kindness is, everywhere: the consolation prize, the donkey in the nativity play, the award for perfect attendance. The metric for gifted is limited in childhood to measurable and therefore narrow results; a child might learn to read early, but disciplines requiring maturity for their impact are sealed off as forms of prodigiousness. There are no seven-year-old fiction writing prodigies. There are no prodigies in kindness, either. A few years ago, none of this would have struck me as noteworthy. It is true that, along with a lot of other “soft” values, kindness is something one comes to appreciate more with age and exhaustion. The phrase “give me a break”, once muttered by rote and gutted of meaning, is now one I use extremely literally. Parenting changes one’s parameters, too. In line with common assumptions, I believed a predisposition towards kindness wasn’t innate, but instead something entirely reliant on cultivation. These days I wonder about that, and about our determination to see it that way. Of my two children, one can be urged, pressured, bribed or cajoled into sharing and being less grabby – behaviour, in other words, which falls squarely within the normal range. The other child, more often than not, considers and accommodates the feelings of others, naturally and without being asked. Like a tiny 40-year-old, she uses phrases like “I’m happy for her” and “No, you go ahead.” It’s weirdly mature and occasionally eerie. Which brings us to the problem of kindness; not only the fact that, in plenty of settings, it can be a code for weakness or neediness, but the fact that the word itself has been emptied out through misuse. Online, “be kind” is an order commonly used by men towards women with whom they disagree. And, like similar entreaties – “smile!” – has a silent “bitch” at the end of the phrase. Kindness in this context means giving in to another’s demands, a form of female pliancy rooted in renouncing one’s needs. Real kindness is not this. Kindness, I try to tell my children, is strength. My child with the kind disposition is frequently baffled and let down by the hostility of others, at which point I have to bite my tongue. “Jessica was a dick to you because she has vast inadequacies; and honestly, have you seen the state of her parents?” is not ammunition I’m going to give to my seven-year-old. On the other hand, it seems fair to provide her with a rudimentary knowledge of how projection and insecurity work. Frequently, these lessons go against the grain of how our culture measures success, and it’s a hard line to navigate; you can be competitive and resolute, and not a “pushover” or a “weakling”, but still factor in how other people feel. Can you teach someone to be kind? Of course, but also only sort of, not entirely. You can condition them with reason and rewards in the same way you can send them to piano every week and eventually they’ll learn to play Twinkle Twinkle. The fact remains that some people are kinder than others not as a result of external forces but from some preloaded ability we’re resistant to valorising. There are branches of therapy that frame acts of kindness as a form of self-care – much more in line with our what’s-in-it-for-me values – and the ancient Greek storyteller Aesop said, “No act of kindness, no matter how small, is ever wasted.” Two thousand years later, it remains a hard sell. Emma Brockes is a Guardian columnistWhen Peh Reh’s* mother, Mi Nya*, lost contact with him in September, she had little doubt as to where he had gone. Four months earlier, the 19-year-old had told her he wanted to join the armed resistance against the military, which had seized power from the democratically-elected government in Myanmar in February 2021. Yet she refused to let him leave their home in Myanmar’s south-eastern Karenni state (also known as Kayah). “In my eyes, he is still so young,” she says. “If I could, I would like to keep my son next to me all the time.” Intense fighting between armed revolutionary groups and the military had been escalating in Karenni state since May, three months after the coup. Like thousands of other families, Peh Reh and his family left their homes and sought shelter in the forest. There, he and his father waited for lulls in the fighting to return to tend to their farm, while his mother went deeper into the forest with the three younger children. The family tried to return home but were forced to flee a second time as the fighting escalated around their village. A few days later, Peh Reh disappeared. The next time his mother heard from him he was in a training camp for an armed revolutionary group. This time, Mi Nya decided not to stand in his way. “I told [my son] to pray and be careful at all times. I also pray for him every day” she says. Peh Reh is one of a rising number of young men and women across Myanmar leaving their families to take up arms as the country is plunged into violence, poverty and mass displacement, with more than 1,400 civilians killed in military crackdowns on the pro-democracy movement since February 2021. As the people of Myanmar endure internet blackouts, arbitrary arrests, a ruthless curtailing of freedom of speech, and escalating military attacks on civilian areas, many of the country’s youth have decided armed resistance is their only option. *** On the other side of the country in Kalay, a small city in Sagaing region near Myanmar’s north-western border with India, 21-year-old Zaw Htet* took part in the street demonstrations that erupted after the coup, while his mother went on strike from her public-sector job as part of a broader civil disobedience movement. Soon after, the military began using deadly force on protesters around the country, including in Kalay. By 28 March, protesters in the city had begun defending themselves with guns, barricading themselves behind sandbags and firing homemade weapons back at soldiers and police who attacked them with snipers, machine guns and rocket-propelled grenades. By the time the military destroyed the protest camp, at least 18 civilians were dead. As Zaw Htet endured this terrifying experience, his mother, Aye Mya*, was punished for joining the civil disobedience movement. The military evicted her and her family from government housing in June, and she has since been selling street food to survive. These experiences intensified both Zaw Htet’s and his mother’s hatred of the military, and when he told her he wanted to join the armed struggle, she supported him. She has only seen him once since he left in July. His absence has left her anxious about how her son is enduring the harsh conditions of life in the forest. “Now that he is a revolutionary fighter, he might be sleeping on the ground,” she says. “I worry about whether he has warm clothes or not. Whenever it rains, I worry he may be soaked.” She also follows the news with dread as clashes escalate in Kalay township, and young people are arrested and killed daily. Yet, despite this, she says she is optimistic that the young generation can succeed where, three decades ago, her generation could not. In 1988, she was active in the student-led pro-democracy protests, when the country also erupted in turmoil as the former regime arrested thousands and opened fire on crowds. Although Aye Mya initially joined those protests, she stopped when the firing started. Now, she says she is no longer afraid. “This time, the revolution is very different than in 1988. Young people today have greater knowledge of politics. They are determined and braver than us,” she says. Some mothers have joined the revolution themselves, including Shwe Yun Eain*, a 23-year-old farmer from Sagaing region’s Myaung township. In October she left her three-year-old daughter with her mother and went off to fight. “My mother told me, ‘My daughter, do not worry for your daughter. I will take good care of her. Just focus on the revolution,’” she says. “I cannot sit still while the whole nation is fighting against military dictatorship.” She has spent the past three months training with the country’s first all-female armed resistance group, the Myaung Women Warriors. Not wanting to endanger her mother or daughter by making contact, she has only seen them once since she left home. The Myaung Women Warriors’motto is “the hand that swings a baby’s hammock can also be part of the armed revolution,” and Shwe Yun Eain says that despite the hardships she faces, she remains committed to her decision. “As a mother, I have had many ups and downs since I joined the armed revolution,” she says. “I continue fighting to root out this evil system for my daughter’s future and the next generation.” * Names have been changed to protect identities. Nu Nu Lusan is a freelance journalist from Kachin state based in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. She focuses on human rights and social justice issues in Myanmar and especially covers issues around ethnic minorities, rural areas and women. Emily Fishbein is a freelance journalist writing on human rights and social justice in MyanmarThe prosecution: Harry Regina sets between six and seven alarms each morning and ‘snoozes’ each one I’m fundamentally opposed to the snooze button but my girlfriend, Regina, loves it. I don’t snooze because it’s not enjoyable. You’re left thinking about the alarm going off again; you’re neither fully asleep nor awake. Why not just set it and get up when it goes off? Regina sets between six and seven alarms each morning and “snoozes” each one. She likes a gradual way of getting up whereas I prefer to do it immediately. I’m awake on the first alarm. I stay over at Regina’s four times a week and I have to adapt. I lie there in bed, waiting. Sometimes I reach over her to turn off an alarm, which is a lot of effort. I often feel as though I’m simply an extension of her alarm clock. The snooze button impacts our morning routine. There have been a few times when alarms have been ringing hours later, while she’s showering or downstairs. It can be crazy. It also means I never know when to make my coffee. I like to make our coffees at the same time, but I can never tell when Regina will actually wake up. Sometimes I will have to wait anywhere between 15 and 45 minutes before I get my coffee. On her phone, Regina has every alarm she’s ever set, as she never deletes them. I find that wild. The ringtone is also the default iPhone one, a loud clanging noise which is really aggressive. Regina claims to be a morning person but she’s not. A morning person is someone who doesn’t need multiple alarms and gets up straight away, ready to embrace the day. That’s me. There’s also the issue of how she makes me feel if I’m getting up earlier than her: I’m accused of being functional, efficient and boring, when really I’m just organised. If Regina was able to get up when the first alarm went off, we could use the spare time to have a coffee and chat instead of snoozing until the last second before she has to rush to join an online meeting. If we want an extra half an hour in bed, we should set the alarm for later and get up then. In my book, those are the only two options. The defence: Regina Harry needs to relax and embrace the snooze time. I enjoy it and it means I won’t be late for things I am a morning person. I like the start of the day. I like to get up and be productive. It’s just that the period before 8am is really difficult for me. When Harry suggests setting the alarm half an hour later and getting up then, he’s missing the point. I don’t want to maximise the amount of time I sleep. For me the period of snoozing is enjoyable in itself. I like to snooze for around half an hour. I like to wake up gently and process what I’m going to do that day. I’m semiconscious. It’s a nice experience. I set seven alarms every day and will snooze all of them, but it’s a necessary process for me to get up. I’ve had a few close misses with things in the past – that’s why I love setting multiple alarms. Recently I woke up 15 minutes before a hospital appointment and it had been scheduled for months. Snoozing is great as it buys me extra time, but if you don’t set enough alarms, then sleeping can be dangerous. Harry says he doesn’t recognise the nice things about snoozing but I have sometimes seen him fall back asleep at the weekends. He is very strategic and organised, so he doesn’t get my point that it’s nice to ease yourself into the day. Sometimes when we wake up, Harry will say “I’m awake now” in a very instructive tone when I’m snoozing, implying that I have to wake up with him. But if it’s not my time I won’t get up. I set fewer alarms when Harry stays over, so he’s probably right when he says he is my alarm clock; I do rely on him a bit more. I’m organised, but probably not as much as Harry. He’s never late for things whereas I usually always am. I can try and set fewer alarms when Harry is with me, but I don’t trust myself to rely on just one or two when he’s not there. Harry needs to relax and embrace the snooze time and make good use of it. He’s not missing out on the day because the alarm goes off and we snooze through it before we need to get up – that’s the whole point. The jury of Guardian readers Should Regina ditch her multiple alarms? I’m on Team Regina, though I enjoy the image of Harry’s rage growing with each clang of the alarm. Harry seems fixated on Regina’s habits and implies that she is lacking in organisation skills. He could ask her to find a less intrusive alarm. Even simpler – just get out of bed, Harry. Emily, 37 Regina is not guilty. Everyone’s morning routine is unique. If Harry cares for Regina, he should respect her ritual and accommodate something his girlfriend values. If Harry wants a coffee he should make one! Ewan, 55 I’m with Harry on this one – nothing induces a reaction like an alarm clock, so to hear it multiple times in one morning is enough to drive anyone up the wall. I recommend he try a judicious application of his cold feet, or a theatrical turn-over-and-steal-the-duvet manoeuvre. Harry could just get up and exit quietly to have a coffee in peace – but where’s the fun in that? Sophie, 29 Repeated alarms would annoy me too but Harry doesn’t have to be a martyr. He can get up and enjoy a leisurely coffee while Regina snoozes. But Regina should accept that a truly organised morning person wouldn’t behave like that. Linda, 60 Harry needs to be more understanding as Regina’s snoozes are part of her wake-up routine. Harry can always get out of bed on the first alarm and start the day without her. Regina could swap the clangy iPhone alarm though. James, 29 You be the judge So now you can be the judge, click on the poll below to tell us: should Regina stop relying on the snooze button? We’ll share the results on next week’s You be the judge. The poll is now closed Last week’s result We asked if Alicia ate the chocolate biscuits too quickly, before her partner, Hans, could get to them. 50% of you said no – Alicia is innocent 50% of you said yes – Alicia is guilty Have a disagreement you’d like settled? Or want to be part of our jury? Click hereFears about our digital future were not assuaged last October when Mark Zuckerberg released a video trailing the delights of “the metaverse”. The Facebook supremo’s awkward presentation style made it feel like an AI-generated missive from beyond the uncanny valley. Plus, many felt there was something pretty dystopian about an immersive new online world controlled by a corporation with a track record of misinformation spreading, data gathering and disseminating harmful body images. If we’re feeling paranoid about our metaverse future, it might also have something to do with our movies. Hollywood has rarely met a new technology it couldn’t make seem terrifying and wrong. From virtual reality (the Matrix movies, Tron), to artificial intelligence (the Terminator franchise, Ex Machina, The Mitchells vs the Machines), from social media (Catfish, Eighth Grade, Unfriended) to real-life tech titans like, er, Mark Zuckerberg (The Social Network), we’ve seen enough to put us off ever going online. All of which makes Mamoru Hosoda’s new anime, Belle, a refreshing alternative. Belle does not gloss over the harmful aspects of digital life such as online abuse, viral gossip and doxing (publicly revealing personal information). But, rather than portraying the online world as a place of cruelty and corporate overreach, it suggests it could be one of sanctuary, even salvation, especially for young people. It is a story about how virtual identities can conceal or reveal people’s hidden facets (as the title suggests, there are Beauty and the Beast parallels). Our hero is Suzu, a lonely, introverted teenager in rural Japan who lost her ability to sing after the death of mother. When she enters the huge online world of “U”, however, she becomes the exact opposite: her secret alter ego is a pink-haired pop goddess with a golden voice and millions of adoring followers. “There aren’t many directors who have shown an online world in a positive way,” says Hosoda, a bookish, mild-mannered man dressed all in black. “I think I’m a rare example, maybe the only example.” He had never heard the term “metaverse” until after Belle’s release, he says. His inspiration was watching his five-year-old daughter growing up in a world where things like smartphones and social media have always existed. “Us grownups see the internet and we think, ‘This is reality, and that’s not reality,’ but for young people it’s more: ‘This is the real world and that’s another world.’ It’s just as real and just as valuable, and how you behave in that online world is also part of reality. This is the new world they find themselves in, and it’s all about how they create that world for themselves.” The finer points of U’s tech are admittedly sci-fi. It uses “the latest body sharing technology”, which generates your avatar according to your biometric information. But as a visual representation of what a fully fledged metaverse might look like, Belle is often breathtakingly joyous and agreeably psychedelic. When we first see Suzu in her virtual persona, she is singing a pop song on the back of a huge whale encrusted with speaker cones; it is swimming through what feels like a cross between a floating city and a giant circuit board. Text comments and messages fly through the ether as she sprays virtual confetti at a colourful carnival of avatars. Farther afield in U there are gigantic spherical stadiums, ruined castles, impossibly coloured sunsets over infinite virtual plains. Mark Zuckerberg might want to take a look. Hosoda has been engaging with digital worlds for more than two decades now. He began his career with the Pokémon-like Digimon franchise, including a short film about an evil virus that consumes data and takes over the internet. It was strictly for kids, but enough to catch the attention of the mighty Studio Ghibli, which in 2001 asked him to direct Howl’s Moving Castle. However, he clashed creatively with Ghibli’s boss Hayao Miyazaki (who eventually directed the movie himself), and Hosoda went his own way. Today he is one of the most successful anime directors in Japan, thanks to hits like The Girl Who Leapt Through Time, Wolf Children, The Boy and the Beast, and Belle’s Oscar-nominated predecessor, Mirai, which premiered at Cannes in 2018. A significant precursor to Belle was Hosoda’s 2009 movie Summer Wars, which also straddles real and virtual worlds. Half the story is a kind of meet-the-parents teen romcom; the other half is set in a proto-metaverse named Oz, whose hacking threatens to destroy the planet. As with Belle’s U, Oz is a visually sumptuous virtual world: this time a clean, white, pop-art realm filled with rainbow-coloured graphics and characters, designed by celebrated artist Takashi Murakami. To design Belle’s metaverse, Hosoda recruited Eric Wong, a British architect and illustrator based in London. Hosoda saw some of Wong’s mind-bogglingly detailed fantasy cityscapes online and emailed him out of the blue, Wong explains. “It all happened over the internet, which I guess is quite fitting.” Architecturally, where Summer Wars’ metaverse was organised like a giant totem pole, Belle’s U is a vast linear city made up of geometric skyscraper-like forms. Working in the evenings between his full-time job, Wong took inspiration from existing places such as New York City and Central Park, but also from movies such as Kubrick’s 2001, he says. In its defence, Hollywood has made a few attempts to depict a virtual realm that isn’t a dystopian hellscape. Steven Lisberger’s Tron, from 1982, is still a trailblazer. With its infinite black expanses, angular geometries and neon accents, it made cyberspace look like a 1980s nightclub (the 2010 sequel, Tron: Legacy, doubled down by hiring Daft Punk as DJs). More up to date is Steven Spielberg’s Ready Player One, from 2018, whose story hinges on a virtual leisure universe named “the Oasis”. Visually it is a mishmash of real-world and gaming landscapes, which is probably closer to what big tech’s metaverses will actually look like. The key difference is that Ready Player One is set in the year 2045, when the planet is ravaged by poverty, war and environmental collapse. “These days, reality’s a bummer; everyone’s looking for a way to escape,” its hero tells us. For all their futurism, Summer Wars and Belle contrast their virtual communities with real-world ones of family and local community. Belle’s location is modelled on an existing village in Kōchi prefecture, whose landscapes and everyday minutiae it renders in loving detail. While virtual populations are booming in the modern digital economy, rural communities are dying out in real life, Hosoda notes. “This is something that’s happening in Japan, maybe in the UK as well. The new online world, the disappearing local communities: both exist side by side.” To some extent, all of Hosoda’s stories have dealt with people torn between two worlds and two identities – by magic or time travel or digital technology. Invariably, his heroes must resolve this divide, and Belle is no exception. Only by closing the gap between their online and offline identities can the story’s central characters truly move forward. By the same token, Hosoda’s films themselves seem to negotiate the boundaries between fantasy and reality. In light of our looming metaverse future, it’s a theme that becomes ever more pertinent. “I believe things created for films can influence the real world,” he says. “Sci-fi films and novels are a prediction of the future, and they play a role in expressing it. Imagination stimulates the real world.” Reality is catching up fast, though: “Ten years ago I created an online community of 1 billion people [for Summer Wars], and then Facebook went and got 2 billion-odd users. And so I needed to make the next one bigger: U has 5 billion users.” It is a matter of time before this, too, becomes out of date, he suggests. “I would like to imagine something even further beyond, and share that future with everyone.” Rather than fearing for what lies ahead in the metaverse, Hosoda is upbeat. “I see the possibility for creating something that is truly global,” he says. “In the real world, we have languages, we have history, we have these walls between nations that are very difficult to overcome. But if those weren’t there, like on the internet, then perhaps there is a possibility to build an online community where everyone can truly belong.” • Belle is released in the UK on 4 FebruaryThere was a time, maybe a decade and a half ago, when the documentary series format primarily existed as a kind of freak show. You’d tune in and watch an hour of a couple that had an unmanageable number of children, or a shut-in with a fear of buttons, or a girl who only ate hair. In retrospect, the whole thing was creepy and exploitative, and the fact that shows like these don’t exist as much any more is a sign of humanity’s ability to improve. Or at least it was, because now there’s a show called Adults Adopting Adults, and good Lord the bad old days are here again. Adults Adopting Adults is exactly what it sounds like. There are a bunch of grownups, seemingly happy with their life, who decided to adopt other grownups for a variety of reasons. And while a universe theoretically exists in which Adults Adopting Adults is a sober look at the rationale behind such a momentous decision, this is clearly not that universe. Adult adoption appears to be one of those grey areas that varies in terms of legality wherever you go. It’s illegal in the UK, for instance, but American regulations vary from state to state. Some require the birth parents to be notified, others require the adoptee to have diminished capacity. Others just let anyone go hell for leather. Anyone. Take Ohio residents Danny and Christy. They’ve made the decision to adopt a 20-year-old woman from Austria who they found on social media and have never actually met. Why? It’s hard to say, although it immediately becomes clear that one half of the marriage is much more into the idea than the other. That half is Danny, a man who had previously attempted to adopt a different woman, only for the process to go wrong because he developed romantic feelings for her. And now he’s doing it again. And also he has a history of cheating on his wife. Christy, meanwhile, is much less willing to let a stranger into her house. She resents spending money on her adopted adult daughter. She buys a trailer for her to live in. Her friends tell her that they want to kill Danny. Gradually, and publicly, Christy starts to unspool. On the basis of the first two episodes alone, Christy looks to all the world like a woman who has accidentally stumbled into a horror movie. It’s genuinely very upsetting to watch. And this is the problem. Perhaps the producers of Adults Adopting Adults fixed themselves with a sheen of compassion, convincing themselves that this would be a sensitive depiction of a little-understood process. But that very tangibly is not what it is. Large portions of Adults Adopting Adults are a middle-aged woman sobbing uncontrollably into an iPhone. If there’s a duty of care involved anywhere here at all, it disappears completely during Christy’s segments. True, not all the adoptions on the show are as out and out troubling as Danny and Christy’s. We meet two grownup children who want to adopt their long-term foster carers, which seems more of a ratification of an existing relationship than anything more sinister. Later in the series we are promised an ageing German prince who wants to adopt an adult so he has someone to pass his inheritance to. And that’s obviously not conventional. That’s a nightmarish cross between Willy Wonka and Amour. But, hey, whatever, let the man have his fun. Others, meanwhile, come close. One woman, under the despairing gaze of her long-suffering husband, decides that she wants to be adopted so that her children can have grandparents. The problem is, they already have grandparents, because her mother is still alive. They’re estranged, but not so estranged that the woman can’t drag an entire camera crew to her mother’s house to inform her that she has been replaced. The mother, for what it’s worth, responds in exactly the same way anyone else would. There is also the woman who chooses to adopt a 23-year-old woman despite the fact that the last time she attempted anything like this, her ex-husband had sex with her new adult daughter. Of this newest daughter, the woman gazes at her second husband and coos, “She’s a daddy’s girl.” I cannot tell you what happened after that, because my entire house suddenly became full of red flags and my view of the television was obstructed. You have to assume that most people who adopt adults do it simply for the paperwork, that they’re underlining a pre-existing relationship to spare legal difficulties in the event of their death. But Adults Adopting Adults is aggressively uninterested in this aspect of the process. It’s a show that willingly splashes around in the muddy waters of exploitation. As such, it isn’t something you’d want to watch a lot of. I certainly won’t, although I might skip ahead to the finale to make sure that Christy is OK.The Morrison government has signalled it will take the first steps towards implementing recommendations from the Jenkins review into parliamentary culture when parliament resumes next week, one of the final sessions before the federal election. The finance minister, Simon Birmingham, indicated last year he would aim to implement the first two recommendations of the landmark review before parliament resumed in February, and amend legislation governing the employment of political staff before the election. In an interview with Guardian Australia late last year, Birmingham said his immediate priorities were setting up a leadership taskforce to oversee the changes, and preparing a public statement acknowledging the trauma caused by bullying, sexual harassment and sexual assault in political offices ready to deliver after the summer break. The Morrison government remains under public pressure to improve the safety of parliamentary workplaces. In a statement on Friday, Birmingham said a multiparty leadership taskforce had been established to oversee the implementation of the recommendations and had met for the first time on Thursday. He said the taskforce had discussed making a statement of acknowledgment, which was the first recommendation of the Jenkins review, as well as the establishment of a parliamentary committee to report on the development of codes of conduct for commonwealth parliamentary workplaces. Birmingham also confirmed the government would introduce legislative changes recommended by the Jenkins review. The changes would confirm that the Fair Work Act 2009, the Age Discrimination Act 2004 and the Disability Discrimination Act 1992 apply to people employed under the Members of Parliament Staff Act (MOP(S) Act). The change would also confirm the Work Health and Safety Act 2011 applied to parliamentarians in their capacity as employers. Last November, Australia’s sex discrimination commissioner, Kate Jenkins, recommended a significant overhaul of federal parliament’s toxic workplace culture after handing down her report that found one in three staffers interviewed had been sexually harassed. The Jenkins inquiry was triggered after former Liberal staffer Brittany Higgins alleged she was raped after hours in a ministerial office in March 2019. Higgins’s allegations are the subject of separate criminal proceedings. Next week, Higgins will appear at the National Press Club in Canberra with former Australian of the Year and survivor advocate Grace Tame. Former parliamentary staffers have urged the Morrison government and other political parties to quickly implement the recommendations, warning failure to do so will trigger a fierce backlash from women at the ballot box. The Jenkins review made 28 recommendations, and last year’s mid-year economic and fiscal outlook (Myefo) allocated $17.8m over four years to fund their implementation. Jenkins recommended political leaders make a public statement acknowledging “the impact of the misconduct on individuals and the lack of action taken in the past” and “outline the institutional leadership commitment to change, with shared accountability for progress”. Jenkins’s second recommendation was the government establish a leadership taskforce, with oversight by the presiding officers, “chaired by an independent expert and supported by an implementation group” to ensure all the recommendations of the report were implemented. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The sex discrimination commissioner also recommended a comprehensive review of the Members of Parliament (Staff) Act, and legislative changes ensuring there were fair termination processes for employees. Chelsey Potter, a former Liberal party adviser, told Guardian Australia on Friday the government’s failure to grapple seriously with the issues last year had “set the bar so low at this stage that any minor progress feels like one giant step forward for the Morrison government”. Potter has alleged she was sexually assaulted by another colleague in Canberra while working for Birmingham in 2015. She was a key advocate ahead of the Jenkins inquiry to ensure the review maintained a workable balance between confidentiality for submitters, and the preservation of staff rights to access key records held by their former employers. On Friday, she said the government had not been very open with former staff about its intentions since the release of the Jenkins review. “I sincerely hope that, finally, we can see tangible action and progress – almost a year after Brittany first shared her story”. Jenkins on Friday welcomed the initial progress. “I welcome minister Birmingham’s announcement of a multiparty leadership taskforce to oversee the implementation of all 28 recommendations from our #SetTheStandard report”. “The multiparty support for the Set the Standard review was an important pillar, and I welcome the continued involvement of the opposition, minor parties and independents,” she said.Storyline of the year: young quarterbacks Over the past two years, the NFL’s old guard has cycled out, making way for a new generation of stars. Future hall of famers Ben Roethlisberger, Drew Brees and Tom Brady have left the building. Aaron Rodgers continues to tease that he may follow the trio out of the door. In their place is a new crop of quarterbacks. Adding to the intrigue: the talent is concentrated in one conference. Draw up any top-eight quarterback list, and the names Josh Allen, Patrick Mahomes, Justin Herbert, Joe Burrow, and Lamar Jackson will appear in some order. And who knows, there’s a chance that one of Trevor Lawrence, Mac Jones and Zach Wilson will join the party over the next couple of years. After back-to-back playoff battles, the Allen-Mahomes rivalry has slotted neatly into the void left by the near-annual Brady-Manning matchup. Adding Burrow, Herbert, and Jackson to the mix is just unfair. The AFC is swamped with the game’s best and brightest. The next 10 years are set to produce some of the finest quarterback duels the playoffs have ever seen, featuring a rotating cast of five rather than the league’s most fearsome twosome. MVP: Aaron Rodgers There is no wrong answer here. You can take Rodgers or Brady. If you want to doff the hipster cap, maybe look to Cooper Kupp for his third-down impact on a Rams offense that was otherwise up-and-down for the bulk of the year. Still: It’s an award about value, and the quarterback is indisputably the most valuable player on the field. Rodgers edges Brady out in the most compelling advanced metrics. The EPA+CPOE Composite, which tracks the down-to-down value of each play and attempts to isolate the quarterback’s impact on those plays (using the Completion Over Expectation metric thanks to the tracking chips in the player’s shoulder pads), has Rodgers streaking ahead of the field. This season Rodgers has lacked some of the awe-inspiring, how-does-he-do-that performances that have come to define his career, but he traded that in for a touch of Brady’s nagging excellence. Rodgers piloted the most effective, efficient, and explosive offense in the league, leading his team to 13 wins in 16 starts. That should be enough to swipe the award. Defensive player of the year: Micah Parsons Aaron Donald is the best defensive player in the NFL. Myles Garrett had the best individual season of any defensive player in 2021. TJ Watt tied the NFL sack record. But let’s think of the DPOTY award not as a Who Had The Most Sacks award as it traditionally defaults to but “which player had the biggest total impact on the unit.” Let’s think of it as a true defensive MVP. With that mindset, there’s not much competition: It’s Parsons, the Dallas Cowboys’ outstanding linebacker. Forget evolution, Parsons triggered a defensive revolution in Dallas. Sure, there is all sorts of talent on all branches of the Cowboys’ defensive tree, but it’s Parsons’ versatility that makes the thing sing. He can align here, there and everywhere. On one snap, he’s a sideline-to-sideline thumper. The next, he’s sliding into deep coverage. The next, he’s turning the corner as a pass-rusher, drawing comparisons to the best to ever do it. Parsons became one of the league’s most dominant defenders, and this after opting out of his final year of college. And he did it not as a one-trick pony, but as the ultimate Swiss Army Knife. That’s not rare, it is totally without precedent. Offensive player of the year: Deebo Samuel Samuel’s success has been less about his gaudy, record-breaking numbers and more about how his style has shattered norms. When you’ve spent half a season redefining the very concept of positions, you know you’ve achieved something pretty special. The hybrid running back-receiver’s ability to add splash plays alongside his team’s formidable defense carried the 49ers to within a possession of the Super Bowl (had Kyle Shanahan better managed the clock, they might be playing next Sunday). Now prepare for an offseason of teams dipping into the draft or free agency trying to find a Samuel clone. But Samuel is one of a kind. Any team looking to recreate his success by targeting a hybrid player in the draft will be disappointed. Coach of the year: Mike Vrabel, Tennessee Titans The tidal wave of opinion that the Titans were the worst No 1 seed in history proved to be true. The Titans were not a great team, but that should not discredit what Vrabel was able to pull off this season. Vrabel’s gruff exterior and rah-rah persona belie one of the game’s most creative thinkers. He’s more of a chess player, a scheme manipulator than he’s given credit for. All that stuff that Brandon Staley is running in Los Angeles that makes the X’s and O’s nerds go gaga, Vrabel was running way back in his days as the defensive coordinator in Houston. He has long been ahead of the league’s trends, even if they’re often hidden behind a Derrick Henry-shaped exterior. Throughout the season, Vrabel found solutions that allowed him to hide Ryan Tannehill’s flaws, even with Henry out of the line-up. He helped construct a feisty defense that was the driving force behind Tennessee winning 12 games. He gets all the little things right on the margins, which is how a team that has no business winning double-digit games winds up winning 12 and claiming the division crown. Often coach of the year goes to someone who outperforms preseason expectations. The Titans were expected to make the playoffs, but Vrabel deserves the award for keeping a creaky ship on course. Coordinator of the year: Lou Anarumo Anarumo’s season will most likely be remembered for his second-half masterplan against Mahomes and the Chiefs offense in the AFC title game. But throughout the season Anarumo has been the architect of one of the league’s overachieving groups. The Bengals defense has talent sprinkled through every level, but it isn’t exactly blessed with a bevy of All-Pros. It’s a case of good players playing excellently as a collective. Anarumo has come into his own this season. Over the span of his career, he has been the architect of the same Bad (with a capital B) defenses. He has been rigid in his thinking, sticking to the old ways in the belief they are the way. This season, he’s shifted. His defense moves more than ever. Every week, the Bengals unveil a fresh take on their old packages. Some coaches get stuck in their ways, their egos telling them they’ve cracked this football thing. Good coaches are constantly looking to adapt, to build their scheme around their best players, and to keep up with the evolutionary cycle of the league. Anarumo was once a dogmatist. This season, he’s ditched dogma in favor of what has worked, and he’s led his defense all the way to the Super Bowl. Acquisition of the year: Matthew Stafford You can go any number of ways here. Was Stafford the best player acquired over the last 12 months? No. Has he had the greatest impact? No. Matthew Judon in New England and Melvin Ingram have stronger claims under those criteria. But Stafford was acquired for a specific reason: To raise the floor of the Rams offense; to make one or two throws that could push the team back to the Super Bowl, the kind of throws Jared Goff was unable, or unwilling, to make. Stafford hasn’t hit his loftiest heights this season. His flaws have been magnified on a team that has, at times, needed him to put the offense on his back. But he was brought to LA with the specific purpose of hitting a big-time throw (or two) in a big-time game. His 44-yard pass to Cooper Kupp in the divisional round against Tampa Bay to set up the winning field goal and effectively end Tom Brady’s career was that moment. Mission accomplished.Pick of the week The King’s Man The first of Matthew Vaughn’s Kingsman movies was an unexpected treat; a big, fun, surprisingly moving Marvel-does-Bond rollercoaster. Interest waned, however, with 2017’s Kingsman: The Golden Circle, a film so incoherent it appeared to have been assembled at speed by idiots. The newest offering, The King’s Man, is something of a soft reset. It’s a prequel, charting Ralph Fiennes’ Zelig-style journey through the events that led to world war one. There’s a lot of fun to be had spotting all the real-life historical figures dotted throughout the mayhem – Rhys Ifans, for one, appears to be having the time of his life as Rasputin. A ridiculous Kingsman v Hitler sequel awaits. Wednesday 9 February, Disney+ *** Collateral Michael Mann’s 2004 thriller deserves recognition not only for its pioneering cinematography – shot overwhelmingly on digital before the technology was perfected, Collateral has a gritty, pixellated immediacy – but for Tom Cruise’s white-hot thermite performance. As hired assassin Vincent, tasked with forcing nervous taxi driver Jamie Foxx to chauffeur him around Los Angeles for a night, this is Cruise using his intensity for bad rather than good for once. His shark-like evil sits in heavy contrast to the woozy, insomniac sprawl of the city around him. Saturday 5 February, 10.35pm, ITV *** Sorry We Missed You Ken Loach’s most recent film was released in 2019, before the pandemic, but only seems to have gained urgency in the intervening years. One of his angriest films in decades, it depicts the dire working conditions doled out to professional delivery drivers: zero-hour contracts, heavy rental fees, no insurance. The toll all this takes on Kris Hitchen’s lead character is abominable. Can a project like this change the employment policies of a notoriously shoddy industry? Probably not. But once seen, you’ll never take a delivery driver for granted again. Sunday 6 February, 10pm, BBC Two *** You’re Next Thanks to the commercial success of last year’s Godzilla vs Kong, Adam Wingard now firmly has his feet under the Hollywood table. But whatever he chooses to do next, it’s unlikely to better the panache of his 2011 break-out hit You’re Next. The joy of this cheap, grimy slasher movie is in how lightly it wears its premise. In any other hands, a story like this – about intruders in animal masks systematically offing a group of semi-likable victims – would be a gruesome sludge of a thing. Wingard, though, fills the movie with endless wit, black humour and wild invention. Beautiful. Monday 7 February, 9pm, Horror Channel *** The Pit and the Pendulum Although not one for Edgar Allan Poe purists, there’s still an astonishing amount of fun to be had with Roger Corman’s 1961 adaptation. At its centre is an unhinged turn by Vincent Price as a castle-owning weirdo with a torture device in his basement. The entire performance is one long I-can’t-believe-they’re-letting-me-do-this wink to the audience, but the magic thing is that it stops just short of undermining the scares. When this film stands to attention, it has moments of pure terror. Friday 11 February, 9pm, Talking Pictures TV *** Bigbug A new Jean-Pierre Jeunet film deserves to be celebrated in the streets. His last film, The Young and Prodigious TS Spivet, came out almost a decade ago; Micmacs, his most recent film in his native French, came out back in the noughties. Jeunet’s long-awaited comeback vehicle, released through Netflix, is Bigbug. A film set in the future, it is perhaps best to describe Bigbug as Tim Burton doing The Terminator. The Yonyx, a breed of AI designed to help humanity, goes rogue and declares mankind to be superfluous. If you can withstand the heavy dose of whimsy, this is a winner. Friday 11 February, Netflix *** I Want You Back Just when you thought the romcom was dead, out comes Amazon with a great big defibrillator. Charlie Day and Jenny Slate play two strangers who find themselves dumped at exactly the same time. Together they hatch a plan: team up and destroy their exes’ new relationships, Strangers on a Train-style, so they can win them back. How will it end? You can probably work it out. But romcoms live or die on the likability of their leads, and I Want You Back benefits from the sparky unpredictability of Day and Slate. Are they the new Tom Hanks and Meg Ryan? Maybe. Friday 11 February, Amazon Prime VideoIf you’re not a Tory, the past few months may have brought some pleasure after years of torment. Bad news for the Conservatives has suddenly started coming almost daily: misfiring smear campaigns, chaotic U-turns, potentially lethal investigations, Tory MPs and rightwing papers turning on Boris Johnson, panicky ministers struggling through interviews, leadership rivalries ruining policy announcements, and a sustained plunge in the opinion polls. The multiplying consequences of the Downing Street party scandals have changed the political atmosphere. The importance of all this should not be underestimated. A terrible government, the most lethally incompetent and probably the most corrupt in modern British history, may finally be beginning to be held to account. At the same time, Conservatism’s image – as a rarely nice but often realistic ruling ideology – is being badly damaged. Seemingly unknown to themselves, Johnson and his remaining loyalists are becoming a laughing stock. But are we laughing too much? Conservative governments in the past have regularly suffered humiliating meltdowns. In 1990 Margaret Thatcher’s premiership ended in tears after months of plotting against her. In 1995 her successor, John Major, resigned as leader and sought re-election in a failed attempt to silence his critics. More recently, the crises have come faster and faster: David Cameron’s resignation after losing his Brexit referendum in 2016; Theresa May’s disastrous attempt to increase her parliamentary majority in 2017; the failed effort to remove her through a no-confidence vote in 2018; her repeated Brexit defeats and resignation in 2019. None of these episodes led to the Conservatives losing office. On each occasion, for days or weeks or months, the party’s future appeared to hang in the balance. Journalists reported excitedly from Downing Street, or outside meetings of the Tories’ much-mythologised 1922 Committee. Opposition parties seized on Conservative divisions and disarray. Labour politicians began to believe they might soon take office. And then, every time, the sense of crisis gradually ebbed away. The Conservatives changed their leader, or some of their policies, or just played for time, exploiting the many opportunities in Britain’s parliamentary calendar for evasion and delay. With its frequent recesses – the latest begins next Friday – the House of Commons is not as tough a place for wounded prime ministers as is traditionally claimed. Something less tangible also helps Tory governments survive these disastrous phases: voters often lose interest. Not just because most people only follow politics closely for, at best, a few days at a time – an attention span that digital media is probably shortening with its overload of political opinions and information. But also because these crises can be emotionally and politically satisfying in themselves. By exposing the errors and shortcomings of our usual ruling class, and by forcing them into U-turns, changes of leadership and displays of sometimes embarrassing contrition, Conservative crises can feel like a rebalancing between politicians and citizens – and make more fundamental change seem unnecessary. The 1992 and 2019 elections both came after particularly protracted periods of Tory upheaval. Yet they saw the biggest total Conservative votes of the past half-century. Many people seemed to feel that the Tories had listened and adapted sufficiently to their discontents. The government had been punished enough, so a new one was not needed. In pre-democratic times, the status quo was protected by brief, pressure-releasing ruptures in the established order. In the annual Feast of Fools in medieval France, for example, low-ranking clergy temporarily swapped places with their superiors and mockery of church practices was permitted. There is also something similarly ritualised about today’s Tory crises: from the theatrical sending of letters to the 1922 Committee by MPs seeking a leadership contest, to the inauthentic-feeling attacks on the government by the rightwing press, which flare up and then suddenly cease. These protagonists may well be playing their roles on the understanding that uncomfortable periods for the Tories are the necessary price, paid every few years, for the party’s longterm dominance. And during these crises British politics becomes, more than ever, mostly about the Conservatives. Currently that means the culture Johnson has created in Downing Street; what Sue Gray and Scotland Yard make of it; and who might replace Johnson as premier. For non-Tories, trying to work out who would be the least awful new Tory leader is a familiar routine – in effect, a partial acceptance of continuing Conservative rule. Many voters and journalists probably know more about the rules of Tory leadership contests than they do about Keir Starmer’s policies. And that’s not just because he doesn’t yet have enough compelling ones. There is an English preoccupation with Tory politics that is a kind of self-fulfilling prophecy. In one-party states, it’s common to ridicule or feel contempt for your government without being able to envisage its removal. Our politics isn’t that stuck, yet, despite the Tories’ ongoing efforts to tilt the electoral system in their favour, such as making it harder to vote for social groups who tend not to support them. But the deepening cynicism about politicians means that a chaotic government no longer shocks and alienates voters as much as it did in previous eras with struggling prime ministers, such as the 1970s, when Edward Heath and Jim Callaghan were ejected from Downing Street for smaller errors than Johnson’s. Nowadays it’s widely expected that our leaders will be out of their depth, as well as entirely out for themselves. That’s one reason why Starmer’s offer of more competence and integrity has yet to properly resonate. Not enough voters can envisage such a government. Yet it’s too early to be sure that the Tories’ current troubles will recede in the usual way. There is another, rarer kind of Conservative crisis. It is less exciting to follow, but longer-lasting and more lethal. It involves enough voters firmly deciding that the Tories have been in power for too long, and then fitting every government scandal and mistake into that template. The last time this happened was in the 1990s, when Labour’s return to office was preceded by almost five years of Tory calamities and failed relaunches. Tony Blair was Labour leader for the most decisive part of the period, and his ability to promise a better future helped make the Conservative government look obsolete. Starmer doesn’t have the same salesman’s gifts. Nor, unlike Blair, does he get much of a hearing from wavering Tory voters and the rightwing press. We live in a more tribal age. It’s also a more impatient one, when the political mood quickly changes. The next general election may not be for almost three more years. The Tories could be in the early stages of a terminal crisis. But if you’re hoping that they really are doomed this time, it’s going to be an anxious wait. Andy Beckett is a Guardian columnistAlmost five years after the fatal stabbing of his cousin and Pivot Gang collaborator John Walt in 2017, Chicago rapper Saba – real name Tahj Malik Chandler – is still grieving. In 2018, he responded to the tragedy with the album Care for Me: a complex, melancholic paean, hot with denial, sometimes sunk under by depression. Few Good Things sees Saba resurface, moving beyond the acceptance stage on an album that sounds and feels like one long exhale. The “Few” in the title doesn’t point out a lack of something, but an appreciation for those things – home, family (Saba’s appears in recorded snippets throughout), happiness – that he does have, and he paints this, on 2012, in shades of youthful innocence: snips of birdsong, rolling snares, and a blissed-out chorus of “I had everything I needed, everything” – all tales of bunking school in pursuit of friendship and first loves. The title track is a highlight, and ties knotty emotions into a neat bow: “Glass half full, the other half was the emptiness / We turned a bunch of nothing to abundance.” Sometimes, his long, healing exhale gets caught in the throat. On Survivor’s Guilt, Saba mean-mugs in the mould of Kendrick Lamar’s more pent-up moments; A Simpler Time is less potent, and sees him tangled in off-kilter percussion (he can be guilty of the “word salad” he raps about). But when he glides on a beat – as on the Outkast-esque Soldier, or the soaring If I Had a Dollar – it’s hard not to be swept up in the euphoria. • The headline to this article was amended on 7 February 2022 to better reflect the contents of the review.“Pram Boy, pill-boy, you know who… it is you who will be carried / while the others are shed.” Violets begins with a miscarriage and a conception in the final months of the second world war. Violet Hall, a newly married suburban wife who is doing war work in a Birmingham munitions factory, loses blood and the foetuses of two babies into a pail and has her womb removed by callously zealous doctors. At the same time, in small-town Wales, unmarried Violet Owen conceives a child with her mother’s lodger, a Polish soldier. The book weaves between the two Violets, threaded throughout with insistently spirited, half-comical poetic interjections addressing Pram Boy, the baby who will bind these women’s lives together. At first the two Violets are difficult to disentangle. Both are working class, both live in the shadows of more charismatic family members, both yearn vaguely for more expansive lives. Then we see Violet Owen make the most decisive step of her life. A few months pregnant, she signs on for war work and asks to be shipped abroad. Her time in Naples, vividly evoked with deft details rather than set-piece scenes, changes her but does not hold out the promise of a new life. This is partly because the letters she writes home to her family are flattened versions of her experiences that wilfully leave out the vivid sights she has seen: “No port, no cove, no filth, no decay. No light. No shade.” At the end of the war, she gives birth in a military hospital and is shipped back to England where, after eight months, she gives her baby up for adoption and Violet Hall’s turn for motherhood has come. The women are not analytically reflective, and the novel skates on the surface of half-experienced thoughts and feelings, with both Violets alive to the more luridly burnished sensibilities of others. “We have taken the cot but the playpen is still there,” a doctor informs Violet Hall after her hysterectomy, indicating that sex is still on the cards. On the ship to Naples, Violet Owen falls half in love with an upper-class woman called Maggie, who comes across as both grotesque and enviable in the immediacy of her wants and her expectation of their satisfaction. “What kind of person expects the world to yield that way, to sway with every bend of her wiry limbs?” Violet asks herself as Maggie leads her around the ship. The most striking feature of the book is the poetry addressing the baby. There’s a tense playfulness to the writing here, alongside the lyrical rapture, and it makes the baby almost as characterised a presence as his two mothers. We are aware of the stages of his gestation – “your ears are shells of tiny, soft-cell bones, / your heart a bivalve” – and then of his readying himself to be born: “Tonight, Pram Boy / you are a caged bird / fluttering between.” Eventually the “uterine-clencher. / Heart-wrencher” emerges into the world, “limb-free and lung-kicked”, and the poet addressing him revels in his energetic sucking: “Press / your face, fill / your mouth / with her flesh.” Violet Owen finds that she and her child are “sea creatures in the deep” as her milk engulfs them both. Motherhood here is a bodily experience for one Violet and disorientingly disembodied for the other. Alex Hyde works as a lecturer in gender studies, and some of the troubled ambivalences of feminism are at the book’s heart. How can we as feminists honour miscarriage as the loss of a child, while also insisting that an aborted foetus is not actually a child? How can we both insist on the right of a single, impoverished woman such as Violet to be a mother while also insisting on her right not to mother the eight-month-old baby she gives up? There’s a kind of tender grace in Hyde’s writing – in its attentiveness to moment-by-moment bodily experience – that allows her to create a novelistic world open to all these questions and possibilities, without making any of it explicitly political. Both women are changed by pregnancy, and Violet Owen is changed more radically by the experience of being claimed by a creature whose bodily needs take over hers. Released from a home for new mothers for a trip home to Wales, she keeps her baby a secret, and it’s almost as though her life remains unchanged since she was last there. But her motherhood asserts itself in the milk that spills painfully from her breasts, surreptitiously expressed into a glass in the night. The arbitrariness of birth and of blood ties is set hard up against the visceral inevitability of the mother-baby bond. One Violet happens to be married, the other isn’t; both are fitted to be mothers yet both are also aware of a world beyond motherhood and its restrictions, which is felt enticingly over the horizon. The relationship between motherhood and biology is possibly more fraught as an issue now than it was in the second world war. Hyde has found a way to make the past speak presciently to our times while also maintaining a playful relationship to a story that becomes unexpectedly moving, warm-hearted despite its flinty poetic prose. • Lara Feigel is the author of The Group (John Murray). Violets by Alex Hyde is published by Granta (£12.99). To support the Guardian and the Observer buy a copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Major League Rugby will kick-off its fifth season this weekend with the addition of a 13th team, the Dallas Jackals, who postponed entry last year due to the Covid pandemic. Covid cut short the 2020 US season too but MLR came back to go “99 &amp; 0” in 2021, completing every fixture. In the championship game, the LA Giltinis – one of two teams, with the Austin Gilgronis, still named for a cocktail named for their owner – beat Rugby ATL, from Atlanta, for the shield. This year’s promotional theme is “Rise of Rugby”, based on the growth of a competition which started with seven teams in 2018 and rugby union’s long-hoped for rise to a place in the US mainstream. USA Rugby, the national union, is bidding to host a men’s World Cup. MLR is thinking big too. Sources say St Louis and Chicago will add 14th and 15th teams next year. For now, the arrival of Dallas means seven teams in the western conference and six in the east. The competition will run until the end of June and there will be 16 regular-season games each, followed by playoffs. Games will be shown nationally on Fox, on regional platforms and around the world on therugbynetwork.com. “As we approach our half-decade mark with MLR, I have seen firsthand that there is a global rugby movement within the United States and Canada,” the league commissioner, former Dallas Mavericks executive George Killebrew, said in a statement. “Thanks to the groundswell of support for the ‘Rise of Rugby’, our league is truly gaining momentum on the national stage. I cannot wait to introduce Major League Rugby to more fans and see continued growth in attendance numbers, broadcast ratings and global recognition during our fifth season. There’s a place for everyone in our sport.” There are fewer big global names in MLR this year, though the former England flanker and captain Chris Robshaw will hope for an injury-free second season with the San Diego Legion and Matt Giteau, one of the greatest Australian backs of all time and all of 39 years old, will play one more year in LA. Intriguingly, Dallas have picked up two backs with vast English Premiership experience: Henry Trinder, once of Gloucester, and Chris Pennell, long of Worcester. There is still a sense of a league in flux and formation. Rugby ATL, for example, roared to the championship game in their first full season but have hit choppier waters. The Rattlers have seen the death of their majority owner, Marcus Calloway; a takeover by Global Rugby Ventures, a company tied to Errik Anderson of the New England Free Jacks and with Adam Gilchrist of LA and Austin one of two powerful owners on either coast; and the departure of a widely respected head coach, Scott Lawrence. The takeover and the departure, sources said, were not unconnected. New York have been particularly visible to European eyes, thanks in part to signings like Ben Foden and Matthieu Bastareaud. But their search for a permanent home continues. In 2019, as Rugby United New York, they played at MCU Park, a baseball stadium in Coney Island, Brooklyn. They have been to St John’s University in Queens but Cochrane Stadium in Jersey City hosted most games last season and this year New York will play in another small Jersey stadium, JFK in Hoboken. They have also dropped the “United”. On the other coast, the Giltinis still play at the Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum, a huge venue for small rugby crowds but which certainly looks good on TV. Down the coast, Torero Stadium in San Diego hosted the first two championship games but is no longer home to the Legion. Nomadic last year, this year they will play on the SDSU Sports Deck: a field on the roof of a parking garage. Next year, the Legion will have a more spectacular home: Snapdragon Stadium, a venue being built for San Diego State University. The 35,000-capacity venue, the Legion said on Thursday, “was specifically designed to accommodate the rugged and exciting sport of rugby, whose expansion is inevitable”. Bold words, in keeping with the league’s bullish outlook. Also in keeping with all things bullish is the presence of crossover athletes from mainstream US sports. The England and Lions prop turned NBC host Alex Corbisiero is fronting one attempt to find such players, a web series called Cross the Line. Another operation continues in Glendale, Colorado. The small city near Denver was home to an MLR team until an 2020. It is now where the American Raptors are trying to shape football players, basketball players and wrestlers into pro rugby talent, all the while filming for a series, Rugby Town, shown in the UK on BT Sport. By email, Patrick Guthrie, producer of the series, said: “David Still is our first Eagle in sevens, and since the end of the second season, 13 American Raptors players have signed, or have been offered and declined to sign, MLR contracts.” Among those with deals is Tani Tupou, once a defensive end for the University of Washington, Seattle Seahawks, Atlanta Falcons and Arizona Cardinals, now a 6ft 2in, 275lbs prop for the Seattle Seawolves, MLR champions in seasons one and two, now looking for a resurgence. Pono Davis, a big Hawaiian, is with the Houston SaberCats. Once a defensive tackle for Southern Methodist University in Dallas, he is the same height as Tupou but 20lbs heavier. He is also now a prop. The SaberCats promise an interesting season. Founder members with a purpose-built stadium, a rare and precious thing, they have struggled to make a mark on the field. For season five, like most teams, they have signed talent from South Africa, the islands and other rugby hotspots. But they have also picked up American sevens Olympians who should show strongly, among them Danny Barrett, a particularly bruising back rower, and Matai Leuta, a big wing or centre.Dear fellow fans of Lee Child’s inimitable creation: all you need to know about Reacher (Amazon Prime Video), the new television series based on the books, is that for the first six and half minutes of the opening episode, Reacher says nothing. This, for the uninitiated, is both the defining feature of Jack Reacher – our ex-military police, lone-wolf hero and man-with-virtually-no-name – and a recurring line in the series of books about his violently noble and nobly violent adventures. Silence is the essence of the man. Most of the outrage surrounding the casting of Tom Cruise in the role for the two film adaptations (of the ninth and 18th books) dwelt on the fact that Reacher is a 6ft 5in, 250-pound wall of muscle and Cruise is … not. But it should have been at least as much about the fact that Cruise’s essential energy is that of a chirrupy people-pleaser and Reacher is living proof that a man can be an island if he just puts his mind to it. Now, at last, we have everything. A production team that understands that, like Harry Potter fans, we need the books – precision-engineered already to deliver exactly what is expected – translated to the screen as fully and as smoothly as possible. And Alan Ritchson, an actor the size of a house and roughly as expressive unless called upon to be otherwise. He has all of Reacher’s stillness and confidence. He exudes exactly his brand of weary patience. And somehow – and of all these gifts, this one surely had the producers falling upon him in weeping gratitude – he is capable of delivering Reacher’s occasional but vital monologues about how exactly he is going to break the next seven people’s heads. The inaugural Reacher series is based, as is right and proper, on the first book in the novel sequence – Killing Floor. If you have read Killing Floor, you now know – and this is a promise of delight, not disappointment – exactly what happens in it. But, again, for the uninitiated: our enormous hero gets off a bus (on a whim – this, and drinking black coffee, is what he does) in the tiny town of Margrave, Georgia, and is quickly arrested on suspicion of murder. Now he must stay in Margrave and prove he didn’t do it. And, when he finds out who has been killed, the matter becomes a personal “find everybody responsible and kill every last one of them”. In the process, he gets put in the bad part of a prison to await arraignment and must use his finely honed fighting skills to stay alive (to see Ritchson walking serenely out of a bathroom littered with bleeding bodies is to know a very special kind of peace), befriends a lady (Reacher is allowed one lady per adventure) and forges a mutually respectful alliance with the investigating officer who is reluctantly impressed by both Reacher’s intellect and street smarts, which combine to give him almost Sherlockian powers of deduction. Ritchson’s delivery (with just a flicker of knowing humour about the eyes) of these litanies of deduction on screen recall – gloriously – the heady days of Paul Gross doing similar monologues as Constable Benton Fraser in Due South, albeit with the slightly more surreal atmosphere of the show to help him sell it. Ritchson works alone. Amazon’s take on Reacher is as solidly made as he is and delivers the rollicking yarn as efficiently as the man himself can dispatch a Glock-wielding gangster. It is great, great fun and will come as a great, great relief to the Reacher devotees who will surely – at least at first – form the bulk of viewers. It will please them endlessly but is still drawn broadly enough as a crime drama to attract others. Pour yourself a black coffee, sit back and enjoy.Another adviser to Boris Johnson has reportedly quit after a day of departures dubbed the “meltdown in Downing Street”. Elena Narozanski, a special adviser to the prime minister on women and equalities, Department for Culture, Media and Sport, and extremism, has resigned, according to Paul Goodman, the editor of Conservative Home. Narozanski’s departure on Friday follows the resignation of four key No 10 officials on Thursday: policy chief, Munira Mirza; chief of staff, Dan Rosenfield; the PM’s principal private secretary, Martin Reynolds; and director of communications, Jack Doyle. Mirza abruptly resigned on Thursday afternoon after Johnson again declined to apologise for attempting to smear the Labour leader, Keir Starmer, over the case of the paedophile Jimmy Savile. In a blistering letter, Mirza, who had worked with Johnson for 14 years since his days as London mayor, called the allegation “scurrilous”. The three other resignations were then announced in quick succession on Thursday night, in what was seen widely in Westminster as an attempt to regain control. The chancellor, Rishi Sunak, made the clearest attempt yet to distance himself from Johnson on Thursday, saying of the Savile comments: “Being honest, I wouldn’t have said it and I’m glad that the prime minister clarified what he meant.” Sunak also used a column in the Sun to further separate himself from the chaos in No 10. Setting out the measures he announced on Thursday to tackle the cost of living crisis, Sunak said: “We have always been the party of sound money – we will always continue to be on my watch – and that is the only kind of party I am interested in.” Sunak is widely seen as a frontrunner for the leadership if Johnson is dislodged. Johnson has been fighting for his political life since the Met announced last week it was investigating gatherings in Downing Street and Whitehall during lockdown. More than 10 MPs have called on him publicly to resign. Several of these have announced they have sent in letters calling for a vote of no confidence in his leadership, and more are believed to have done so privately. Mirza was quickly replaced on Thursday: close Johnson ally Andrew Griffith, a wealthy former Sky executive, will now head up Johnson’s policy unit as a minister. Supportive MPs sought to portray the mass clearout as Johnson fulfilling his promise to MPs to shake up his Downing Street operation in the wake of the partygate allegations. Doyle and Reynolds had both been expected to depart: Reynolds sent a leaked email inviting staff to “bring their own booze” to a gathering on 20 May 2020 that is one of 12 being investigated by the Metropolitan police. The spate of resignations means the prime minister is left without a principal private secretary, a communications director or a chief of staff. Issuing a statement about Reynolds’ and Rosenfield’s departures on Thursday night, Downing Street said: “Recruitment for both posts is under way”. A former senior No 10 official, Nikki da Costa, who worked with Mirza, said: “For me this has all the signs of being rushed, in order to try and regain control.” She claimed there was a culture in Downing Street under Rosenfield in which some staff found themselves “marginalised”. “We had a change of chief of staff in December last year [2020]. What has happened in terms of the culture, that team hasn’t been built and morale has been undermined, and certainly there has been a culture in which if you aren’t somebody who says yes and falls into line, then you quickly find yourself marginalised, and if you deliver bad news then you feel marginalised,” she told the BBC’s Today programme. She added that there were “longstanding issues” in No 10 that were “starting to come to a head”.Wealthy people have disproportionately large carbon footprints and the percentage of the world’s emissions they are responsible for is growing, a study has found. In 2010, the most affluent 10% of households emitted 34% of global CO2, while the 50% of the global population in lower income brackets accounted for just 15%. By 2015, the richest 10% were responsible for 49% of emissions against 7% produced by the poorest half of the world’s population. Aimee Ambrose, a professor of energy policy at Sheffield Hallam University and author of the study published in the journal Science Direct, says cutting the carbon footprint of the wealthiest might be the fastest way to reach net zero. In terms of energy demand in the UK, the least wealthy half of the population accounts for less than 20% of final demand, less than the top 5% consumes. While their homes may be more energy-efficient, high consumers are likely to have more space to heat. They also own and use more luxury items and gadgets. Ambrose said the cost of living crisis was likely to make those on middle to low incomes reduce their carbon consumption by holidaying in the UK, if at all, and by using less fuel. However, those who consume the most are unlikely to have to make such changes. “It is much easier for richer consumers to absorb these increases in costs without changing their behaviour,” said Ambrose. “Unlike the less wealthy, the thermostat won’t be turned down and the idea of not jetting off on a long-haul flight to find some sun is out of the question. In most countries, before Covid-19, less than half of people reported flying at least once a year while more than half of emissions from passenger aviation were linked to the 1% of people who fly most often. “In many ways, the rich are being largely insulated from the spike in energy costs,” said Ambrose. “But addressing excessive personal consumption is something that isn’t on the agenda for the government and policymakers. This is bad news for the planet and our prospects of reaching net zero.” She said the resulting policy neglect of high consumers was a “missed opportunity” to address inequality and opportunities for carbon reduction. “Price mechanisms may force low-income households to cut back consumption to dangerous levels,” Ambrose added. “Moreover, high consumption and large carbon footprints are spatially concentrated in high-income cities and suburbs – while their negative effects, such as air pollution, typically spill over into less affluent areas.”From the Canadian Rockies to Patagonia, pumas have the largest terrestrial range of any mammal in the Americas. Now, a new study has reported the web of life these elusive cats support, showing how they are connected to more than 485 other species, from eagles feeding on their carrion to elk impacted by their “fear effect”. Researchers reviewed 162 studies published between 1950 and 2020 looking at how pumas – also known as mountain lions or cougars – enrich ecosystems and support other species. They found the large cats contribute 1.5m kilograms of meat a day to scavenger communities across North and South America, with 281 species getting to feed on carcasses they have killed. The paper, published in Mammal Review, also identified 203 species as puma prey; 40 that are affected by their fear of pumas; 12 that compete with pumas; and seven species that benefit from the ecosystem services they create. “We went into this thinking pumas were connected to loads of other species for a variety of reasons,” says lead author Dr Laura LaBarge from the Max Planck Institute of Animal Behaviour. “But it was so surprising when we went through the enormous range of species connected to them, especially those that are indirectly affected by pumas, like invertebrates or plants.” When pumas make a kill they act as “ecosystem engineers” because the carcass, or carrion, becomes a source of food for scavengers and decomposers. Pumas are apex carnivores (but not top carnivores) and research suggests they have adapted to allow for about a third of their food to be stolen by higher predators such as wolves and bears, meaning they are used to running off and leaving the leftovers for other wildlife. One study found that pumas in Patagonia contributed three times more carrion to the ecosystem than grey wolves in Yellowstone national park, despite living at lower densities. Another paper looking at ecosystems in Greater Yellowstone found that 215 carrion beetles feed on carcasses caught by pumas. They also affect the distribution of condors in South America and early findings suggest they have an impact on bald and golden eagles in the Rocky Mountains. Researchers found 40 species, including ungulates such as elk, white-tailed deer and vicuña, were impacted by the fear effect. Pumas are ambush hunters and tend to hunt from predictable areas, whereas wolves hunt prey over long distances. This means the fear effect – and therefore the areas ungulates avoid – is more pronounced with pumas than wolves, researchers believe. “It’s just incredible how many domino effects you can have from these large carnivores which influence the distribution of foraging animals,” says senior author Dr Mark Elbroch, an ecologist from Panthera, the global wild cat conservation organisation. “You’ve got areas on the landscape that are safe, and areas that are risky for these hoofed animals to feed, and it’s just incredible all the things that changes – plant architecture, plant communities, birds, and even the soil chemistry.” Moreover, pumas also provide ecosystem services to seven species. In North Dakota the recolonisation of pumas is thought to have saved $1bn (£740m) in deer-vehicle collisions. Pumas also reduce the incidence of some diseases in prey animals: for example deer affected by chronic wasting disease are unlikely to be able to escape from an attacking puma. Elbroch says: “Even as someone who has been studying pumas for a long time, it is still amazing to sit back and say ‘my goodness, look at how incredible this species is’ and see how interconnected it is in these ecosystems. But even to sit back for a little bit longer and say ‘wow, look at the complexity of life’, because it is truly amazing. All of these relationships are occurring all the time, all around us, so I just enjoyed the fact that this paper was a celebration of this species and a celebration of life.” There is little published research on pumas from the tropics and subtropics, which account for a third of their range, and are among the most diverse ecosystems in the world. LaBarge believes the number of connections they found in this study probably “only scratches the surface” of pumas’ true impact. Because of their elusive nature, puma populations are difficult to study. Their numbers declined drastically after European colonisation of the Americas but in the past 20 or 30 years there has been evidence of a small recovery, stabilising at about 50,000 breeding pumas globally. In South America there has never been a long-term study, but the International Union for Conservation of Nature believes numbers are declining. Pumas are threatened by habitat loss and fragmentation, vehicle collisions and hunting by humans. Several isolated populations suffer from low genetic diversity with “severe health consequences”, according to the paper. Researchers hope the paper will highlight the benefits of puma conservation as a public good, showing the importance of creating integrated human-wildlife ecosystems. Christian Hunt, an author of the study and representative of Defenders of Wildlife, says: “The main takeaway for me is that we simply cannot have these rich, dynamic ecosystems without these top predators. We have to protect them to protect wilderness.” Hunt believes one of the greatest challenges is to change people’s perception of pumas as scary and reduce conflicts between humans and these big cats (which are generally terrified of people), with compensation schemes for farmers and better community outreach. He says: “For us, the question is not whether pumas and people can coexist at this point. It’s a question of whether we, as an expanding society, have the grace to accommodate this animal and to leave it some room as we continue to encroach upon its habitats. I think ultimately, the puma’s future – like so many other large animals in the 21st century – is going to depend, really, on our ability to coexist and to make peace with the wild.” Kate Vannelli, a big cat specialist at WWF, who was not involved in the research, says: “This study helps to highlight how there is an interdependence between people and big cats, and big cats are inextricably tied to their landscapes, as demonstrated by the huge amount of diverse biotic relationships highlighted in this study. This integration is extremely important to acknowledge if we want to conserve big cats.” Find more age of extinction coverage here, and follow biodiversity reporters Phoebe Weston and Patrick Greenfield on Twitter for all the latest news and featuresNord Stream 2, the controversial Russian gas pipeline to Germany, will be part of the package of sanctions facing the Kremlin if Ukraine is invaded, Ursula von der Leyen has said. In comments that appear to go further than any commitments made by Germany’s chancellor, Olaf Scholz, the European Commission president sought to clear up any doubt about the pipeline’s future. “Nord Stream 2 cannot be excluded from the sanctions list, that is very clear”, Von der Leyen said in an interview with the Handelsblatt and Les Echos newspapers. The commission president said the future of the pipeline, which is yet to receive regulatory approval in Berlin or Brussels, would depend “on Russia’s behaviour”. The latest estimate is that Russia has mobilised 145,000 troops on its border with Ukraine, with the US claiming on Thursday it had uncovered plans for a Russian “propaganda video” it believed could have been used to justify an invasion. The video, the US said, would depict a staged false explosion with dead bodies and actors as mourners following an “attack” by Ukraine or its Nato allies. Von der Leyen’s commitment offers clarity on an issue on which Scholz has remained vague, stating only that “all options are on the table”. The chancellor has come under heavy criticism domestically for the stance. In recent days Ukraine’s government had called for greater transparency on the potential range of EU sanctions facing the Kremlin. “Make it available for the Russians, for everyone, so that the Russians can see what awaits for them,” Ukraine’s foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, said. Von der Leyen responded to that call by shedding light on the package, saying it “ranges from closing access to foreign capital to export controls on critical goods, hi-tech components that Russia cannot simply replace, for example in the field of artificial intelligence and weaponry, quantum computers, lasers and space.” She described the sanctions list as “robust and comprehensive”, adding: “People close to [Russian president Vladimir] Putin and oligarchs could of course be hit sensitively.”An elite Australian soldier has told a court he heard Ben Roberts-Smith order the shooting of an unarmed Afghan man he was interrogating during a mission in Afghanistan in 2012. Much of the testimony presented in the decorated war veteran’s defamation trial this week had centred on two alleged shootings committed during a raid on a compound in the village of Kakarak in April 2009. But late on Friday, the federal court heard a former comrade of Roberts-Smith give evidence about another alleged shooting, in 2012. The elite soldier told the court Roberts-Smith commanded a military interpreter to order an Afghan national army soldier kill an unarmed captive. Roberts-Smith is suing the Age, the Sydney Morning Herald and the Canberra Times for defamation over a series of reports he alleges are defamatory and portray him as committing war crimes, including murder. The newspapers are pleading a defence of truth. Roberts-Smith denies all wrongdoing. On Friday, the court heard evidence from a still-serving SAS soldier, anonymised in evidence as Person 14, who served eight tours of Afghanistan in the SAS as well as three in Iraq and three in East Timor. He told the court he was assigned to Roberts-Smith’s patrol on 12 October 2012, during a mission in Khas Uruzgan. The Australian soldiers conducted the mission alongside members of the Afghan national army. As the mission was being concluded, and the helicopters to extract the Australian soldiers were en route from their Tarin Kowt base, Roberts-Smith was interrogating an Afghan male detained inside a compound, according to evidence from Person 14. The male, who was not armed, was referred to as a “PUC”, an acronym for person under control. Evidence before the court said the man “was not exhibiting any signs of being a threat or violent”. As Roberts-Smith conducted the interrogation, Person 14 said he was standing to the side of the compound when he noticed a discolouration on one of the mud walls: “It had been recently plastered with mud.” “I thought, ‘oh, there’s a cache’.” Person 14 kicked the discoloured area and a cache of weapons fell out, including rifles, ammunition, binoculars, and rocket-propelled grenades. As Person 14 walked back towards the interrogation, Roberts-Smith turned towards the Australian forces’ interpreter. Person 14 was standing behind the interpreter. Roberts-Smith pointed at the senior member of the Afghan national army who was on the raid with the Australians and then gestured towards the PUC. Roberts-Smith said: “Tell him to shoot him or I will,” Person 14 told the court. The interpreter initially refused to interpret the message, so Roberts-Smith repeated it: “Tell him to shoot him or I will.” The interpreter passed on the message to the Afghan soldiers, and after some discussion between the interpreter and the Afghan soldiers, a member of the Afghan forces stepped forward towards the PUC. “One of his soldiers … stepped out of the group of soldiers, trained his suppressed M4 [rifle] on the Afghan man and unloaded five to eight rounds into his centre of … mass … his torso,” Person 14 told the court. Person 14 said as the unarmed Afghan fell, the soldier fired two more bullets into the man’s neck and head. “I was perplexed but didn’t say anything. We were close to extraction,” Person 14 told the court. In earlier evidence this week, another still-serving member of the SAS, anonymised as Person 41, told the court he had seen Roberts-Smith order a subordinate soldier to execute a captive, unarmed elderly man during a 2009 raid on the Whiskey 108 compound. Person 41 said he also saw Roberts-Smith “frog-march” a man with a prosthetic leg outside the same compound before throwing him to the ground and machine-gunning him to death. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Person 14 gave evidence that he saw an Australian soldier shoot the man with the prosthetic leg with a machine gun in a similar fashion. He said he did not recognise Roberts-Smith at the time, in fading light, but later saw Roberts-Smith holding the uncommon weapon, a Minimi machine gun, used to kill the man, and recognised his distinctive camouflage face paint from the scene. Under cross-examination, Person 14 said he had doubts about the awarding of the Victoria Cross to Roberts-Smith, but added he had a “good” working relationship with the decorated veteran. The trial before Justice Anthony Besanko continues.Boris Johnson has privately conceded there is less than a 30% chance of negotiating a new Brexit deal for Northern Ireland this month, it has emerged. Sir Jeffrey Donaldson, the leader of the Democratic Unionist party, said the prime minister made the admission during a private meeting last week. Donaldson also said Johnson could not guarantee the UK would take unilateral action in the event the current Brexit negotiations with Brussels failed to result in a scrapping or radical reworking of the Northern Ireland protocol. Donaldson told BBC Radio Ulster’s Good Morning Ulster: “I met with the prime minister last week, I asked the prime minister two straight questions. I asked him what he thought were the prospects of agreement being reached with the EU on the protocol within the next few weeks. “His answer was ‘20 to 30% chance of agreement’. “I then asked the prime minister for a clear commitment that in the absence of an agreement with the EU, the UK government would do what they said in their command paper last July … and take unilateral action … the prime minister could not give me that commitment in those circumstances.” Donaldson also said on Friday he had warned the foreign secretary, Liz Truss, who took over negotiations from David Frost in December, that the clock was ticking. He said he needed to see progress in talks by 31 January, further extending deadlines he had set in September and October. He also revealed Johnson had told him at the Tory party conference in October that there would be a new Brexit deal after “a short sharp negotiation” lasting just “three weeks”. Donaldson was speaking after a day of political drama triggered by two DUP decisions. On Wednesday its agriculture minister, Edwin Poots, ordered a halt to Brexit checks on food and farm products at all Northern Ireland ports and airports setting it on a collision course with Westminster and Brussels. And on Thursday the DUP carried out its threat to quit the executive in Stormont, announcing that the first minister, Paul Givan, was resigning. Rival parties have rounded on the DUP’s decision to quit Stormont in a row over the protocol, paralysing decision-making until after the local elections in May. One of the critical decisions now on hold is the approval of a three-year budget that would have enabled critical changes in the health service, which has one of the worst waiting lists in Europe. Donaldson said he had no choice but to act as the current protocol presented an “existential threat” to the union of the UK. He said rivals had already goaded him as the “boy who cried wolf” but he had shown patience and given the government and the EU time to deliver a new Brexit deal. He said it was “premature” to set a three-year budget before the May elections when a “fresh mandate” could be set. The DUP’s decision to instruct port officials to stop conducting Brexit checks on food and farm products arriving from Great Britain is already being challenged in the courts. Two unnamed individuals lodged an emergency application for a judicial review of Poots’s order on Thursday with a hearing expected on Friday. During the initial hearing it emerged that the checks would not be stopped until Monday at the earliest.A group of American truckers are seeking to import a Canadian movement to protest against vaccine mandates, with thousands of members on social media pledging to bring the demonstration to Washington DC next month. In Canada trucker protests have been linked to the far right and caused days of disruption in the capital, Ottawa, as well as in a border town in Alberta. US organizers operating a Facebook group called Convoy to DC 2022 quickly gained more than 100,000 members and announced a convoy next month. But the Facebook group was recently removed by Meta. “We have removed this group for repeatedly violating our polices around QAnon,” said a spokesperson for Meta, referring to the QAnon conspiracy movement that has sprung up in rightwing circles and often promotes antisemitic tropes. Organizers of the convoy say they are demonstrating strictly against vaccine mandates, which they consider unconstitutional, and deny any affiliation to QAnon. “None of us are QAnon supporters or followers or anything like that,” said Jeremy Johnson, an organizer and one of the group admins. “We didn’t even have anything like that posted on our personal pages.” Johnson said his personal Facebook along with those of two of the other organizers were also removed for violating QAnon policies, despite his own disavowal of the conspiracy movement. He has appeared on the conservative channel Fox News since the ban, telling the Fox &amp; Friends show: “They like to silence people that speak the truth.” Since being banned on Facebook the organizers of the convoy have moved to Telegram, where more than 28,000 have joined. The Guardian has reported on the rightwing exodus to alt-tech platforms like Telegram. In Canada, the protests have attracted far-right protesters, organizers and fundraisers. They have driven to Ottawa where some reportedly defaced statues and carried swastika flags. A separate trucker convoy has also blocked a border crossing into the US in the Alberta town of Coutts. Police in Ottawa recently warned they might have to call in the military to disband the protests. But some organizers in the US say far-right and far-left groups are not welcome in the group. “We don’t condone it or want it there. On either side,” said Brian Brase, one of the organizers. “All races, genders, sexual orientation, ethnicities, legal status are welcome,” said Brose. “This isn’t conservative or liberal.” Johnson said the convoy was about Covid-19 mandates, which they believe are unconstitutional, and not about the efficacy of vaccines or Covid-19 denial. “We’re not against the vaccine. We don’t want anybody to be discriminated against because they choose not to get the vaccine,” said Johnson. This month the supreme court’s conservative majority blocked a mandate from the Biden administration that would have required businesses with more than 100 employees to compel their staff to get vaccinated or provide a negative Covid test weekly. However, the court allowed a more limited vaccine mandate that affects about 10 million healthcare workers at facilities that participate in federal Medicaid and Medicare programs. But groups that monitor the far right in the US are concerned about the planned protest. “The far right uses big public events like this, particularly around Covid denial, as an opportunity to normalize their presence as well as an opportunity to recruit new members,” said Devin Burghart, executive director of Institute for Research &amp; Education on Human Rights. “There are examples in Canada where the far right came out in droves.” Burghart said the far right seizes on vaccine hesitancy and Covid-19 denial, with legitimate healthcare awareness efforts outmatched by the sheer size of misinformation campaigns. “It’s very hard these days to draw a bright line in the Covid denial space that is dominated by conspiracy thinking and far-right ideology,” he said.I caught Covid in October 2020, and lost my sense of smell and taste. Back then I worked in a school, so catching the virus felt inevitable. At first, I didn’t think too much about it: anosmia (loss of sense of smell) is a common symptom of the virus. After four weeks or so, and a brief stint in hospital, I regained some of my ability to taste things: salty, sour, sweet. My nose was still misbehaving, but my tongue was starting to slowly whirr back into action. I thought I was on the mend. By the middle of December, however, things started to get strange. In the house, I was certain I kept smelling stale ashtrays. I’m not a smoker, so it made no sense. Then I started smelling exhaust fumes. I looked online and found other people reporting similar experiences of phantosmia (smelling of odours that aren’t there). I’d be consumed by these aromas even in pure, clean air. It was a total assault on my senses: morning to night I had a repugnant fragrance in my nostrils. I’d drive my family to distraction, asking if they could smell it, too, and struggled to rustle up an appetite. Occasionally, out of the blue, I’d be blasted with a strong smell of fresh lilies, which was a welcome relief. Sadly, having flowers around the house had no effect. The smells stayed for about two months. Towards the end of 2020, I’d become used to my new condition: things were still a little wonky, but you adapt. In early 2021, I was eating batch-cooked spaghetti bolognese with my kids when I realised the sauce didn’t taste right. I assumed it had spoiled, so we stopped eating it immediately. The next time I had red meat, however, I encountered the same problem. It wasn’t long before nearly everything I ate, and soon smelled, was revolting to me. Simple cooking smells made me retch, violently; if my food had been anywhere near an onion, I’d feel physically sick. Things smelled and tasted like rotting flesh. Imagine an animal had crawled into your greenhouse in the height of summer, died, and you discovered it two weeks later. That’s what, day in and day out, filled my nose and mouth. I would open the fridge and be certain something was decomposing; my mum received frequent requests to come over and give things a sniff. I searched for bland food, settling for a simple ready-meal macaroni cheese. Soon that, too, became impossible for me to eat without nearly – and sometimes actually – vomiting. It turned out it had onion powder in it. Peppers, garlic, fried foods and meats – they all induced the same reaction. By April, half a year after my initial Covid diagnosis, there was only a handful of things I could safely eat – cold plain pasta, bananas, yoghurt and cereal – without throwing up. It’s the same to this day. Since August 2021, I’ve rarely felt hungry. I only eat when I feel I should. When I do, it’s far from pleasant. When lockdown restrictions lifted and I ventured into town, I realised it was a bigger problem. At home I could control my environment, but smells are everywhere on the street: traffic, perfume, takeaways. I couldn’t face going for a meal or to the cinema, and setting foot in a supermarket was a gamble, too. Swimmer’s nose plugs help, though they are uncomfortable and look ridiculous. I use them so I can make meals for my family. I’ve also started trimming down foam earplugs and lodging them in my nostrils. You don’t realise how heavily food features in life until it becomes an issue; weddings, funerals, the Christmas “do”. I’m happy to go along and not eat, but people stare and it feels awkward. Instead, I turn down invitations. I miss cooking and baking. Now I barely eat 500 calories a day, but I haven’t lost any weight. When you’re overweight your doctors aren’t too bothered that you’re not eating enough. The worst part, medically speaking, is that my condition is still a bit of a mystery. There’s not even a definitive consensus as to why it happens. I’ve met others online who are suffering like me – it feels as if we have been forgotten. Until there’s a cure, which may never happen, it’s a waiting game. Will I one day wake up and find my senses have returned to normal? I honestly have no idea. • As told to Michael Segalov Do you have an experience to share? Email experience@theguardian.comMy earliest reading memory Aged five or so, at primary school: a story about two siblings, Janet and John, who didn’t have much of a life beyond throwing a red ball. Soon after, Roger Hargreaves’s Mr Greedy – much more fun, and terrifying when the giant shows up. The cover retained my bite marks. My favourite book growing up The Ghost of Thomas Kempe by Penelope Lively, about a boy chosen by an alchemist’s spirit to be an apprentice. It’s beautifully written, is set in English rural world of my boyhood, and I found reassurance in how the story was resolved not by force or cunning, but by acceptance, time and what we’d now call emotional intelligence. The book that changed me as a teenager EB White’s Charlotte’s Web gave me the uncomfortable idea that the contents of my bacon sarnie had wanted to be alive as much as I did. Anne Frank’s Diary and Richard Wright’s Native Son gave me a sense of proportion regarding my own problems and injustices. The writer who changed my mind The Reason I Jump by Naoki Higashida changed my mind about autism when I read it in my early 40s. Previously, I had interpreted my son’s non-verbal autism as a cognitive impairment. Thanks to this book, I understood it was me who had been labouring under a cognitive impairment. The books that made me want to be a writer Several, in no order: Ursula K Le Guin’s Earthsea trilogy; CS Lewis’s The Voyage of the Dawn Treader; Richard Adams’s Watership Down; Susan Cooper’s The Dark Is Rising quintet; the closing line of The Lord of the Rings – Sam’s “Well, I’m back.” I would lie in bed on Saturday morning asking the book: “How do you do that? How do you make readers feel what I’m feeling now?” The book I came back to James Joyce’s Ulysses was my lockdown read. It was getting embarrassing having to go silent and vague when the subject of Joyce came up. I’m a professional novelist living in Ireland, for heaven’s sake. This time, it clicked. The book I reread The Left Hand of Darkness by Ursula K Le Guin, once a decade. It’s trippy, human, mind-expanding, curious, feels more prescient by the year and has one of my favourite lines from anything: “The King was pregnant.” The book is a chance to catch up with my past and future selves and see how we’re getting on. The book I could never read again I devoured Willard Price’s Adventure series books as a kid, about two white American brothers, Hal and Roger Hunt, who scour the globe for endangered fauna to put in crates and send back to their father’s New York zoo. Our plucky heroes outwit rival animal hunters, Africans, Asians and “savages” too damn stubborn to recognise a white messiah when they see one. For some reason, you don’t see the books around any more … The books I discovered later in life Halldór Laxness’s Independent People. Marguerite Yourcenar’s Memoirs of Hadrian. Marcus Aurelius’s Meditations. Van Gogh’s letters to his brother Theo. Literature is an all-you-can-eat buffet with no expiry date. The book I am currently reading Sudden Traveller, Sarah Hall’s latest short story collection. Ye Gods, Ms Hall is talented. My comfort read Jamie Oliver’s 5 Ingredients cookbook, a Father’s Day present from my wife a couple of years ago. Choose something you have the ingredients for, follow the instructions, serve it up and yell: “It’s ready!” Bask as everyone eats the first forkful, goes quiet and my wife says: “You should make this when your brother comes.”. If I need cheering up, that usually works.In the tiny village of Martimporra (population 16), nestling among the lush green hills and valleys typical of Asturias, Orfelina Suárez, 58, runs a household goods shop. “If I was only allowed to speak Spanish I’d struggle with some vocabulary because I’m used to speaking Asturian,” she says. “Without Asturian, life around here would be impossible. It’s not about geography, it’s more of an emotional terrain. You can’t underestimate the importance of a language that you speak and live and feel.” Martimporra is in Bimenes, a district where the Asturian language has officially enjoyed equal status with Spanish since 1998. Now the regional government proposes to extend this language parity throughout Asturias. Basque separatists laid down their arms more than 10 years ago and with the Catalan independence movement currently running out of steam, it seemed that Spain, a nation state at risk of unravelling along regional and linguistic lines, had stitched itself back together. But national unity could face its next challenge from this small and mainly rural region best known for its dairy products, cider and, until recently, coal mining. In October, up to 10,000 people marched through Oviedo, the Asturian capital, to demand an upgrade for the region’s language. Just how many of Asturias’ one million inhabitants speak Asturian daily is a moot point. Any Spanish speaker would find it easy to understand. While it has grammatical differences, many common verbs are either the same or vary only slightly: hacer (to do or make) is facer in Asturian; hablar (to talk) is falar. Many nouns differ only by a letter: harina (flour) is farina in Asturian; gato (cat) is gatu. As a spoken language, many argue that Asturian is little more than a Spanish dialect. But then, as others may counter, a language is simply a dialect with an army and navy. Spain already recognises four co-official languages – Catalan, Euskera (Basque), Galician and Aranés – each sharing equal status with Spanish in the region where it’s spoken. If Asturian joins their ranks, the other minority languages of Aragón, León and Extremadura, as well as the Spanish Gypsy languages Caló and Erromintxela, may demand similar treatment in a Spanish state already fractured along linguistic fault lines. Xosé Antón González is the president of the Asturian language academy, which has produced the standardised form of Asturian that will be implemented should the regional parliament vote to make it co-official. He says that Asturian is a language in its own right. “We’re realists,” he says. “We don’t have a problem with bilingualism. We know that Asturian is a small language that belongs to a small community of one million people and that Spanish will continue to be the main form of communication with the rest of the world. But without the sort of protection offered under the constitution it can’t survive.” Berta Piñán, the Asturian culture minister, argues that making the language co-official simply asserts speakers’ rights under the constitution. From that point on, “Asturias will be able to design its own language model based on rights rather than obligations”, she says. “Making it co-official is the only way to guarantee our freedom to express ourselves in Asturian,” says Inaciu Galán, an Asturian language activist who has compiled an Asturian-English dictionary. However, some Asturians fear the language will become politically weaponised, as is the case with Catalan, Euskera and, to a lesser extent, Galician. “It’s very sad the way it’s been politicised,” says Álvaro Queipo, secretary-general of the conservative People’s party in Asturias. “Now there is no debate, just emotion and posturing, dividing Asturians into the good, who want to make the language co-official, and the bad, who don’t.” González argues that language is a more fraught issue in Spain than in other European nations because Spain lurched from absolute monarchy into 40 years of fascist dictatorship with only a brief democratic interlude. A uniform idea of the nation was imposed without any recognition of significant regional differences. The other issue is nationalism. “The reason we have linguistic conflict in Spain is because the nationalists are linguistic nationalists, as in Québec,” says Mercè Vilarrubias, a linguist and advocate of bilingual education. Language, she says, is a means for regions to assert that they are different from the rest of Spain. She speculates on what could happen if the Spanish state gave these languages prestige nationally, beyond the areas where they are spoken, which is what Canada has done with French. Instead, Spain’s other co-official languages are invisible outside their regions and face an increasingly vocal, one-nation Spanish nationalism led by a resurgent neo-fascism not seen the end of the dictatorship in 1975. The far-right Vox party, vehemently opposed to minority languages, has produced a billboard campaign depicting the Asturian president kissing a language campaigner under the slogan: “They’re trying to stick their tongue in you.” On the other hand, Vilarrubias says, once a language becomes co-official, nationalist governments can try to marginalise Spanish and use language as a separatist tool. This is what is behind an ugly dispute in Canet de Mar, a seaside town north of Barcelona, where a family complained of harassment and abuse for seeking to have their five-year-old son taught at least partly in Spanish. Insisting on the right to be educated in Spanish as well as Catalan is viewed by nationalists as anti-Catalan, even though more than 50% of Catalans claim Spanish as their mother tongue, compared with 36% for Catalan. The resurgence of linguistic regionalism seems to undermine the process through which many of Europe’s nation-states emerged in the 19th century. Language standardisation was a used as a unifying factor, for example, in the creation of the Italian state in 1871. In recent decades, however, language has been used as a justification for separation, not unity. The European Union encourages the protection of minority languages – other than its 24 official languages (Irish only moved to full official status on 1 January) – following the conviction that linguistic diversity is a social good. The European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages, adopted in 1992 by the human rights body the Council of Europe (which has 47 member states), recognises 60 minority languages spoken by 50 million Europeans, 10 million of whom are Catalan speakers. The charter does not provide any definition of what a language or dialect is. Scots, which many see as a dialect, is recognised by the UK in the charter, but Italy doesn’t recognise its numerous regional dialects as languages, although it does list 12 languages aside from Italian, among them Catalan, Albanian and Sardinian. “Dialects [in Italy] are not a political issue in the way the minority languages are in Spain,” says Anna Cozzolino, a Neapolitan resident in Barcelona whose dialect includes words of Spanish, Catalan, French and Arabic origin. “They survive because they’re spoken at home and in the street. Growing up in a middle-class Neapolitan family the local dialect was seen as vulgar but now people take pride in speaking it.” Asturian language campaigners want to keep the language alive by ensuring it is taught in schools. But the main motivation behind the drive to extend co-official status is to raise its profile and use in public life. Even in Catalonia, where a system of immersion ensures that everyone is fluent in Catalan, studies show that young people increasingly prefer to speak Spanish. This is partly because the internet and social media have further empowered Spanish and English, while doing nothing to stop the perception among many young people that Catalan is uncool. Immigration is also a factor. About 1.3 million of Catalonia’s 7.5 million inhabitants are immigrants with little or no stake in the nationalist discourse. Around a third are Spanish speakers from Latin America, but others, such as Moroccans, tend to also speak in Spanish, partly because Catalans don’t speak to them in Catalan, thus reinforcing the impression among many immigrants that Catalan isn’t for them. In the Basque country, where the educational options are 100% Spanish, 100% Euskera or a mix of the two, about 70% opt for Euskera, while immigrants are more likely to choose Spanish. About 750,000 of the Basque country’s 2.1 million inhabitants speak Euskera, an increase of 233,000 over 25 years which is an extraordinary achievement for a language that, unlike Galician and Catalan, is not part of the Latin family of languages. “There’s a lot of talk about language rights,” says Rafa Arenas, an Asturian who teaches law at the Universitat Autònoma in Barcelona. “The question is, does a language have a right to have people who speak it, or is about people’s linguistic rights?” González argues that, when a minority language is lost, we also lose a way of understanding the world. “This leads to uniformity which I don’t think is good for humanity. It’s our language and our culture and we still have time to save it. It’s my mother tongue.” Aníbal Martín, who is campaigning for Castúo, which is spoken in northern Extremadura, to be made co-official, agrees. “There’s a consensus that we need to conserve our material heritage – a Roman bridge, for example – and language is part of the heritage you carry within yourself,” he says. “Abandoning a language means abandoning part of who we are.” Back in Martimporra, Orfelina Suárez is perplexed by all the fuss. “I don’t understand why wanting to preserve a language could be so controversial,” she says. “Just because we stand up for Asturian, it doesn’t mean we’re politically motivated. It’s the politicians who politicise language.” • This article was amended on 10 February 2022 to clarify that Irish moved to “full official” status on 1 January 2022. Irish was legally granted the status of an official and working EU language in 2007, but a derogation in place since then restricted the amount of material translated into Irish. Since 1 January 2022 Irish has been on a par with the other official EU languages.Tony Colombo is one of the biggest names in neomelodica, an Italian music style combining elements of traditional Neapolitan song (think O Sole Mio) with modern pop influences. He has released more than 20 albums, held concerts across Italy, Germany, Canada and the US, and has hordes of fans. It is also alleged that part of his fortune comes from laundering money for the Camorra, the Neapolitan mafia , made famous through its depiction in Roberto Saviano’s book Gomorrah and its TV adaptation. On 21 December, the Italian police confiscated goods from Colombo including an apartment, two cars and €80,000 (£66,000). In 2019, Colombo married the widow of a Camorra boss and he has reportedly been seen at parties thrown by the Camorra; prosecutors believe he has received dirty money from his wife’s clan and attempted to pass them as proceeds from his music career. He has always denied any involvement with organised crime. It isn’t an isolated case. Neomelodica singers are often accused of colluding with the Camorra – sometimes by their actions, sometimes through their music. And, as the authorities circle around Colombo, the Italian parliament is also discussing a law criminalising the glorification of the mob that seems specifically drafted to target some neomelodici. It somewhat mirrors other disputes across the globe. London drill rappers, for example, are censored by police fearful that their songs could instigate gang violence; Spanish rapper Pablo Hasel was arrested for glorifying terrorism and insulting the monarchy in his lyrics, while musicians led by Jay-Z argued this month for a change in New York law to mean lyrics cannot be used as criminal evidence. “These days, you go on TikTok and it’s all guns and money,” says Gianni Fiorellino, another popular neomelodici – who has no links to organised crime, but is dismayed at the idea his style could be censored. “I don’t see why that should be allowed and lyrics about organised crime should not.” Neomelodica was born in the 1980s as a reaction to societal change and the crisis of the canzone napoletana, the traditional, hyper-sentimental Neapolitan song (sometimes accompanied by mandolin or guitar) that bloomed in the early 19th century. By the 70s canzone napoletana had fallen out of fashion, and around the same period its hotbed, Naples, underwent a transformation, with the creation of neighbourhoods completely segregated from the city’s polite society. “In a way, neomelodica was to Naples what hip-hop was to America, it gave a voice to impoverished neighbourhoods,” says Marcello Ravveduto, a history professor at the University of Salerno. Whereas canzone napoletana was representing a picture-perfect, idealised Naples, neomelodici began depicting the harsh reality of its peripheries. Blending Neapolitan dialect with Italian, neomelodici sing of lost lovers and betrayal, teenage sex and divorce, drugs and broken homes. Some of them also sing of organised crime, a topic the fanbase would be familiar with, touching issues such as latitanza, mob soldiers going into hiding; and pentitismo, arrested mob soldiers collaborating with the police. “It’s a music rooted in the territory, with great melodies, where lyrics are central – they are like a mirror of Neapolitan sentiment,” says Fiorellino, who has released about 12 albums. Fiorellino is one of the few neomelodici who has performed in Italy’s most important music festival, Sanremo, but, aside from a few exceptions such as him and Gigi D’Alessio, Italy’s mainstream culture frowns upon neomelodica. For one, it is associated with urban poverty, while some neomelodica hits openly describe the Camorra, and more rarely the Sicilian Cosa Nostra. Tommy Riccio’s Nu’ Latitante is about hiding from justice, away from your family. Then there’s Lisa Castaldi’s Il Mio Amico Camorrista (My Camorra Friend), and Gianni Vezzosi’s ’O Killer or Carcere Minorile (Juvenile Prison). Ravveduto describes such songs as “a way to justify a way of being”. On one hand, those songs are critiques of society, and the way it pushes people toward crime; on the other, they take pride in otherness, and in resorting to violence to get what you want. Some view these songs as a propaganda tool for the mob, and this criticism has become more vocal. Before streaming, neomelodica used to be broadcast by small local radio stations, sometimes directly controlled by organised crime, but the internet has turned the genre into a near-national phenomenon. Last April, protests by anti-mafia activists forced Niko Pandetta to cancel a concert in Ostia, near Rome. Pandetta, a Sicilian who stands out for combining neomelodica with trap, is also the nephew of a prominent Cosa Nostra boss, Salvatore “Turi” Cappello. He dedicated his first hit to his uncle. The lawmaker Stefania Ascari has presented a bill that would make it illegal to glorify the mafia. She says she doesn’t want to target neomelodica as a genre, but only those artists “who are close to organised crime”, and points out that Camorra has exploited neomelodica to send veiled messages. For instance, two years ago, a group of mobsters detained in a high-security prison near Avellino shot a video to the beat of the song Si Sto’ Carcerato (The Inmate, by Tommy Riccio) to send the message that their clan stood strong, even behind bars. “Yes, I am an inmate, it was a life choice,” went the lyrics, as they waved to their families. “If you’re in a high-security prison and all detainees ask for neomelodica songs, you start wondering why,” says Ascari. Fiorellino is sceptical of the bill, even though it would not target his purely romantic songs. Ravveduto says the idea makes sense, at least in theory – “when songs glorify mafia powers, they should get them out of the market” – but in practice, he believes, there’s a risk that such a measure could turn into a boomerang. There’s a precedent in Mexico, where some northern states banned narcocorridos, the songs glorifying drug smugglers, and ended up turning them into the hymns for rebel youth. “If you crack down on music, you could end up providing the mob with new propaganda ammunition,” he says. “They could end up with even more leverage on the youth: ‘See, authorities don’t even let you express yourself.’”Over the 17 days of the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing, more than 70% of the American population tuned in to watch on NBC, which has owned the exclusive US broadcast rights since 1988. The official audience figure of 215m domestic viewers far exceeded guarantees to advertisers and represented the apotheosis of the network’s star-driven storytelling ethos under longtime NBC Sports chairman Dick Ebersol, one of the last high-profile sports TV impresarios. But as the Olympics return to the Chinese capital less than 14 years on, the awareness and general buzz around the Games stateside, while impossible to quantify with any precision, has never felt lower. Despite a star-studded US Olympic team filled with established champions and promising newcomers that will march into the National Stadium during Friday’s opening ceremony and pile up medals in the weeks to come, the outcome could be a commercial nadir that makes the underwhelming ratings from last year’s Tokyo Games seem like a fond memory. Why that is is down to a constellation of factors. Advertisers keeping their distance The athletes pushed by NBC as the faces of the Beijing Winter Games – alpine skier Mikaela Shiffrin, figure skater Nathan Chen, cross-country skier Jessie Diggins, snowboarders Shaun White and Chloe Kim – are no less accomplished or advertiser-friendly than previous headliners. But the network is finding that no amount of promotional willpower is enough if Coca-Cola, Visa, Procter &amp; Gamble and co aren’t doing their part. The corporate sponsors that typically go big on the Olympics have kept their distance in the run-up amid global condemnation for the host country’s human-rights abuses against Uyghurs and other Turkic Muslims in far western Xinjiang – which the US state department has labelled a genocide – in addition to the persecution of Tibetans and the repression of Hong Kong’s freedoms. Those thorny geopolitical implications were only underscored when the US, Australia, Britain and Canada announced a diplomatic boycott of the event last month. Only two of the 20 official Team USA sponsors had aired spots pegged to the Olympics as of Wednesday, according to Reuters, with both focusing on the athletes while downplaying the host nation. That’s a far cry from the flood-the-zone deluge that’s critical to breaking through and building anticipation for athletes and sports that are largely in the public eye only once every four years. Bottom line: many casual sports fans, perhaps thrown off by an Olympics taking place only seven months after the last one due to the coronavirus postponement, are barely aware a Winter Games is even happening. Timing is everything A third straight Olympics staged in the inhospitable time zones of east Asia was always going to present a challenge for NBC, which paid $7.75bn for broadcast rights through 2032 before Beijing was awarded this year’s affair. But the network’s broadcast choices in response have been strewn with unforced errors, not least its famously byzantine Tokyo coverage spread across two broadcast channels, a half-dozen cable channels and multiple digital platforms, that managed to estrange curious passers-by while baffling even dedicated fans who knew what they’re looking for but couldn’t easily seek it out. Perhaps the most glaring example surrounded the women’s team gymnastics final, which took place in prime time in Japan. Even as most of America woke up to a flurry of push notifications and breaking news alerts that spread word of Simone Biles’ shocking withdrawal due to mental health issues, NBC and its affiliate stations throughout the country went through the day as if one of the biggest global stories in any sport last year wasn’t unfolding in a risible effort to preserve its primetime audience – a decision better suited to Tokyo 1964 than Tokyo 2020. By failing to update a hidebound model for a media ecosystem dominated by streaming services and social media, NBC risks letting one of the most lucrative properties in all of sports drift toward irrelevance. Avoiding last summer’s missteps in Beijing would be a good start. The Covid question The Olympics are, like all major sporting spectacles these days, fundamentally a made-for-TV event. The spaces where the competitions take place are often so outfitted with cameras, lighting and equipment they can feel like television studios as much as sporting venues. But the empty stadiums that hosted the Tokyo Games, a precaution that Beijing will mostly follow, laid bare the importance of live crowds to the overall package. The quality of coverage will be further undercut by the scaling-back of resources on the ground due to coronavirus concerns and China’s strict quarantine policies. ESPN’s decision to not send reporters to Beijing was not a big deal as it tends to ignore the Olympics even in normal years, but NBC’s announcement that it would broadcast all events remotely and have only a skeleton crew on the ground raised eyebrows. This sense of detachment can also be felt on the ground in the days before the opening ceremony. With all participants from athletes to media members having entered a closed loop that completely separates them from the general public since arriving in China, the result is a sort of panopticon-like effect, as if you’re experiencing the city from behind a window. All of it adds up to the same lack of atmosphere, emotion and human connection that diminished the Tokyo Games as a spectacle through no fault of the athletes themselves. Hockey fright in America Just as the decision to allow NBA players to participate in the Olympics ahead of the 1992 Barcelona Games whipped up interest among meat-and-potatoes US sports fans whose interests are bound to the four major North American leagues, the inclusion of NHL players at the Winter Games has proven a key draw for casual audiences. That was never more evident than at the 2010 Vancouver Olympics when Canada faced off with the United States in the gold medal game. More than 26.7m people in the US – and roughly half the Canadian population – watched the Americans force overtime on Zach Parise’s last-minute goal before Sidney Crosby’s epochal overtime winner provided arguably the most indelible moment in the host nation’s Olympic history. But as the spread of the Omicron variant was laying waste to the NHL’s regular season last month, the league and its players’ union announced they would no longer be sending players to Beijing. The gutting of star power aside, the decision will have a disproportionate effect on the US and Canadian teams, whose rosters lean more heavily on NHL players than the traditional European powers. Changing habits Some of the perception shift around the Olympics is simply elemental and larger than any one network or sporting event. The monoculture was dead and traditional network audiences fragmenting even before getting smashed to smithereens by the ascent of streaming services. People simply don’t watch TV like they used to, young people in particular. The Olympics is no longer event television, but neither are the Oscars. That reality is reflected in the most recent viewership figures. Last year’s Tokyo Games drew the smallest audience of any televised Olympics, with an average viewership of 15.5m in addition to cable and streaming outlets. The Pyeongchang Olympics three years earlier averaged 19.8m viewers, the lowest ever for a Winter Games. All signs indicate Beijing will struggle to better either mark. Of course none of that matters for the more than 150 members of the US team who have made the trip to China after years of self-sacrifice and discipline. The public apathy of the run-up will invariably turn to excitement as unexpected stars emerge and familiar names shine. But for the Olympics to command the American consciousness like when they last came to Beijing will require something extraordinary and unpredictable. Fortunately, that’s just what sport does best.The hack According to users on TikTok, wearing a petroleum-based moisturiser under your perfume can make a scent last longer on your skin. The promise Fine fragrances can cost a fortune, and the more often you apply them, the more of your money evaporates into thin air. By smearing petroleum jelly on your neck before spritzing your perfume, you delay the drying-out process and there’s no need to reapply. The test There is logic here: scents don’t last as long on dry skin, and the alcohol that forms the base of most fragrances dries it out even more. Some schools of thought suggest applying an unscented moisturiser, then spritzing on top, but TikTok recommends using petroleum jelly instead. So in the morning I apply the jelly to one wrist but not the other, then spray my light floral fragrance on each. By the end of the day, after a sniff, the jellied wrist definitely has a stronger scent. The next day I take my investigation further, using deeper, wood-based notes that are known to last longest on the skin (the best contain oud, which is extracted from one of the most expensive woods in the world). I repeat the process. By the evening, the difference is marked – I even have it verified by a pal to check that I’m not losing my mind. The verdict This was a cinch to try out. For once, I can safely say: the petroleum jelly hack undeniably works.Abu Ibrahim al-Hashimi al-Qurayshi took over as leader of Islamic State in 2019 following the deaths in quick succession of Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi and Baghdadi’s nominated successor Abu Hassan al-Muhajjir. The US operation to try to kill him had been in the planning stages since early December, when officials became convinced that he was living in a nondescript three-storey building on the outskirts of Atme in Syria’s Idlib province, close to the Turkish border. He and his family had been in the house for 11 months, according to his landlord. Qurayshi said he was from Aleppo and was carrying a Syrian ID. He moved in with three children, a wife and another woman whom he said was his sister. The operation was complicated by the fact that Qurayshi was known to only rarely leave his residence on the building’s third floor, instead relying upon a network of couriers in order to interact with others. The only known exception was when he sometimes would go to the building’s roof to bathe, officials said. Administration officials said that President Biden approved the operation on Tuesday morning in the Oval Office. US special forces flew in from Erbil in Iraq, arriving at approximately 3am local time (1am GMT). A man speaking Arabic with an Iraqi accent through a loudspeaker told the occupants of the house that they had 15 minutes to surrender. People fled from the first of the building, and a short while later, according to the US, Qurayshi detonated explosives in his home, causing a blast so large that bodies were blown out on the ground. After the blast, special forces stormed the building, where they opened fire on Qurayshi’s top lieutenant and his wife, who had barricaded themselves in their home on the second floor. Both were killed but four children were rescued. Witnesses said the US troops were on the ground for more than two hours – a long time for a special forces operation. A total of 13 people lay dead by the time the Americans left. It is not clear how many were killed by direct US fire, and how many died during the purported blast inside the house. A blood splatter near a large pool of congealed blood appeared to support the claim that a powerful blast had detonated near a person. Biden later said that a raid rather than an airstrike had been ordered to minimise civilian casualties. He also claimed that the high death count was caused by the explosion inside the house, and not a US attack. However, there was a significant discrepancy between the initial Pentagon report that eight children had been safely evacuated and two children were killed by the blast triggered by Qurayshi, and the accounts of first responders on the scene who say they found six children and four women dead. “Some of the corpses in the area do not look like they died in an explosion. They look like they were hit by extremely heavy calibre gunfire,” Charles Lister, director of the Syria programme at the Middle East Institute in Washington, said. A helicopter used to ferry forces to the scene suffered some form of malfunction, in circumstances that are not clear. It was destroyed by a circling US jet and the wreckage remains near the house. All troops returned safely to Erbil. Photos later circulated of the face of a dead man closely resembled a photograph of Qurayshi. American forensic experts took DNA samples of his body to match against samples they already had and Biden later confirmed the identification. The precise version of events was still unclear hours after the attack. As is often the case in complex attacks carried out in the dark, it may be some time before clarity on who was killed and by whom is reached.Thousands of demonstrators are expected to hit Brazil’s streets on Saturday to protest against the murder of a young Congolese refugee whose killing – captured in spine-chilling video footage – has caused an explosion of anger over deep-rooted structural racism and hate violence. Moïse Mugenyi Kabagambe abandoned his home in the conflict-stricken city of Bunia, in the Democratic Republic of Congo, 11 years ago after his grandmother was killed. He sought shelter thousands of miles away in Brazil only to lose his own life last week, aged 24, after being set upon by a group of men on one of Rio’s best-known beaches, Barra da Tijuca. Relatives say Kabagambe had gone there to demand 200 reais (£28) in unpaid wages from the seaside bar where he had worked informally as a waiter serving beach-goers. Kabagambe sustained fatal chest injuries after being knocked to the ground and battered dozens of times with pieces of wood and fists. His hands and feet were reportedly bound after he was knocked unconscious. One local newspaper ran images of the ferocious 24 January assault – which occurred just metres from some of Rio’s most exclusive beachfront hotels and condos – on its front page under the headline: “Cowardice. Savagery. Barbarity.” “My cousin never hurt anyone, he was always smiling. It’s abhorrent. It’s a nightmare,” said his cousin, Chadrac Kembilu Nkusu, a fellow refugee who is considering fleeing to Canada because of the attack. “Brazil is a mother, a country that embraces everyone. I cannot understand how this mother could have killed a son as good as Moïse,” Nkusu added. So far three men have been arrested for a crime that has sparked a wave of revulsion from campaigners, politicians and celebrities. “Brazil is a dangerous country for us black people. Beware!” tweeted Preto Zezé, a prominent black activist and impresario. A supreme court judge, Gilmar Mendes, said the “deplorable scenes of hatred and barbarity” exposed the dangers of intolerance, racism and xenophobia. On Saturday morning civil rights activists and citizens will rally at the crime scene, while demonstrations are also planned in cities including São Paulo, Recife, Belo Horizonte and Porto Alegre. Douglas Belchior, a leader from the Coalizão Negra Por Direitos network which is helping organize protests, said: “The barbaric murder of black people is shamefully commonplace in Brazil … Here we have a George Floyd every 23 minutes. We have a Moïse every 23 minutes. We are constantly being killed.” Wiping tears from his eyes, Belchior spurned the notion that his country offered a safe sanctuary for black refugees. “The image we sell of Brazil is a lie. It’s not true that we are a mother who offers shelter. Brazil is a country of race war. What’s happening here is a war – black people die every single day. It is a state of terror – and we have to expose this.” Brazil’s far-right president, Jair Bolsonaro, who owns a home a few minutes’ walk from the murder scene, has remained silent over Kabagambe’s killing – although he did find time to wade into the row over Spotify and Covid misinformation. “Stand your ground! Hugs from Brazil,” Bolsonaro tweeted at the controversial podcast host Joe Rogan on Thursday. But the former leftist president, Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, condemned the “cowardly murder”. “This isn’t normal. This isn’t human. It’s the result of a country that is being governed by a fascist,” Lula said, blaming Bolsonaro’s radical administration for the climate of violence. Activists believe the roots of Kabagambe’s murder run much deeper, describing the killing as part of slavery’s malignant legacy in a country that received nearly 5 million enslaved people from Africa. Belchior said: “Brazil is a country built on slavery. It’s the country that endured slavery for the longest, was the last in the Americas to abolish it – and the way Brazilian society was organized post-slavery was designed to perpetuate the social dynamic by which black people were subjected to the slave owners’s way of thinking.” Wesley Teixeira, a Rio-based activist and educator who will attend Saturday’s protest, said the murder exposed “the open wound of slavery”. Teixeira voiced bewilderment nobody had intervened to stop the attack: “Brazilian society sees a black body splayed out on the floor, dead, and carries on drinking … as if it’s all completely normal.” Belchior said all of Brazilian society – rather than just black people and movements – needed to mobilize if such killings were to be stopped. “There wouldn’t be space in the news for any other topic if this was a white person from Europe or the US. But it was an African person from the Congo – so no sweat,” he said. “This is sickening and it is intolerable. I feel great anger, but sadness too – because there is nothing to suggest that very soon the same thing won’t happen again.”Mahamat-Saleh Haroun is the Chadian film-maker whose 2002 movie Abouna – my favourite of his – has a claim to classic status. Now he returns with a film that is recognisably a part of African cinema’s quietist walking-pace tradition, set in a place where, on its outskirts, the city becomes a village. The two distant ambient sounds are barnyard chickens and incessant traffic noise. Yet for all its ostensible gentleness, his storytelling is driven by a need to challenge the country’s reactionary theocratic males. There are fierce and even shocking stabs of sexuality and violence cutting through the opaque, stoic calm. The title Lingui is the Chadian word meaning sacred bonds, and on the question of abortion, the male rulers of church and state think the really sacred bond is between mother and unborn child, or perhaps more pertinently, between submissive women and autocratic menfolk. But the men’s opposition to abortion co-exists with an enormous enthusiasm for female genital mutilation. The film shows that they are two halves of a whole, and the women involved feel that their sacred bonds are those of loyalty to each other. Amina is a single mother who has to pretend that her husband is dead; in fact, she was made pregnant by a man who simply deserted her. Now she makes a living creating wire stoves out of reclaimed materials, chiefly the circular wiring inside discarded tyres. It is a strong and charismatic performance from Achouackh Abakar, whose calmly assertive face is repeatedly captured in extreme closeup. Her teenage daughter Maria is a smart, popular pupil at the local high school, but she has just been expelled for being pregnant, without a word of concern from the hatchet-faced and disapproving headteacher. Rihane Khalil Alio gives a performance of defiant scorn as Maria. Wretched Amina is horrified at the thought of her daughter having an abortion, because she feels the need to conform to religious teachings, and placate the local imam. But the film shows how she is also wretched at another thought: the feeling that, yes, Maria is quite right; that this is her body and that she should be allowed to do what she wants. This thought complicates the already fraught mother-daughter relationship, as Amina was in this situation herself not so long ago. Now Amina must consider how far she is prepared to go, how far she is prepared to abase herself to get her daughter the abortion she wants. All of this is to bring the two women into contact with Amina’s estranged sister Fanta (Briya Gomdigue), whose own daughter is threatened with FGM, and their middle-aged male neighbour Brahim (Youssouf Djaoro), who has made a proposition of marriage to the deeply ambivalent Amina. In its way, Lingui is about the idea of community and people looking out for each other. But this is a secret community of women, a community that exists beneath or beyond the official community presided over by the imam, who is forever coldly hectoring Amina for not coming to the mosque and for not confiding her problems to him (Amina is far too shrewd to do anything of the sort). It is the figure of Amina’s unromantic but well-off suitor, Brahim, who is to be the nexus of all this: is this to be their way out, or another unsacred bond tying mother and daughter to their servitude? The intense, focused performances from the two central women keep this drama in a hyper-alert state: we are intensely aware of all that is at stake and how mother and daughter are battling for survival, and teetering on a precipice of unacknowledged shame. I am not entirely sure that Haroun entirely absorbs into the drama the shocking act of violence, with all its necessary consequences. But the sheer seriousness and urgency of the deceptively unhurried story give it power. • Lingui, the Sacred Bonds screened at the Cannes film festival, and is released on 4 February in cinemas in the UK.I love so many things about these muffins: the vibrantly pink batter, and then the perfectly balanced hit of feta alongside the beetroot and rosemary in the final bake. These are as perfect for a lazy Valentine’s Day brunch with friends as they are for breakfast in bed à deux – especially when served with blood orange mimosas on the side. I’ve been known to eat three in one sitting, so double up if you’re having more than four people over. Everything can be found fresh from Ocado, or in its well-stocked baking “aisle”. Instantly shop all these ingredients from ocado.com/breakfastmuffins Beetroot, feta and rosemary breakfast muffins Prep 15 min Cook 30-35 min Makes 12 muffins 200g fresh beetroot, peeled and grated 1⁄2 tbsp lemon juice 150g self-raising flour 100g rye flour 1 tsp baking powder 1 tsp sea salt flakes 1 sprig rosemary, needles finely chopped 100ml olive oil 150g natural yogurt 50ml milk 1 free range egg, lightly beaten 200g feta cheese, roughly crumbled Rosemary sprigs, to garnish Freshly ground black pepper Preheat the oven to 200C (180C fan)/400F/gas 6. In a large bowl, stir the grated beetroot with the lemon juice, then add the flours, baking powder, sea salt, and chopped rosemary. Mix well. In a separate bowl or large jug, whisk the olive oil, yoghurt, milk and egg together. Stir the liquid very briefly into the beetroot and flour mixture along with half the crumbled feta. Combine just until you can’t see any flour, and no further. The less you mix, the lighter the muffin. Spoon a tablespoon of muffin mixture into each of your 12 lined muffin cups, then scatter over the remaining feta evenly, along with a few rosemary sprigs and a small grind of black pepper. Transfer the muffins to the oven to bake for 30-35 minutes, until well risen and firm to the touch. Allow to cool slightly on a wire rack, but make sure to serve warm. These are best eaten on the day they’re made, but can be kept in the fridge in an airtight box for up to two days and reheated gently in the oven as needed. Get set for this and any other bake at Ocado.com, which has everything from kids’ baking kits and colourful cake decorations to gluten-free ingredients.1 Eat with friends If you have friends coming over for food and just one is following a meat-free diet, make the same meal for everyone. Not only will you spare yourself the hassle of cooking different dishes, you’ll also actually pep up your party: research from the University of Chicago shows that sharing the same food, not just sitting down to eat together, improves trust and cooperation. 2 Explore new cuisines Forget what you can’t eat and get excited about discovering new ingredients and restaurants. Ethiopia has a reputation for incredible, soul-warming vegan food. Dishes from south India are less likely to use meat and ghee than those from the north. If you’re looking up recipes, you might be able to get inspiration from certain occasions: food that’s eaten in Greece during Lent, for example, is mostly meat- and dairy-free. 3 Challenge yourself to a 30-plant week Five a day? Old news. Scientists in the US found that people who ate 30 different kinds of plants in a week had a much more varied gut microbiome than those who ate 10 or fewer. Their research showed it could improve your digestion and reduce the risk of bowel cancer. So how do we fit more plant-based foods into our diet? Think about adding one extra vegetable to your side salad. Grate a carrot into tomato sauce in lieu of sugar. Start eating plants at breakfast, adding dried or fresh fruits to porridge, or cooking up spinach or mushrooms. 4 Hit the market And no, it doesn’t have to be a bougie farmers’ market. If you’re lucky enough to live within striking distance of a local market, it’s a cheap and fun way to shop. The whole “pound a bowl!” joy makes for vibrant streets, and the stacks of fresh produce will inspire your cooking. When you have impulsively purchased a bag full of aubergines for a pound, you’ll want to find ways to use them. 5 Think of alternatives At the supermarket, you’ll notice that the section of vegan alternatives is expanding rapidly. And, again, choosing to explore will pay delicious dividends. Jackfruit cooked as a curry or stuffed into a burrito is lush and filling. Oat drinks make for incredibly creamy porridge and smooth hot chocolate (whisk up with cocoa powder, sugar and a pinch of mixed spice). Nutritional yeast may sound a bit bleak, but it’s great for adding a savoury, cheesy flavour to sauces. 6 But what about protein? Plant-based diets can fall short on protein, but you can meet your daily requirements by eating a variety of beans, pulses, grains and nuts – all of which provide more dietary fibre than meat. About one-third of global greenhouse gas emissions come from the food system, with half of those emissions produced from the livestock (or animal-based) sector. 7 Don’t stress about labels In general, animal-based products have a higher environmental impact than plant-based products. If you want to reduce your climate impact, switch to a more plant-based diet. But on a personal level, it can be difficult to tell yourself you will never eat roast beef again. There’s no need to issue a press release that you’re now vegan, vegetarian, flexitarian or whatever. Ditch the labels. Just keep exploring new foods and making small changes, because every time we choose plant-based we’re helping the environment. Looking for dietary advice from a puppet? Watch THE NEW NORM&amp;AL SHOW. Season 1 streaming now. Find out more at oatly.comI used to live on a road in London that the neighbours would often close for street parties – I’ll just come out and say it, Stoke Newington – and frankly I found the whole charade quite irritating. I was always cycling into a big plant pot someone had dragged into the road, that sort of thing. There would be a marquee up early on a Saturday with 6 Music playing too loudly for my hangover. You learn a lot about your neighbours when you watch them sit in the middle of the road and eat a focaccia finger: who, for example, has quite such a substantial amount of fabric bunting on hand at all times, and space for it in their house? I began to see them less as people and more like animals I might disinterestedly stare at in a zoo: lizards in a tank, pointing a finger to a lidless tub of hummus while saying, “Ooh that’s good – what’s that one? Red pepper? Red pepper. Yeah no I’ve never had that. Red pepper”. Anyway, big year for it. The Queen is doing something – still being the Queen, by the looks of it, well done – and we, the peasants, are being urged to celebrate her for it. With the platinum jubilee around the corner, a host of very mild British stars – Gareth Southgate, Ross Kemp, Prue Leith, Big Alan Titchmarsh – are backing plans for a celebratory street party, where they hope 10 million of us will block up the roads and put stupid union flag wigs on, and wave and rah for the Queen. It’s called National Thank You Day, and to make it all feel slightly less embarrassing it’s being wrapped up with all the NHS rainbow stuff and community spirit newspeak of the past two years. It’s quite muddy messaging, actually. It really could do with one extra spin around the thinktank. “Mainly it’s thank you to our Queen, who has served for 70 years,” Ross Kemp told Good Morning Britain this week, from in front of Windsor Castle (she’s not gonna let you in, mate). He went on: “It’s a big thank you to her but it’s a big thank you, if you wish, to staff of the NHS, people who have volunteered, neighbours who have gone round and just checked on people.” I really love the use of “if you wish” in that sentence – if you really must insist on thanking people who have done things, sure, but for me this is mainly about Lizzy Dos – but Kemp pivoted back to keeping it on message. “And by golly do we need a big party right now! But primarily it’s a huge thank you to an extraordinary woman who has steered this country and the Commonwealth for the past 70 years with – ” at this point Ross Kemp drops into his “gangs” voice “ – a steady hand.” Meanwhile, various MPs this week have drawn up plans to make Big Ben bong 70 times in a row in honour of the jubilee, too. Extraordinary what they can get done when they actually want to, isn’t it? My beef with National Thank You Day isn’t with the Queen, so tell MI5 to call off the snipers currently aimed at my head. And it’s not with the members of the community we should be thanking right now – National Thank You Day actually emerged last year, as a sort of glorified NHS clap, and folding it up into the Queen stuff in 2022 probably does make people more likely to mark it. No: I suppose my problem with it all is that it adds to this bizarrely prevalent idea that we as a people got through Covid very nobly, thanks to that one speech the Queen did and the strength of Captain Tom and the inherent goodness and kindness of the Great British People. This is not quite how I remember it at all: sure, some people checked on neighbours, and dropped shopping off, and banged a pan every Thursday. But many others called the police on people for going for two jogs in one day, posted disappointed photos from beaches of other people going to the beach, and tutted loudly whenever someone sat down on a park bench they could vaguely see through binoculars. Meanwhile, the group that we, the people, had duly elected to steer us through the storm were too busy going through the entire national supply of Colin the Caterpillar cakes to do much about it. So we should not be packaging up the disastrous past two years in twee, apolitical, self-congratulatory “Keep Calm and Carry On” wrapping paper. National Thank You Day is ultimately harmless in the same way most British pomp is – put it in the basket with breathless 24-hour royal wedding coverage, the Last Night of the Proms, RAF flyovers and remembering the Olympic opening ceremony – but the “blitzification” of Covid cannot continue unabated. Let’s announce National We All Apologise to Each Other for How Frantic We Got Over the Past 24 Months day. See if Steve McFadden, Roy Hodgson and Charlie Dimmock want to endorse it. Joel Golby is a Guardian columnistWhen I was at school there were two choices for lunch: hot or cold food. If we queued up for a hot lunch, we would get what we were given – usually some combination of meat and two veg. Back then, I didn’t know anyone with dietary preferences or limitations, such as allergies. I also didn’t think much about where food came from or what it did to my body. At home, things were much the same: dinner would be meat or fish with potato in various guises or, occasionally, rice, plus a few different types of veg. Dairy and gluten were definitely on the menu, and whether or not either of these aggravated our digestive system wasn’t a consideration. In my late teens, I started to become aware of vegetarianism and knew a few people who adopted that lifestyle, but it wasn’t until I was in my mid-20s that I came across anyone who was vegan. At first, it seemed so extreme. So complicated. It was all about what you couldn’t eat, not what you could. Yet, in the 10 years since, I and most of my friends have, for environmental reasons, moved towards either a more flexible diet where dairy and meat consumption is limited or are fully fledged vegans. So what happened? The plant-based movement is what happened, and it’s far bigger than just us as a nation. Around the world, notions of what constitutes a healthy diet have changed rapidly. Meanwhile, our access to different foods has exploded over the past 20 years, adjusting our idea of what is “normal” when it comes to diet. According to a study for Oatly, a company that creates dairy alternatives from oats, 23% of those who responded believe the term “normal” has lost its meaning and relevance, and 29% believe they don’t live a “normal lifestyle” (compared with 61% who say they do). At the same time, 39% think a plant-based diet is now “normal”, and 73% think they themselves have a normal diet – which most respondents classify as “a combination of meat, fish, dairy and veg”. Basically, the thing that has changed most – more so than even our actual diets – is our perception of what is considered normal. Growing environmental concerns and eco-anxiety are in part responsible for this shift. A 2021 study by YouGov shows that 17% of Britons believe that the threat of a climate crisis is exaggerated, while 68% believe it’s genuine. And 72% of us now believe the climate is changing as a result of human activity, compared with just 49% in 2013. Against this backdrop, it’s not hard to see why so many people are changing their behaviours around food and eating, with more people moving towards a flexitarian diet – which is centred around plant-based foods with the occasional inclusion of meat. Food allergies are also playing a part, being far more common than they once were, and affecting between 6% and 8% of children up to the age of three, according to the National Allergy Research Foundation. While there are various possible explanations for this, allergies mean that many people who may hope to eat a “normal” diet simply can’t. In addition, as many as two in 10 people develop an inability to digest lactose (lactose intolerance) later in life, making ingesting dairy products uncomfortable. For these people, as well as those suffering from more acute allergies related to dairy, a proliferation of non-dairy products over the past few years – such as nut and oat drinks – has given them far more choice in what they eat. Whichever way you look at it, we are all thinking differently about our diet, whether it’s for health reasons or concerns about the environment. Most families these days have had to adapt their previous eating habits to cater to specific dietary requirements. In my family alone, we have one vegan, two people with dairy allergies, and at least one person with lactose intolerance. And doesn’t everyone think their family is more or less normal? Change can sometimes feel overwhelming, but it also presents great opportunities to experiment and branch out with food, which can probably only be a good thing for our health and that of the planet. And there has truly never been a better time to do so with thousands of different products and recipes to help us diversify what we put on our plates. So why not give it a try? Looking for dietary advice from a puppet? Watch THE NEW NORM&amp;AL SHOW. Season 1 streaming now. Find out more at oatly.comBritish boxing’s midwinter hiatus ends on Saturday night in Cardiff as Chris Eubank Jr and Liam Williams meet in a grudge middleweight match which promises to be as bitter in the ring as it has been in the acrimonious buildup. Eubank Jr and Williams are both running out of time and opportunities at the highest level and defeat for either fighter will come as a heavy blow. The British Boxing Board of Control put the sport into a self-imposed lockdown throughout January “to allow doctors and medical experts to prioritise their work with the NHS during the pandemic.” The doctors’ crucial work at ringside, while monitoring the risk and damage that boxers face, resumes in Cardiff in front of a sold-out arena. They will be especially vigilant when Eubank and Williams enter the ring. While neither man is an elite-level fighter, they offer a sobering reminder of boxing’s dangerous undertow. In March 2016, Nick Blackwell, who was one of Williams’s closest friends in boxing, defended his British middleweight title against Eubank. Blackwell suffered a sustained beating and was stopped in the 10th round. He then collapsed while the doctor was examining the grotesque swelling above his left eye. Blackwell was rushed to hospital and placed in a medically induced coma for nine days. He survived and partially recovered before he made the mistake of trying to spar behind closed doors, against all advice, and suffered further brain damage. That unsettling memory should temper excessive enthusiasm about the “needle” that clearly exists between Williams and Eubank. Their mutual dislike of each other appears genuine and the spite is deepened by the fact that they both feel they have to win this fight. Williams, an intensely proud Welshman, will have the vociferous backing of his home crowd, but he returns to the ring after a chastening defeat to Demetrius Andrade when the American won a wide decision and retained his WBO world middleweight title last April. Andrade, usually an ultra-cautious boxer with an awkward style, knocked down Williams in the second round and dominated the contest. The gulf between domestic and world level was made glaringly apparent to Williams. It was also his third loss, after Liam Smith beat him twice in 2017. A fourth defeat in his 28th fight would end Williams’ remaining world title aspirations at the age of 29. Eubank, the marginal favourite, has won 31 of his 33 bouts. But his two defeats, against Billy Joe Saunders in 2014 and George Groves in 2018, were clear-cut and highlighted his limitations. Yet he has always talked in the provocative style of his father, Chris Eubank Sr, who was an even more outrageous pantomime villain in the 1990s. Eubank Jr has won his last five fights and victory over Williams could secure him another crack at a world title. But defeat would be just as crushing for him, at the age of 32, as for the Welshman. Such intensity and rivalry could produce a riveting domestic classic. The undercard will be illuminated by Claressa Shields, the double Olympic gold medallist who defends her WBA, WBC and IBF world middleweight titles against Ema Kozin. The brilliant American should win comfortably and set up her return to the UK in the summer when she will meet Savannah Marshall, the WBO champion, and the only woman to have ever beaten Shields in a boxing ring. They were amateurs then but Shields and Marshall are destined for a fight that will elevate the rise of women’s boxing even further. Caroline Dubois, the prodigiously talented 21-year-old who was so disappointed to narrowly lose out on a medal at the Tokyo Olympics, makes her professional debut against Vaida Masiokaite, a Lithuanian journeywoman. Dubois expects an easy win to begin a career that is rich in promise and should scale the heights of boxing in the coming years. For the loser of the main event, whether that is Eubank or Williams, such dreams of glory will come to a shuddering end. It promises to be a night full of stark dangers and vivid contrasts.During the spring lockdown in 2020, Christopher Sloman was walking down a street in Hove when he saw what looked like a green dinosaur looming towards him. The 48-year-old charity shop worker was baffled by the figure in the distance – until he realised it was a woman whose coat was so oversized that her hands (one carrying a phone, the other a coffee) “looked really small,” Sloman says. “I thought: My God, what on earth is that?” “That” turned out to be a Dryrobe – the £160 ankle-length, waterproof robe designed as an outdoor changing robe for surfers in 2010 which has become the go-to piece of kit for any half-serious outdoor swimmer. If cold swimming became the pandemic’s Olympic sport – and an increase of 50% and more of cold-water swimmers as reported by the Outdoor Swimming Society (OSS) suggests it has – then Dryrobes were its uniform. With its towelled interior designed to help the sea-soaked get dry, the robe is oversized so you can get changed underneath it, pulling your arms inside to take off your swimwear without flashing – and many find it coat-like enough to wear home. Slowly but surely though, as we spent more time not simply in cold ponds but outdoors in general, Dryrobes began migrating inland. On his Instagram page @dry_robe_count, Sloman has spent the last year documenting Dryrobes where Dryrobes were not designed to be. There’s the woman in the supermarket; the mum on the school run; the man in the cafe; Russell Brand in a field of sheep. Elise Wilkins, a 28-year-old Brighton resident who runs the similar page, @DoYouOwnACoat, believes Dryrobes are favoured by the middle-aged and the middle class. “It’s a status symbol,” she says. Though she swims herself, Wilkins laughs when asked if she’d ever get one. “Oh my God! I can’t afford it!” Beyond Brighton, the fashion world has also taken notice of the robe. Grazia magazine has branded Dryrobes “the must-have, all-season coat” – while Amy de Klerk, digital fashion editor of Harper’s Bazaar, says Dryrobes remind her of the “comically oversized Balenciaga coats” that hit the runway in 2018. One particular Dryrobe may have played a part. You can get them in blue, black, red and purple, but the most eyecatching is a camo number with a hot-pink fluffy interior. While company founder Gideon Bright says sales are even across each colour (and customers in general are “an equal split of men and women”), the camo-pink combo is the Dryrobe that most often gets papped on Instagram pages such as Sloman’s. They don’t just stand out – Sloman thinks that people wearing them want to stand out. How and why did a speciality surfing robe become a fashion statement, and how did it come to inspire, if not an all-out culture war, at least a culture tiff? In November 2020, a laminated sign appeared on a lamppost in Sandycove, Ireland: “By order” read big bold letters: “No Dryrobe or Dryrobe types!!!”. When another sign sprang up in nearby Blackrock, warning to “beware of Dryrobe wankers”, a counter-revolution began, with “types” creating the “I am Spartacus”-esque solidarity hashtag #dryrobewankers. It has taken 12 years for Dryrobe to reach this point. It started, the tidy marketing story goes, when Bright’s mum sewed him a cape. Bright is a 54-year-old dad from north Devon who has surfed from a young age – when he was 16, his mum made him a waterproof robe with a towel lining and a hood so he could stay warm and change more easily on the beach. Years later, he improved on the prototype in his shed, selling the first official Dryrobe in December 2010. In 2012, production moved to China, and in 2016 the brand partnered with Adidas to produce Team GB Dryrobes for Olympic swimmers and divers. By last summer, Dryrobes had appeared in Vogue, newspaper style pages and on Rita Ora. Today, runners, mountain bikers and campers swear by Dryrobes, though Bright says the company didn’t actively market to other hobbyists: “It just spread naturally into other activities as people discovered how useful it can be.” Bright didn’t suddenly decide to invest millions of pounds to ensure Dryrobe took over the streets. No, it turns out that That Thing That Changed Everything in 2020 even changed the popularity of towelled robes. Anna Deacon, author of Taking the Plunge and The Art of Wild Swimming, says the popularity of wild swimming went “crackers” thanks to Covid-19 lockdowns. Her local wild swimming Facebook group went from 40-50 swimmers to 2,500. There are now a number of similar robes available, part of a growing category of post-swimwear. You can buy post-swimming robes from Shore, Robie and Mountain Warehouse. In 2020, two wild swimmers created Wylding, a £160 fleece-lined boiler suit available in three colours – marine blue, moss green and midnight black – that’s designed for the fashion-conscious as well as the wet. Deacon’s family own multiple Dryrobes – she bought her first five years ago when she started swimming outdoors regularly after moving from London to Edinburgh. “Dryrobes are incredibly useful,” she says, “It’s quite difficult to get changed on a beach when you’re very cold without dropping your towel and flashing your boobs or your bum. They don’t look great, but they’re practical.” Except, well, plenty of people seem to think they do look great – or at least good enough to wear in the supermarket or the pub. Like the Ugg and the Croc before it, the Dryrobe is a divisive piece of clothing, inspiring ire but continuing to grow in popularity. Bright himself admits that when he was first testing prototypes, people gave him “funny stares” at the beach – so how exactly did the Dryrobe leapfrog into fashion? How did a changing robe become a coat? Cost is a factor. Sloman, who has lived in Brighton since 1988, says: “The people who tend to wear them are the ones who came down [to Brighton] from London and exchanged flats for big houses here.” For him, the coats have become a symbol of gentrification. He estimates you can spot “10 in half an hour” on Hove seafront, but the best place he saw a Dryrobe was outside Waitrose. The woman wearing it “was doing squats in her Dryrobe in the queue,” he marvels. Whether or not there is a particular “Dryrobe type” doesn’t change the fact that plenty of people think there is; there’s a “dryrobe wankers” Facebook group with 478 members that bemoans “people using a Dryrobe for anything else other than its intended purpose”. Though Deacon only dons her robe after swimming – and then, only in winter – she defends those seen wearing them elsewhere. “You might drive to go swimming and then on the way back, you go to the supermarket. It might not be an intentional thing of, ‘Look at my lifestyle,’” she says. Has this culture war affected sales? Bright won’t say, only offering: “It was actually all pretty good-natured fun when we looked into it.” But Google Trends, a tool that monitors the relative popularity of a search term over the years, shows that “dryrobe” searches began growing steadily in the summer of 2020. And (unpaid, accidental) celebrity endorsements helped – when Harry Styles was pictured wearing a Dryrobe after swimming in the sea for a film scene in May 2021, Google searches saw a healthy boost (he was pictured in one again last month). Perhaps it helps that, from a distance, Dryrobes don’t look too dissimilar from the long, padded jackets sold at Uniqlo or Moncler. Those who love their Dryrobes really do love them – a Facebook fanpage, “Dryrobe Owners’ Club”, has 3,000 members. “I’m not bothered what others think,” says member Gail Moorhouse, a 50-year-old civil servant from Huddersfield. Moorhouse bought her black, turquoise-lined Dryrobe for dog walking and camping: she doesn’t actually swim outdoors. “I loved it from the first time I used it,” she says, praising its big pockets, overall size and warmth. She has worn it to the pub in bad weather. Bright doesn’t point to any one particular marketing drive or branding decision that made the Dryrobe what it is today – though the company has hired athletes (such as surfers Ben and Lukas Skinner) as ambassadors, and the company supports outdoor activity charities through its Dryrobe Warmth Project. Perhaps the real trick was creating something equally as loved as it is hated. “Do you know something? I’ve got nothing against people using them for what they’re for,” Sloman says. “The problem is that Dryrobe has become more than what it’s used for.” Could the boom be just a temporary fad? “I think it’s getting worse,” he says. “They’ve even got Dryrobe doggie coats now.” Hair and makeup: Delilah Blakeney using Charlotte Tilbury. Model: Marion at Body London. Styling assistant: Peter Bevan. DryRobe, £160, dryrobe.com. Shop photo: grey sweatshirt, ksubi.uk; trousers, holzweileroslo.com; Socks, monki.com; Shoes, by Tretorn from arket.com. this page: Brown sweatshirt, samsoe.com; Lilac trousers, americanvintage.com; Shoes, craghoppers.com; Hat, redwingheritage.comWhy will I love it? Aloe vera is a great reminder of the far-reaching power of plants, from its ornamental beauty to its practical applications. Aloes are famous for their pulp, which has been valued for centuries for its ability to reduce inflammation, whether used topically or internally. So you can rub it on sunburnt or damaged skin, or add it to your smoothie. And these plants look good, too. Light or shade? Bright, indirect light. Where should I put it? In a bright, airy bathroom or beside a sunny window in a bedroom or front room, somewhere that catches the sun and where its long, fleshy leaves, with their characteristic toothed margins, can be admired. How do I keep it alive? Try to keep it away from direct exposure as it can cause the leaves to turn a reddish-purple or have dry brown spots and tips. Water every seven to 10 days in summer, reducing the frequency in winter. Allow the soil to dry out between waterings. Did you know … Green or yellow flowers bloom on long stems which can grow up to 90cm long, though this is rare unless you’re in a tropical climate.A coalition of climate, environmental and animal welfare groups is calling for California to remove the huge subsidies provided to dairy farms to turn animal waste into a form of energy called biogas. Manure, which emits the potent greenhouse gas methane, is a big problem for US farms, and is particularly stark in California, where the dairy industry accounts for nearly half the state’s methane emissions. Since 2011, California has been running a policy called the low carbon fuel standard (LCFS), which now includes incentives for dairy farms to convert methane into energy to fuel vehicles by enabling them to sell offset credits. This is intended to be a win-win: reducing farm emissions while allowing fossil fuel companies to mitigate their own greenhouse gas emissions by buying these offsets. The number of anaerobic digesters used to produce the biogas has surged in the state especially among large dairy farms. But environmental advocates argue that the environmental benefits of biogas are exaggerated, and that the LCFS encourages the expansion of factory farms and could end up increasing emissions and pollution. In a petition to the California Air Resources Board (Carb), the state government’s clean air agency that runs the LCFS, six environmental groups called for dairy farms to be excluded from the policy. In January, Carb turned down the request but said it would continue to engage with the petitioners. This decision will “kick the can down the road [and] ensures that the program will remain fundamentally compromised and California will fall further behind its climate goals,” said Tyler Lobdell, a staff attorney with Food &amp; Water Watch, one of the organizations involved in the petition. While biogas from manure is marketed as a clean alternative to fossil fuel, said Phoebe Seaton, co-director and attorney at the non-profit Leadership Counsel for Justice and Accountability, a signatory to the petition, “in fact it burns the same, has many of the same environmental impacts and has enormous local impacts at its production”. Under the current credit system in California, biogas from dairy farms can receive carbon intensity ratings that are 200% to 300% lower than a battery electric car powered by renewable energy from solar or wind. “That is a really stark example of the bizarre and perverse incentives that are being driven by this program,” Lobdell said. “Who in their right mind thinks that we should be prioritizing factory farm gas, which is still a combustion-based energy source?” Brent Newell, a food project senior attorney at the legal advocacy non-profit Public Justice, cited the Aliso Canyon natural gas leak settlement in California, as an example of problems with the credit program. In 2015, a ruptured well at Aliso Canyon natural gas storage facility caused the US’s largest ever methane leak. As part of a settlement, the owner of the facility, Southern California Gas Company, agreed to pay more than $26m towards the construction of digesters at dairy farms. “These facilities are getting money from the Aliso Canyon settlement fund, they’re getting money from the state, and under both of those systems, they’re getting credit for reducing the same reductions twice, then they’re selling reduction credits in the market,” said Newell. Without government subsidies and grants, digesters may not be profitable according to an analysis conducted by UC Davis researchers, which found that it costs $294 a year to produce $68 of gas from one cow, excluding the upfront cost of building the digester. With LCFS credits, the revenue loss is turned on its head: one cow generates a subsidy of $1,935 a year, according to analysis by Aaron Smith, DeLoach professor of agricultural economics at UC Davis. The global biogas industry is projected to more than double by 2030 to over $126.2bn and this type of methane production could become more lucrative in the dairy industry than milk production. California has spent more than $600m since 2015 on subsidizing the construction of digesters, primarily at large factory farms with average herds of about 7,000 cows in 2017 and 2018. The Union of Concerned Scientists has criticized dairy biogas subsidies as “excessive” and vastly exceeding the costs of producing methane from manure. An analysis by the organization indicated that the LCFS will also disproportionately benefit the largest, most polluting dairy farms, potentially increasing industry consolidation as well as disincentivizing other methods of reducing methane emissions. “The revenue from the low carbon fuel standard-related subsidies is actually driving this ongoing intensification of the dairy industry and intensifies local impacts,” said Seaton. Large dairy operations have been linked to water pollution, air pollution, and health problems for residents in communities where these operations are concentrated, in addition to emissions contributing to the climate crisis. “We would not be processing biogas and using it as a replacement for fossil natural gas without these subsidies,” said Smith. In response to the criticisms of the LCFS credit system, Carb, said the agency was “committed to ensuring our program focuses on environmental justice and environmental integrity” but that “specific requests for a near-term rulemaking are premature”. A Carb spokesperson added that there would be a public workshop in the coming weeks to delve into claims regarding the LCFS program and its impact on the dairy sector.It was 40 years ago that choreographer Pina Bausch first brought Kontakthof to London (it was made in 1978) and yet its subject matter hasn’t aged a bit. Its themes centre on the endless miseries of mating, gender wars and sexual mores as well as the irritations, humiliations and pain we inflict on each other in our struggle to connect and make physical contact. The pursuit, judgment and abuse of women is ever present, too. The late Bausch was sharp in her commentary and clever in her execution. A cast of 22 populate a dull dance hall, in suits and brightly coloured silk dresses and stilettos. To the gramophone crackle of a 1930s tango, they offer themselves up for examination – teeth, face, posture – and proceed in formation across the stage, knowingly on display. Bausch exposes private actions under stark lights, and gives physical form to psychological needling, having couples bend each other’s fingers back, tug earlobes or flick noses. But she also shows why we go to the trouble: a man holds up his hands, then a woman slips her face in between them, perfectly fitting the gap like Cinderella’s slipper. Kontakthof has bitterness, regret, moments of tenderness and brutality, but plenty of humour, too. The problem is, at three hours long, Bausch never knew when to stop. For some, that’s the point. Don’t humans go on repeating their strange behaviour endlessly year after year? Much like Peter Jackson’s epic Beatles doc Get Back, arguably you have to become immersed in the world, and from repeated riffs emerge something simple, brilliant and true. Alternatively, you could say Bausch was just terrible at killing her darlings. In 2010, Tanztheater Wuppertal performed Kontakthof in London with different casts: one made up of teenagers, one of dancers over 65, and that was revelatory, seeing the anxieties and excitement of youthful encounters, and unseen intimacies of older people. This original version is lacking by comparison, even though the cast is strong, a rich gathering of individuals, with Canadian Emma Barrowman by turns sexy, cutesy, dominant and playfully teasing in the central role. • At Sadler’s Wells, London, until 6 February.“An impassioned protest against death,” is how Shostakovich described his Fourteenth Symphony. Written at speed in 1969 when the composer was in hospital in Moscow after his second heart attack, you could argue that it represents music’s most disquieting confrontation with mortality. Part symphony, part song cycle for soprano and bass soloists, strings and percussion, it’s an unremittingly bleak piece that sets 11 poems about untimely death by poets who themselves died young. There’s little attempt to console, no suggestion of transcendence, only a numbing and pervasive sense of finality. For some, it is Shostakovich’s greatest score, though the emotional demands it makes on audiences and performers alike can make it uncomfortable listening. Gianandrea Noseda’s performance with the London Symphony Orchestra, part of a current Shostakovich cycle, was typically uncompromising: a deeply unsettling exploration of a desiccated sound-world that eerily hovers at the limits of existence. Restraint and violence were garishly juxtaposed. String phrases seemed to echo across distances and abysses, and skeletal xylophone taps ushered death into taverns and on to battlefields. The soloists, superbly matched, were Elena Stikhina and Vitalij Kowaljow, their singing hovering between lyricism and expressionism. The gabbled colloquy between the suicidal Lorelei and the bishop who desires her was deeply unnerving. Kowaljow’s deliberately bleached tone spoke volumes in the opening depiction of the mass graves of dead lovers, while the extraordinary beauty of Stikhina’s voice offset the bitter ironies of Waiting and the sheer horror of The Suicide. Its companion piece was Beethoven’s Seventh, the absolute antithesis of the Shostakovich in every way, a celebration of life and vitality that embraces Dionysian extremes of elation and joy. Noseda propelled the score forward with seemingly boundless energy, pressing urgently through the slow movement where some conductors are apt to hold back. The sheer exhilaration of the finale occasionally came at the price of textural clarity, but elsewhere the playing was beautifully focused, the all-important woodwind solos elegantly honed.There are many wonderful things about The Book of Boba Fett, Disney+’s new TV show about the bounty hunter who was first introduced in George Lucas’s original Star Wars trilogy. Unfortunately, the title character is not one of them. Which makes it a strange viewing experience, and one that should make fans question their abiding fascination for the jetpack-sporting killer-for-hire. We’ve had the return of Timothy Olyphant’s Cobb Vanth, a space cowboy to rival even Pedro Pascal’s Din Djarin for sharp-shooting insouciance. There’s that dark, black-eyed Wookiee, who has to be the most terrifying thing seen in Star Wars since it was revealed Jar Bar Binks had been elected to the Galactic Senate. In the most recent episode we got nearly 20 minutes of Luke Skywalker teaching Baby Yoda Jedi skills, while chatting casually to the incredible Rosario Dawson’s Ahsoka Tano. Geek heads duly spun right off shoulders. Was that the new Jedi temple all those multi-limbed robots were building? Do the Sand People really have personalities? What on Tatooine does the Hutts’ home planet look like? OMG is that Cad Bane from the Clone Wars show, realised in live action? The good stuff has been pretty much never-ending. The show’s problem is Boba himself, as essayed by Temuera Morrison. Star Wars fans had been waiting more than 40 years to find out who the enigmatic bounty hunter really is under the Mandalorian armour (that appearance as a kid in the prequels doesn’t really count) only to now rather wish he’d kept it on. Is this really the same guy we saw in The Empire Strikes Back, and briefly in Return of the Jedi? The taciturn figure who inspired a thousand dodgy fan-fic efforts and a decades-long campaign to give him his own movie or TV show? The Book of Boba Fett makes us wonder why we got so excited about Lucas’s creation in the first place. It turns out his armour really was the most intriguing thing about him: a triumph of remarkable costume design; of style over substance. On this basis, why are we not seeing Disney+ shows about Gwendoline Christie’s Captain Phasma, whose battle-threads were surely equally cool, or Adam Driver’s Kylo Ren? Boba’s other interesting characteristic, his bounty hunting creed, was already explored in The Mandalorian. We’ve seen Din Djarin’s people slowly reimagined as the yin to the Jedi yang; a culture that prides itself on sticking to the rules but also values interpersonal connections and loyalty to one’s companions. Boba, on the other hand, was reintroduced with the revelation that his Mandalorian armour was most likely stolen by his clone daddy decades ago, and that he has little to do with the creed other than this. He has, effectively, been an impostor for the best part of half a century. Maybe the final episode of Boba Fett will set everything to rights. Perhaps there is some fabulous finale waiting for us in which all parties come together for a giant hurrah of laser-fire and lightsabers. Maybe Baby Yoda learned to jump-spin like Sonic the Hedgehog just in time to save Din Djarin from certain death at the hands of the twisted-looking Bane. Perhaps those Hutt twins are going to be dumped on dark Wookiee’s head from a great height. Maybe Ahsoka Tano slices and dices Jabba’s green pig monsters like slimy sweet and sour pork. Who knows, and who cares? The fact that we can’t really imagine Boba being anything other than a bystander at the centre of the final episode’s geeky sweet spots tells us everything we need to know about this character. He’s become Star Wars’s equivalent of Hawkeye – though at least Marvel had the nous to give us 20+ movies and half a dozen TV shows before finally getting to the eternally superfluous sharp-shooting superhero. Forty years after Boba Fett first turned our heads, most of us probably wish they’d given it at least the same again before he finally took off his helmet.Barnaby Joyce labelled Scott Morrison “a hypocrite and a liar” in a private text message, sent before he returned to the leadership of the National party. In another blow for the embattled prime minister, the leaked text, seen by Guardian Australia, was forwarded to the former Liberal staffer Brittany Higgins by a third party. In it, Joyce said he did not “get along” with Morrison. “He is a hypocrite and a liar from my observations and that is over a long time,” Joyce said in the message, dated March last year. “I have never trusted him, and I dislike how earnestly [he] rearranges the truth to a lie.” Joyce’s attack is the second time in a week private text exchanges, critical of the prime minister, have been leaked. On Tuesday, Morrison was blindsided when the Ten Network’s political editor, Peter van Onselen, used a televised question and answer session at the National Press Club to reveal private criticism of Morrison. Van Onselen told Morrison he had a record of a text message exchange between a party colleague and the former New South Wales premier Gladys Berejiklian in which she branded the prime minister a “horrible person” who was untrustworthy. “The minister is even more scathing, describing you as a fraud and ‘a complete psycho’,” Van Onselen said. “Does this exchange surprise you? And what does it tell us?” Van Onselen later said the conversation was between Berejiklian and a federal minister. The prime minister’s office confirmed in a statement on Friday night that Joyce had approached Morrison earlier this week to inform him of the critical text messages sent when he was on the backbench. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Joyce returned to the Nationals leadership in July 2021 after toppling Michael McCormack in a leadership spill. At the time, he said he returned to lead the Nationals a “better person” after spending three years on the backbench. In a statement, Morrison said after telling him about the messages, Joyce “sincerely apologised and I immediately accepted his apology in good faith”. “I understand Barnaby was in a different headspace last year, both professionally and personally, and so I know he genuinely no longer feels this way. Relationships change over time. Politicians are humans beings too. We all have our frailties and none of us are perfect. “Since coming to the role of deputy prime minister, it is fair to say that we both positively surprised each other. We were never close before this and never pretended to be. But in these roles we have really found our rhythm, as we have concluded Aukus, settled our climate change policy and continued to fight the pandemic.” In a separate statement, Joyce said: “In the last 24 hours I have become aware that a screenshot of a text message has been circulating among third-parties that contains comments I made in March 2021 when I was a backbencher. “While the text message was supposed to be private, what I said in that message was wrong; and I have unreservedly apologised to the prime minister for my comments,” the deputy prime minister said. “It is common knowledge that in the past the prime minister and I had not always seen eye to eye. But I have worked extremely closely with the prime minister over the last seven months since I returned to the role of deputy prime minister; and the prime minister is a person of high integrity and honesty in what is possibly the most difficult job in the nation.” Earlier in the week, Joyce had blasted the anonymous critic of Morrison and urged the person to reveal their identity. “I would suggest that if you know anything about this don’t wait to be outed,” Joyce told reporters on Wednesday. “And give an explanation. Maybe it was a bad day in the office, I don’t know. That’s a better way to do it. It getting out is one good rump steak, with horseradish sauce, vegetables and chips, two bottles of red wine, and some journo is going to say ‘You know who told me that? Blah blah blah.’ And she’s out.” On Wednesday, Morrison said he had “confidence” the person who leaked the messages to Van Onselen was not in his federal cabinet. When asked if his office would investigate the leak he replied: “I’m not fussed.” The revelation of the text message from Joyce caps off a difficult week for the prime minister. Morrison had hoped his speech to the National Press Club would be a political reset after a difficult summer battling the Omicron variant – but that outing was overshadowed by the text exchange, and an ensuing 48 hours where cabinet colleagues lined up to deny they had made the criticism. Federal parliament returns next week, and Morrison plans to call an election after the government has delivered a budget in March. Published opinion polls suggest Labor would defeat the Morrison government if an election were held today.It doesn’t take much imagination to realize that Amazon warehouse workers would benefit from having a union. The average Amazon warehouse worker leaves within just eight months – that’s an unmistakable sign that Amazon’s jobs are unpleasant, to put it kindly, and that many Amazon workers quickly realize they hate working there because of the stress, breakneck pace, constant monitoring and minimal rest breaks. Indeed, experts on the future of work often voice concern that Amazon’s vaunted algorithms and technologies treat Amazon’s warehouse workers like mindless, unfeeling robots – having them do the same thing hour after hour after hour. And then there are the endless tales from Amazon warehouse workers that the company is so stingy about break time that they often don’t have enough time to go back and forth to the bathroom without getting demerits for exceeding their allotted daily break time. It’s hard to believe that here in the 21st century, one of the nation’s biggest, most respected companies makes it so hard for many of its workers to pee. In this way, working at Amazon resembles working at a poultry processing plant, where workers often wear adult diapers to work because their bosses frequently tell them they can’t take a break right now from cutting all those drumsticks and wings to go to the bathroom. Amazon workers continue to endure all this pain and strain even though Jeff Bezos, Amazon’s founder and the world’s richest human being, has said he is committed to making Amazon “Earth’s Best Employer and Earth’s Safest Place to Work”. Evidently Bezos fails to realize that any company whose workers leave after eight months on average is light years from being Earth’s Best Employer. As for being Earth’s Safest Place to Work, Bezos shouldn’t insult workers’ or the public’s intelligence by making such a claim, considering the rate of serious injuries at Amazon’s warehouses in 2020 was nearly twice that at other warehouses across the US. If Amazon were to be the Earth’s Best Employer, then its employees would probably be eager to work there until age 65 or 70, rather than say good riddance after a few months. By the way, the eight-month average that Amazon workers stay is a piddling one-sixth the average job tenure for America’s 155 million workers. However much Bezos detests unions, there’s one thing Bezos can’t honestly deny –unions would be a surefire way for Amazon to become a better employer. Indeed, if Bezos is serious about making Amazon Earth’s Best and Safest Employer, not only should Amazon stop fighting so hard to block unionization, as it has in Alabama, Staten Island and elsewhere, but it should roll out the red carpet for union organizers. If Amazon workers had a real voice at work, a real voice in shaping and improving Amazon’s working conditions – perhaps in de-stressing and slowing down Amazon’s the-algorithm-uber-alles work routines – Amazon might become a far better place to work, and perhaps take a few steps closer to Bezos’s much-ballyhooed goal of becoming Earth’s Best Employer. (I would settle for Amazon becoming Earth’s Best Warehouse Employer – Best Employer is a laudable goal, but a bridge way too far for Amazon.) If Amazon workers had an effective union that improves pay and conditions, they might stay for eight years on average instead of eight months. In that way, a union might go far to cure Amazon’s biggest headache: it chews through so many employees so fast that it is always desperate to hire new workers – more than 500,000 new hires some years (before quickly chewing through those new ones and spitting them out). Deep down, Amazon executives must be terrified that at some point, so many millions of Americans will have gone through and been chewed up by the Amazon push-it-to-the-max, stress machine, that Amazon simply won’t be able to find enough workers to keep all its warehouses operating – unless, perhaps, it raises its starting pay to $25 or $30 an hour. Some labor experts see an anti-union method to Amazon’s stress-o-matic madness: that it intentionally wants its workers to stay only a short time because its workers will then conclude that they won’t be there long enough to make it worthwhile to fight for a union. Besides, with such enormous employee turnover and with so many workers staying for such a short time, that makes it immensely hard for union organizers and union-supporting workers to explain to all of a warehouse’s workers how they would benefit from having a union. To say that unionizing Amazon is an uphill battle is an understatement. It’s one thing to unionize a Starbucks cafe with 30 baristas – and that’s quite hard, considering how aggressively anti-union Starbucks is. But it’s a whole different level of difficulty to unionize a warehouse with 5,000, especially when Amazon pumps out anti-union propaganda to its workers 24/7, while it prohibits union organizers from setting foot on company property. Making it even harder to unionize Amazon is the company’s apparent willingness to violate labor laws. Fed up with Amazon’s numerous alleged labor law violations at its warehouse in Bessemer, Alabama, the National Labor Relations Board pressured Amazon into reaching a settlement in December in which the company promised to comply with federal laws that protect workers’ right to unionize. But just a month after that settlement, the NLRB again accused Amazon of serious labor law violations, this time at its Staten Island warehouse. In a complaint issued on 27 January, the NLRB said that one of Amazon top anti-union consultants, Bradley Moss, had called union organizers “thugs”, a word that some see as racially insensitive considering that most of the organizers in Staten Island are Black. The NLRB also said Moss had told workers it would be “futile” to vote for a union because a union would “never happen here”. The NLRB said Amazon committed other illegalities; confiscating pro-union literature, preventing workers from distributing flyers in break rooms and telling workers they couldn’t distribute union literature without Amazon’s permission. Amazon denies the NLRB’s allegations. While Amazon pushes its anti-union message to the max – remember the anti-union posters it put in its toilet stalls – Amazon seems averse to letting its employees utter a pro-union peep. Amazon has earned the dubious distinction of replacing Walmart as the nation’s fiercest anti-union employer. This week, more than 6,000 workers at Amazon’s warehouse in Bessemer are getting a second chance to vote on whether to have a union; the NLRB ordered a new election after asserting that Amazon’s illegalities prevented a fair, first union vote there. The bottom line here: not only would unionizing Amazon make it a better place to work – something Bezos says he badly wants – but a successful unionization vote at Amazon would be a huge, hopeful signal to embattled workers across the US that even at a fiercely anti-union corporation like Amazon, workers can indeed choose to have a union as a surefire way to improve their jobs and their lives. Steven Greenhouse is a journalist and author, focusing on labor and the workplace. He is a senior fellow at the Century Foundation and the author of Beaten Down, Worked Up: The Past, Present, and Future of American LaborToday in a nutshell: All eyes turn to the Bird’s Nest stadium in Beijing for the opening ceremony after three days of sporting preliminaries. Next up: The Games start in earnest on Saturday with the first medals available, but China will be sensitive to the levels of global protest coinciding with the official opening of a controversial Games. The stadium at the Winter Olympics is often criticised on cost and environmental grounds because it has been built specifically to hold the opening and closing ceremonies, and not much else. However, Beijing’s National Stadium doesn’t face that charge. Today it becomes the first stadium to host a Winter Olympics opening ceremony after having been built for the Summer Games. There have been suggestions that some athletes might boycott the ceremony in protest over China’s human rights record, but the US delegation say they are expecting around 80% of their contingent to attend, despite media reports to the contrary. There’s already been some sport. British interest has mostly been confined to the curling, where the mixed doubles pair of reigning world champions Jennifer Dodds and Bruce Mouat have won three of their opening four matches, following a tight game on Friday morning against Australia. Italy lead the round-robin stage so far, unbeaten after four matches. The Alpine skier Dave Ryding and curler Eve Muirhead have been chosen as Team GB’s flag-bearers for the opening ceremony. We’ve also had the opening skirmishes in the women’s ice hockey competition. Slightly oddly, every team in Group A (Canada, Switzerland, Finland, the US and the team from the Russian Olympic Committee) are already guaranteed a quarter-final slot, so these match-ups are just about jockeying for position and playing yourself into form. In Group B the Czech Republic, Japan, Denmark, Sweden and hosts China are scrapping for the remaining three berths. The main news so far though has been that the US assistant captain, Brianna Decker, suffered a sickening leg injury that will sideline her for the rest of the tournament. It didn’t stop the US demolishing Finland 5-2 as they opened their title defence. Elsewhere, the third round of training for women’s ski jumping was cancelled due to windy conditions, while Norway’s Aleksander Aamodt Kilde set the fastest time in the men’s downhill, with athletes concerned about the gusty conditions. Organisers say nine more athletes and officials tested positive for Covid in cases confirmed on Thursday. A strong performance by Nathan Chen in the short programme helped the US into the lead ahead of the Russian Olympic Committee and China in the team figure skating event after three rounds. Things you might have missed Donald McRae interviewed skier Gus Kenworthy, who will compete for Team GB in his third and final Olympics as a gay man, an LGBTQ+ activist and an actor. He told Donald: “I’m just much happier now than I was back then when I wasn’t living my life authentically. I wasn’t being my true self and it definitely took a toll.” You might also enjoy reading: 10 things to look out for in Beijing by Sean Ingle and Bryan Armen Graham Spectre of 1936 and 1980 haunts Beijing as fear and repression breed silence The Georgian luger racing 12 years after his cousin’s death at Olympics Guardian US writers predict the victors at the Winter Olympics If you’re watching from Australia, here’s what you need to know The briefing’s picture of the day Thursday saw qualification runs in the freestyle skiing for both the men’s and women’s moguls, and I suspect this is not the last picture of people on skis flying upside down through the air we will have in the newsletter. Mikael Kingsbury of Canada topped the men’s qualifying, with Australia’s Jakara Anthony placed first in the women’s qualification. The men’s competition continues on Saturday, the women the day after. What to look out for next Times are all in local Beijing time. For Sydney it is +3 hours, for London it is -8 hours, for New York it is -13 hours and San Francisco is -16 hours. Later today – Friday 4 February 8pm Opening Ceremony – scheduled to last for around an hour and 40 minutes – though these things have been known to go on for longer – the time difference means that you’ll be watching this at 11pm in Sydney, at noon in the UK, 7am in New York and 4am in San Francisco ✨✨✨ Tomorrow – Saturday 5 February 9am and 2pm and 8pm Curling – more mixed doubles round-robin matches 🥌 12.10pm and 4.40pm and 9.10pm Ice hockey – women’s preliminary round matches, of which the last one is the US v Not Russia 🏒 3.45pm Cross-country skiing – the women compete in the 7.5km + 7.5km skiathlon 🥇 4.30pm Speed skating – the women’s 3,000m 🥇 5pm Biathlon – it is the 4x6km mixed relay. The teams will be cross-country skiing, then breaking off to do some shooting and it should be fun 🥇 6pm – 8.40pm Freestyle skiing – there’s a qualification round and then three runs of the men’s moguls culminating in the medal ceremony 🥇 7pm Short track speed skating – there are heats for the women’s 500m and men’s 1,000m, then from 8.23pm it is the mixed team relay event with the final set for 9.26pm 🥇 7.10pm Luge – the men’s singles start their first two competitive runs 7.35pm Ski jumping – the final round of the women’s normal hill individual contest will see them soaring for gold. Or crashing spectacularly. One or the other, assuming the wind has died down a bit 🥇 Beijing 2022 Winter Olympics schedule: our full programme with details of every event. How things stood Here’s what the medal table looked like at the end of 2018 Pyeongchang Games in South Korea. We can expect to see China much higher up this time around. Russian athletes will again be competing under the banner of the Russian Olympic Committee rather than their national flag as part of Wada’s punishment for state-sanctioned doping. Team GB chiefs have set their sights on their greatest ever Winter Olympics medal haul, between three and seven medals, a tally that could take the team past the record of five set in Sochi in 2014 and equalled in 2018. 1 🇳🇴 Norway 🥇 14 🥈 14 🥉 11 total: 39 2 🇩🇪 Germany 🥇 14 🥈 10 🥉 7 total: 31 3 🇨🇦 Canada 🥇 11 🥈 8 🥉 10 total: 29 4 🇺🇸 US 🥇 9 🥈 8 🥉 6 total: 23 5 🇳🇱 Netherlands 🥇 8 🥈 6 🥉 6 total: 20 Selected others: 13 ◻️ Not Russia 🥇 2 🥈 6 🥉 9 total: 17 16 🇨🇳 China 🥇 1 🥈 6 🥉 2 total: 9 19 🇬🇧 Great Britain 🥇 1 🥈 0 🥉 4 total: 5 23 🇦🇺 Australia 🥇 0 🥈 2 🥉 1 total: 3 26 🇳🇿 New Zealand 🥇 0 🥈 0 🥉 2 total: 2 Don’t forget you can get in touch at martin.belam@theguardian.com to let me know what you are enjoying – or not – about the Winter Olympics and these newsletters. Enjoy the opening ceremony, and I will see you tomorrow. But here’s today’s last word … The last word I explained how millions of Uyghurs are being arbitrarily detained in concentration camps. The IOC was told survivors’ stories of rapes and torture, forced sterilisation and repression. And about families who have not heard from relatives for years. All of us shared personal experiences of loss and sacrifice. And do you know what the first thing that [the then] IOC vice-president, Juan Antonio Samaranch Jr, said? ‘The world is a complicated place’” – Zumretay Arkin, who fled Xinjiang when she was 10 years old.BLTs – bacon, lettuce and tomato sandwiches – are one of the most popular choices in many supermarket meal deals. As a professional sandwicher of sorts, I look down the row of pre-packed sarnies in front of me with quite some glee. How fascinating to see how the real players of my industry go about their business. Sainsbury’s, £2.55 There is only one piece of lettuce in this sandwich and it is already going grey. My friend Jack, with whom I shared these treats, says “a bit manky” might be a better description – but I couldn’t possibly comment. Many might argue that one piece of lettuce is ample – but not in a sandwich with lettuce in its name, surely? Overall the sandwich is very dry, as lacking in mayonnaise as lettuce, and the tomato is cut so thin even that old faithful can’t bring any moisture to the party. 4/10 Co-op, £3 Straight away, I can see mayonnaise. This is good. And the tomatoes are clearly thicker than in the first sandwich. There’s much more lettuce and the more plentiful mayo makes the whole experience juicier and more enjoyable. Unfortunately, the excessively smoky flavour of the bacon looms a little large over everything and is, quite frankly, a bit much. 5/10 Waitrose, £3 Looks a bit mean on contents for what should be one of the posher versions. More grey lettuce is encountered. This is almost identical to the Co-op sandwich, with less smoky flavour and a little more tomato. 5/10 Tesco, £2.50 Wafer-thin bacon in abundance. Looks quite nice. Same lettuce as all the others but here there are (what appear to be, at least) grill marks on some of the bacon. How did they do that, we wonder? Feels as if the sandwich has a much lower salt content than the others and therefore less flavour, despite things initially looking quite promising. 5/10 Marks &amp; Spencer, £3.30 This is the best looking of the bunch by miles but also the most expensive. Looks more like a BLT from a cafe than one from a supermarket. The bacon is palpably thicker and more peppery than the others. The tomato is much thicker. There are two varieties of lettuce in here and – about time – one would appear to be iceberg. Not too bad at all, relatively speaking. 6/10 Boots, £3 People used to buy olive oil in a pharmacy, so why not get your lunch there now? The bread used for this one is particularly soft, and the volume of mayonnaise is verging on acceptable. There is a little more lettuce than most of the others. Unexpectedly, Boots have done all right here. 5/10 • Max Halley is the owner of Max’s Sandwich Shop in Finsbury Park, north London, and the author of Max’s Sandwich Book and Max’s Picnic BookIt is, says James Blunt, the first night of his Greatest Hit tour. The crowd cheers. “That’s ‘hit’ singular,” he adds. “I’m going to play You’re Beautiful 22 times.” This is, of course, very on brand for James Blunt these days. His vast mid-00s success came with equally vast accompanying opprobrium – perhaps inevitable when an unnecessarily handsome Eton and Sandhurst alumnus shifts 11m copies of his ballad-heavy debut album, with sales driven by Radio 2. But Blunt has proved exceptionally adept at owning his role in popular culture. His witty, self-deprecating tweets are renowned. As Neil Young removed his music from Spotify, Blunt threatened to add more of his, for example, and similar stuff fills the gaps between songs tonight. It’s at odds with the intensity of his performances – which occasionally extends to singing with fists clenched. But Blunt can afford to laugh at himself. One running gag involves his career tailing off since his debut album, Back to Bedlam, but its successors have shifted another nine million copies between them. On the evidence of tonight’s set, they have taken musical detours into areas just as uncool and reviled as Blunt once was, including Mumford &amp; Sons-y pop-folk (Bonfire Heart) and ukulele-driven Ed Sheeran-isms (Postcards). Clearly he knows his audience. Some of it is as beige as detractors suggest but some is built robustly enough to cut through prejudices: Love Under Pressure’s house piano; Same Mistake’s Coldplay-ish stadium-rousing. His voice is an acquired taste – the cut-glass intonation occasionally suggests an impassioned love ballad being sung by the cad in a Boulting Brothers film – but it would be churlish to say that Monsters, about his ailing father, doesn’t pack an emotional punch, or that 1973, imbued with something of the Balearic spirit of Ibiza, where Blunt lives, isn’t really well-turned. Moreover, he appears to have attracted a new audience. Among the middle-aged couples lurk a noticeable contingent of early-twentysomethings, presumably fuelled by some combination of his online presence and memories of childhood car journeys soundtracked by Back to Bedlam. “You’re beautiful James!” cries one male voice; “I also love you, James!” answers another. They’re doing that thing where you pretend you’re at a gig ironically – but they’ve bought tickets and are singing along, raising the question of who the joke’s on. When Blunt dons a gas mask and runs into the crowd midway through an unexpected cover of Slade’s Coz I Luv You, one of them blocks his way, arms outstretched. Blunt literally leaps on to him, his legs wrapping around the fan’s waist, a man who fully understands on which side his bread is buttered.Gwion Ap Iago, half of the duo Roughion – sometimes billed as Wales’s answer to the Chemical Brothers – is in no doubt that this is “a moment” for Welsh language music. “A lot of people are learning Welsh, a lot of people are really wanting to support the Welsh language music scene and they’re realising what is pumping out there is really, really good,” he said. “We had that thing in the 90s – cool Cymru, Catatonia and all that. We are 100% living in a cool Cymru 2.0.” Across the nation on Friday, venues, workplaces, schools were celebrating Dydd Miwsig Cymru (Welsh language music day), celebrating music from folk to rock, from indie to Roughion’s speciality: electronica. “We might automatically look at America, Germany and the Netherlands as countries producing the most recognised electronic music but the quality we have here shows that Wales is doing it too. Female artists like Gwenno and Kelly Lee Owens are leading the way.” Roughion’s songs include an atmospheric piece of electronica called Newport Road inspired by early hours returns to Cardiff after gigs, while their remix of a tune by the north Wales group Band Pres Llareggub (Llareggub Brass Band) has been played by DJs around the world. The seventh iteration of Welsh language music day was being seen as a particularly special, important and joyful one, with the Covid lockdowns having been both a challenge and an opportunity for the scene. Challenging because the Welsh government’s cautious approach to re-opening has led to long breaks for clubs and music venues. But the hiatus has also given musicians a chance to refine and develop their sound – and provided the time for more people to begin to learn Welsh. According to the language app Duolingo, Welsh is the most popular language to learn in the UK. The number of Welsh language pieces of music released via the Welsh label and distributor PYST increased from 357 in 2020 to 485 in 2021. It is now commonplace to hear Welsh language music on mainstream UK stations including BBC Radio 1 and BBC Radio 6 Music. The country’s reopening and the buildup to festival season is causing excitement. “People have got a lot of great songs ready to go, club ready,” said Ap Iago, who also runs a label, Afanc, named after a lake monster from Welsh mythology. A string of free gigs from Newport in the south-east to Caernarfon in the north-west were being held on Friday to mark Dydd Miwsig Cymru. Elan Evans, Welsh music promoter at the renowned Cardiff venue Clwb Ifor Bach, said there was an air of excitement. She said she loved seeing new artists “taking ownership” of the language. “Not just for home and school but to socialise in, live in, you can do whatever you want with it. It’s our language.” Huw Stephens, the BBC DJ and Dydd Miwsig Cymru ambassador, said: “There is a definite, carefree, creative moment in Welsh language music.” Stephens said following the lockdowns this spring and summer were going to be “critically important” for Welsh language music as people got out and about together. “What’s great is that it really is a year-round thing; it’s a live culture, a real culture, not a manufactured culture, it’s a very organic and natural scene.” Dydd Miwsig Cymru is part of the Welsh government’s long-term vision Cymraeg 2050 to see a million people speaking and using Welsh daily by the middle of the century. The minister for Welsh language and education, Jeremy Miles, said: “Mae’r iaith yn perthyn i ni gyd – the language belongs to us all. Gwenno and Gruff Rhys have shown that music in Welsh can travel the world and you don’t need to speak the language to enjoy Ani Glass and her electropop sound, or Candelas, who are formidable live. Dydd Miwsig Cymru celebrates all forms of Welsh language music, diverse scenes which are thriving and it’s about welcoming more people to dive in and discover what we have.”Welcome to this week’s edition of the Guide – I’m filling in for Gwilym Mumford with your roundup of recommendations for what to read, watch and listen to, and pop cultural conversation starters. On that note, has there been a bigger cultural conversation starter this week than the beef between Neil Young and Joe Rogan (and by extension a little streaming service called Spotify)? Rogan, a man described by the New York Times as “Oprah for the Creatine-taking set”, sold the rights to his podcast The Joe Rogan Experience to the music/tech giants for $100m in 2020. Fast forward to 2022, and he has been accused by experts of spreading vaccine misinformation on his show – not least through an interview with a controversial vaccine scientist and sceptic, Dr Robert Malone, who claimed that the public had been “hypnotised” into following Covid rules. Neil Young – godfather of grunge, veteran of rock – withdrew his music from the streaming service in protest, followed by Joni Mitchell, podcaster Brené Brown, comedian Stewart Lee and a smattering of other musicians. While it seems unlikely that this exodus will bring down Spotify, who control 31% of the music streaming market worldwide, stranger things have happened (and imagine what would happen if Taylor Swift or Ed Sheeran joined in?) Perhaps though, besides restarting tired “culture war” conversations about free speech, the biggest thing that this whole affair highlights is the fact that podcasting – even in its most high-profile form – is something of a wild west. Spotify has said it will add warnings to podcasts which discuss coronavirus, advising listeners to do their own research … but is it a case of too little too late? Unsafe and sound Spotify is, to many, merely a music streaming company, but the Swedish behemoth has been steadily investing in other forms of audio in the past few years, acquiring podcast companies like Anchor and Gimlet, signing up the likes of Rogan, and partnering with production companies like the Obamas’ Higher Ground outfit. But even podcasting’s big leagues are devoid of regulation like that seen with television, which is presided over by Ofcom in the UK and the FCC in the US. A quick Spotify search for “Covid hoax” brings up a glut of worrying recommendations, including one show which claims in its title that Covid vaccines contain HIV. It’s not just amateur shows which are a cause for concern, either. In 2019, the Guardian asked whether podcasting was “a disaster waiting to happen”, citing incidents including alleged plagiarism in the podcasts Crime Junkie and The Dollop, and questions around the ethics of Serial spin-off S-Town, which posthumously chronicled the life of a reclusive Alabama resident who died by suicide. That a major podcast might spread vaccine misinformation hardly seems shocking when you consider the US media market and some of other podcast controversies of recent times, including the New York Times retracting its Islamic State-themed series Caliphate after a central figure was found to have fabricated his account of life as a jihadist in Syria. Meanwhile, a drama based on the 1982 killing of a Chinese-American man, Vincent Chin, was shelved last year by the company A-Major Media after Chin’s family and an activist who was involved in the case said they had not been consulted (“I’m not dead yet and it’s weird hearing/seeing myself fictionalized by people who have never tried to connect with me or the Estate,” said the activist, Helen Zia, on Instagram, who was played by Star Wars actor Kelly Marie Tran in the podcast). Out of control? Much of the beauty of podcasting comes from the fact that it is an accessible medium – you or I could start a series in our living room and upload it to Spotify or Apple Podcasts to share with the world. And, perhaps, Big Podcasting’s blind spots are a hangover from its beginnings as a purely homespun form of media. Indeed, Rogan launched his podcast in 2009, at home, on his laptop. Similarly, another Spotify hit, Reply All, started out as a venture by friends Alex Goldman and PJ Vogt as part of a startup, Gimlet, which was later acquired by the company for $230m. That Reply All later ran into trouble – via a miniseries on racism at food website Bon Appetit, which led to accusations of racism at Gimlet itself – is no surprise when you consider its insular, unregulated start. Part of the appeal of Rogan and his ilk is that listeners feel as if they’re hanging out with a friend, albeit one who talks about cage fighting and the failings of the left more than most. Podcasts would be all the poorer if they didn’t bring in the quirks and foibles of their hosts, but – as this and other cases show – change is likely needed. Until then: don’t believe everything you hear … If you want to read the complete version of this newsletter, please subscribe to receive The Guide in your inbox every Friday.At least five of Boris Johnson’s key aides have resigned. Here’s a roundup of who has left, who may go next and who is likely to remain. Who’s gone Munira Mirza Johnson’s longstanding policy chief, Mirza resigned on Thursday with a blistering letter criticising Boris Johnson’s attempt to smear Keir Starmer over the failure to prosecute Jimmy Savile. Jack Doyle Johnson’s communications director, Doyle took over from James Slack, the former adviser whose leaving party was held on the eve of Prince Philip’s funeral and is being investigated by the Met. A former Daily Mail journalist, Doyle is believed to have been involved both in some of the gatherings and in Johnson’s initial response to the revelations. Martin Reynolds Johnson previously worked with Reynolds in the Foreign Office, and brought him in to be his principal private secretary – a powerful gatekeeper role. Reynolds was the author of a leaked email urging colleagues to “bring your own booze” to a gathering on 20 May 2020. He is returning to the Foreign Office. Dan Rosenfield A former Treasury official who had joined the private sector, Rosenfield was a surprise appointment when he was announced as Johnson’s chief of staff in 2020, after Dominic Cummings left Downing Street. He had been criticised as lacking political nous though Johnson trusted him, involving him closely in reshuffles, for example. Elena Narozanski The special adviser to Johnson on women and equalities, digital, culture, media and sport, and extremism resigned her post in No 10’s policy unit, according to the editor of Conservative Home. Who’s at risk Dougie Smith Munira’s partner is a longstanding Tory aide who works at Downing Street. He is known to be close to the leadership frontrunner Rishi Sunak. Simon Case Handpicked by Johnson and brought back into Whitehall from Kensington Palace, Case was initially put in charge of investigating “partygate”, but stepped aside after it emerged that a lockdown gathering was held in his own office. Alex Chalk Chalk is not a No 10 adviser but a minister, the solicitor general. Reportedly on resignation watch from the whips, he represents the marginal seat of Cheltenham and may feel that standing up for Johnson over partygate and the Savile comments is unlikely to be popular with his constituents. If he did quit, it would signal the crisis has moved beyond Johnson’s Downing Street operation. Who remains Henry Cook, Henry Newman and Simone Finn Many of Johnson’s remaining senior advisers were formerly close to the levelling-up secretary, Michael Gove – they include “the two Henries”, Cook and Newman, and the deputy chief of staff, Lady Finn. Andrew Griffith The new head of Johnson’s policy unit, replacing Mirza, Griffith has been made a minister. He is a former senior business figure who has been an MP since 2019. Who could be in? Simon McGee A former civil service communications chief and ex-Yorkshire Post and Sunday Times journalist, McGee has worked with Johnson in the past while at the Foreign Office. Valued as a sensible type, who is personable and knows how the lobby works, he currently works as a “senior counselor” for the lobbying agency APCO. He could be a possible candidate for communications director. David Canzini Canzini has been repeatedly touted for a strategy job in No 10 by those on the right of the party who rate his behind-the-scenes work in pushing for a “clean” Brexit. He is an ally of the elections guru Lynton Crosby for whom he has a role at CT Group. However, No 10 has repeatedly denied reports that he is going in to work there. Ross Kempsell Kempsell works in a senior political role for CCHQ and is considered an effective and pragmatic operator. He is former journalist for Times Radio and TalkRADIO, but his roles have been more in strategy than communications, so would be more likely to get a job in that area. Rosie Bate-Williams Johnson’s current press secretary has worked her way up through the Tory press officer ranks and is a calm, clear-headed presence in his communications team. Meg Powell-Chandler Powell-Chandler has been an aide for many senior cabinet figures and previously worked in David Cameron’s administration. She has previously been in charge of the “grid” of announcements but has since got a more senior role, and could get a promotion. Rob Oxley One of the longest standing special advisers in the government, Oxley has worked for Theresa May, Vote Leave, Boris Johnson, Dominic Raab, and now Nadine Dorries. He is an experienced communications operator but it is not clear whether he would want to go back into No 10. Alex Wild The director of communications at CCHQ is a former adviser to Priti Patel, the home secretary, and a sharp communicator. An agency? One of the ways Johnson could solve the issue of the staff exodus is to second a senior political strategist from an agency on a short-term basis until the ship can be stabilised – if that is possible. One of the problems in making hires so far is that it is risky for any senior political operator to quit a private sector job when Johnson’s future in No 10 is so insecure. • This article was amended on 5 February 2022. An earlier version said Rob Oxley had also worked for Andrea Leadsom. This has been corrected.Monday At the weekend, we went to the Big Apple Circus, and let me tell you those places have changed. Instead of a sad elephant chained up outside the Big Top – standard in my childhood, unthinkable today – there is “Diana Vedyashkina and her adorable dachshunds!” Creepy clowns are out; Jim Carrey-type stuntmen are in. The ringmaster is called Alan and delivers a long speech about realising one’s dreams and the tightrope artist brings on his 70-year-old mother, who, he informs us, has just had a hip replacement, and has her do a quick turn on the wire. It is an extremely satisfying night out. What lingers into Monday is the power and purity of the imagery. As with a lot of modern entertainment, a self-help script has been bolted on in an effort to lift the evening from merely diverting to inspirational. It’s a needless tautology. If you can’t extract an analogy for your life or small business from a performer balancing on a pile of cylinders and cones on a platform 20 feet up with no safety net, or an escape artist submerged in a tank full of water, fighting desperately to unchain himself and break free, entertainment in general and the circus in particular probably isn’t for you. It’s not the risk that thrills here, although I do wonder if the tumblers and trapeze artists hold the earth-bound jugglers in low esteem. (I bet the jugglers look down on the dog trainers, meanwhile, even though the performing dachshunds are actually quite cool). What lifts it is the experience of seeing one’s internal weather so precisely externalised. I must have a very basic psychology, because while I identify strongly with the wobbling man and the man in the death tank, it’s the juggler who eventually undoes me. Katya Nikiforova juggles four, five, then six balls in the air, at which point the lights go out and adding a seventh ball, she juggles on, impossibly, in darkness. I have come with my two children and a friend and her five children, and together we watch as the balls rise and fall. To my amazement, I have a strong urge to cry. It could be a Covid thing, or a middle age thing, or a winter in New York thing – it is -12C outside and the snow is piled high – but as my friend jams her elbow into my ribs, I know she’s thinking exactly the same thing as I am: there it is, life, an endless exercise in juggling in the dark with balls you can’t see. Tuesday News reaches us that Elon Musk, continuing to charm his way across every demographic, has been DMing a 19-year-old student from Florida. There are, admittedly, worse types of DMs: Musk asked Jack Sweeney, a first-year student at the University of Central Florida, if he would take down @ElonJet, a Twitter feed created by Sweeney to track the passage of Musk’s private jet, using publicly available information. Musk offered him $5,000; Sweeney, cheekily, asked for $50,000 and an internship at Tesla. A person with regular responses might have seen the potential PR in this. Musk, of course, promptly ghosted the teenager and proceeded to make the information less trackable using a data-blocking program. Sweeney neatly side-stepped the block and the feed remains active. “He probably will be mad now,” he said, showing, on top of his tech skills, advanced skills in public service. Wednesday I might not know what phrases like “data-blocking methods” actually mean, but I do know a scam when I hear one. “I’m calling from the Department of Social Security, where your account has been breached,” says a man from a blocked number. “What?” “This is the third time we’ve tried to call you, it’s your last chance to cooperate without serious consequences.” I pause to consider this. “If I’m the victim of the crime, what are the consequences?” There’s a long pause. “Do you see what I mean?” I say. “It doesn’t make sense.” “This is your last chance,” repeats the man, “or you’ll be in trouble with the government.” I feel sorry for him, trying to push through an honest day’s scamming, tell him to contact me in writing and hang up. A day later, another scam, this one by text and encouraged, almost certainly, by stories like the one about that guy who texted a wrong number and ended up being included in a stranger’s Thanksgiving for the next six years. “Heyy are you Jonah? It’s Olivia, we msged on OK Cupid before when I went to visit my grandmother. I’m back if you wanted 2 meet?” I totally fall for this. Aw, poor girl, I think. “So sorry, you have the wrong number!” She replies, instantly. “Wow did I actually chat up some random dude? Oh my gosh I’m so sorry.” Still the penny doesn’t drop. “You really have the wrong number, I’m a 46-year-old of mom of two. Good luck!” She texts a generic-looking photo and says “What’s ur name? Want to txt?” Oh, now I see. Blocked and reported, though I have to hand it to the 50-year-old guy working his angles, this is next-level phishing. The grandmother was a particularly nice touch. Thursday David Beckham has recorded a podcast with Ruth Rogers of the River Cafe in which he reveals that his wife, Victoria, has “eaten the same meal every day for 25 years”. In a long, jolly anecdote the footballer recounts how, “she only eats grilled fish, steamed vegetables; she will very rarely deviate from that. The only time she’s probably ever shared something that’s been on my plate was actually when she was pregnant with Harper, and it was the most amazing thing … It was one of my favourite evenings. I can’t remember what it was but I know she’s not eaten it since!” The tone of this revelation, and the publicity around it, was in the spirit of a man affectionately teasing his wife. In her own, earlier appearance on the same podcast, Victoria Beckham cheerfully talks about an eating regimen with no oil, butter, or sauce, and in which her idea of “comfort food” is brown toast with a smattering of salt. There are worse tragedies in the world than a rich, famous woman who can’t eat, but to present it as anything other than grimly fanatical really sticks in the throat. Friday A man from Home Depot comes to look at my kitchen. This is the circus working it’s magic: I can do this impossible thing I’ve been putting off forever. I can do a renovation. My kitchen is from 1961, the appliances from the 1980s. I moved into the apartment eight years ago and haven’t done a single thing to it. The man sits at my table and asks about taps. I have no strong feelings about taps, something that, before this moment, has never felt like a deficit. He asks about tiles for the backsplash and I inch away from him like he pulled out a knife. “These handles, or these?” he says, pushing a ring binder in my direction. “Sounds fine,” I say. He looks confused. He starts muttering about counter tops – “I have samples in the car.” Oh, god, I’ve made a terrible mistake. I know it, he knows it. He could put a timeshare in Florida on the end of my invoice and I’d sign just to make this thing end. • An evening with Marina Hyde and John Crace: join in person or online Join Marina Hyde and John Crace live in Kings Place, looking back at the latest events in Westminster, on Monday 7 March, 8pm GMT | 9pm CET | 12pm PST | 3pm EST. Book tickets hereA gripping account of the negotiations between Britain and Germany in 1938 before the outbreak of war, Robert Harris’s thriller – which has now been adapted into a film starring Jeremy Irons – focuses on the backrooms of power and peripheral figures working to avert catastrophe. At the centre of the story is Hugh Legat, a civil servant who, at the start of the novel, is dragged away from an anniversary lunch with his wife for a meeting at No 10. Events take place over four tense days at the end of September, during which the prime minister Neville Chamberlain goes to Munich for talks with Hitler, who is intent on invading Czechoslovakia. On his return, Chamberlain famously stepped off the plane waving a written assurance of peace from the Führer, a moment that would come to stain his reputation. This is no alternative history in the manner of Harris’s Fatherland, though there are heavily fictionalised elements including Legat and his friendship with Paul von Hartmann, an old chum from Oxford who is now a diplomat at the Nazi foreign ministry. David Rintoul is our steady and authoritative narrator, bringing suitable graveness to early conversations in London when war appears inevitable – Legat’s children have even been fitted for gas masks – and during which it is revealed that Britain’s air force is calamitously unprepared. As the action moves to Europe, Rintoul subtly evokes the toughness and veiled contempt of German officials without descending into theatrics (you’ll find no ’Allo ’Allo!-style accents here). Hitler would later say of the allied leaders: “Our enemies are little worms. I saw them at Munich.” • Munich is available on Random House Audiobooks, 9hr 38min Further listening (M)otherhood: On the Choices of Being a Woman Pragya Agarwal, Canongate, 10hr 30min An immensely powerful reflection on the ways motherhood has been politicised, fetishised and used to control and suppress women, narrated by the author. Will Will Smith, Penguin Audio, 16hr 16min The actor and rapper reads his memoir chronicling his troubled childhood and rise to Hollywood fame.Michael Gove should be a bishop, not a politician. He smiles. He nods. He declares “missions” and blesses all and sundry. His current diocese is Britain’s northern cities, which are suffering the worst regional disparity of any OECD country and said to be crippling the British economy. Boris Johnson has acknowledged this in his “levelling up” agenda. But to govern is to govern, not just to mean well. Gove’s Wednesday sermon on levelling up meant well, but he might have been speaking of a distant province of a forgotten empire. The people of the north, he said, deserved better transport, better education, better housing, training, health, science, anything you cared to mention. They should have it, God willing. He promised that mayors would be appointed, plans formulated and 22,000 civil servants sent out from London, like missionaries to the unwashed. But please don’t mention money. It is so vulgar. The clear reality is that British regional policy has barely moved on since the days of Clement Attlee. Gove’s speech could have been delivered in 1947. To him, the cities of the north need big government and central spending. Making them level with the south is about more infrastructure and more welfare. That is what macho British ministers always say: theirs is a job for spades, diggers and hi-vis jackets. If this was the end of the matter, the outlook for levelling up would be bleak, as it would seem there is no money to spare. Yet I tried to imagine the citizens of Frankfurt, Toulouse or Milan, let alone New York or Los Angeles, hanging on the goodwill of distant politicians for their future. I tried to imagine them being patted on the head by Gove and told to be patient. The whole Gove project is unreal. The only region Whitehall recognises is London. Reality is the chancellor Rishi Sunak’s infrastructure mega-projects: Crossrail in central London and a high-speed commuter line into London from Birmingham. Sunak embodies the so-called Matthew effect: “To them that hath shall it be given.” The great unmentioned truth in any debate on the north-south divide is not the deprivation of the north, serious though it may be. It is the magnetism of London. It is summed up in a meeting of Manchester businessmen I once attended. They never mentioned infrastructure. They cried with one voice, “Why does London steal our young people?” I likewise recall a northern woman telling me that all her children and grandchildren had gone south, and never would return. When I commiserated, she beamed and said, “Oh no. They’ve all done very well.” Gove did hint at this in his mission to improve something called “pride of place”. The dominance of London over all other English cities is unlike that of the capital of any other developed country. At its root is the steady disempowerment of these cities, stripped of their self-government until they are mere agencies of Whitehall. Northern cities cannot now await London cash, least of all those not among Gove’s bizarre “top 20”, chosen for his special favour. Their revival will only start with a newly confident local leadership. Gove hints at more devolution and localism – a political promise so often made but never fulfilled. England’s current elected mayors are a powerless shambles that confuse cities and regions. Liverpool and Bristol both have two overlapping ones. Every city and town should clearly have one mayor, executive and plenipotentiary. This is extremely common in Europe. The additional devolution of wider local control has had mixed results in Wales and Scotland, but it unquestionably boosts local pride and morale. Gove should give cities and counties tax-raising powers and far more fiscal discretion. With local taxes accounting for such a tiny percentage of public sector revenue, this is a recipe for Whitehall deciding everything. Virtually the only real discretion British provincial cities have is over property development. This is why the leaders of Manchester, Liverpool, Birmingham and Bristol can think of no way of competing with London other than by erecting garish towers of luxury flats in their central areas. They ignore the evidence that modern “creative clusters” – in design, marketing, the arts and entertainment – are drawn to historic neighbourhoods and old converted buildings. Manchester’s Northern Quarter and Birmingham’s Jewellery Quarter are the Sohos and Shoreditches of the future, yet they are desperately under-protected. Northern cities regard their Victorian heritage as a liability not an asset. They should ponder last week’s lavish London edition of Country Life. Significantly not a single modern development was pictured. Every up-and-coming neighbourhood, street or house in the magazine was built in the 19th century or before. That is true magnetism. The idea that government bulldozers and concrete mixers will reignite the vitality of these places is absurd. They need saving, not digging. If conservation is one spur to civic renewal, the other is culture. Britain’s artistic and creative life is dominated by London. To see Hull and now Coventry declared “UK city of culture” is heartwarming – for Hull in 2017 it was worth a reported £220m in investment. But it demonstrates the yawning gulf with the capital. Every modern city should be a city of culture, all the time, and not have to be declared it (by London). The report last week that the V&amp;A and the British Museum had brushed aside Gove’s request to establish northern branches spoke volumes about modern Britain. He is the boss. He should emphatically redirect cultural spending away from London, and compel its museums to disgorge from their basements hidden treasures that belong not to them but to the nation. Last week the streets of London’s West End were heaving as the capital roared back to pre-Covid prosperity. You could feel the excitement. But the metropolis is truly blessed. Its galleries and museums, its music and opera are heavily subsidised, as is its transportation. We all know that London’s taxes support the north, but as my Manchester businessmen complained, it “taxes” the rest of Britain of its youthful talent in return. If Johnson is to deny the north large sums of public spending, he can at least demand that London offers instead some of its magnetism. For it is that magnetism that will help the north back to prosperity. England’s great cities should be liberated to recover the civic pride they once enjoyed. That is their one secure renaissance. Simon Jenkins is a Guardian columnistOn an island not known for its snow or ice, something is stirring. Not so long ago when Team GB turned up at the Winter Games, they left with their medal cupboard looking barren or bare. Sure, there was the occasional highlight – and those of a certain age will see Robin Cousins, Torvill and Dean and Rhona Martin in their mind’s eye – but as a winter sports country, Britain carried a distinct whiff of Eddie the Eagle: harmless and a little bit hapless. The transformation has been stark. Between 1952 and 2010, the nation won just 12 medals in 16 Winter Games. Then came a quiet revolution. In Sochi in 2014 there was a five-medal haul, a tally equalled in Pyeongchang in 2018. Now there is a bullish confidence that the team can do even better in Beijing. As Britain’s chef de mission, Georgina Harland put in her message to athletes in the team handbook: “Team GB arrives in Beijing with a talented team, more competitive across more disciplines than ever before. We continue to grow as a winter nation and that is down to the performances you as athletes continue to achieve every season.” What has caused such a turnaround? A combination of tech, talent, money and new Olympic events. The tech has been most pronounced in the skeleton, where Britain has used the same aerodynamic and skinsuit technology that helped propel Britain’s track cyclists to success. Amy Williams in 2010, and Lizzy Yarnold in 2014 and 2018, reaped the benefits with gold medals. Money? When it comes to winning more medals, Rule 101 is that cold hard cash undoubtedly helps. In curling’s case, for instance, they have been able to build a national centre in Stirling in 2017 which has led to almost immediate results. GB’s three teams – mixed, men and women – are able to train full-time in a state of the art facility and have three realistic shots of glory in Beijing. The new events? Remember curling, a game played seriously by a small number of countries, was only reintroduced as a demonstration sport in 1988. While the exciting snowboard and free-skiing events are an even more recent addition. Despite many of its athletes learning on dry ski slopes rather than real snow, Britain’s flicks and tricks department has punched above its weight. And the talent? Here a mixture of homegrown stars combined with the controversial acquisition of those British roots – including snowboard cross athlete Charlotte Bankes, who previously competed for France, and halfpiper Gus Kenworthy, who used to represent the US – has given Britain a team that could yet win seven medals, the top end of its target. Some caution is advised, of course. In many high-tariff events such as big air, where competitors perform a spectacular trick after flying off a massive ramp, the level of variance is higher than in, say, rowing or cycling or running. Another injection of randomness comes from the Covid situation. So far no British athlete has tested positive but as the Alpine skier Dave Ryding puts it: “It’s always on everyone’s mind. You wake up in the morning, and you’re like: why is my throat hurting? Your roommate will probably tell you you’ve been ripping out some snoring all night, but the first thing you think is: what am I coming down with? “It does bring more stress and that makes it harder and draining,” added the 35-year-old, who believes he has a shot at a medal after his recent World Cup win. “But we’ve been through it for two years now. So we all know what to expect and what to do.” When it comes to medals, Bankes is considered Britain’s gold medal banker, and the mixed and men’s curlers will fancy their chances too. But it would be unwise to discount the men’s four-man bobsleigh, given they have peppered the podium this season. Meanwhile Zoe Atkin, James Woods and 17-year-old Kirsty Muir all have live shots in freestyle skiing, and if British skeleton can find more secrets in their bag of tech tricks, Matt Weston might yet figure in the medals. Is it possible that Britain has its best ever Winter Games? Of course. However there is a sense that what happens in Beijing is only part of a wider project that involves climbing higher in the medal table, with GB Snowsport setting their sights on being a top five skiing and snowboard nation by 2030. Is spending the money needed to succeed philosophically desirable, given the country is not a winter sports nation? Good question – although probably one for the end of these Games not the start. For now, Team GB expects. And Andy Anson, the British Olympic Association’s chief executive, believes its athletes can deliver. “The past two Winter Olympics have seen Team GB achieve record medal returns,” he says. “And having seen the depth of our talent with our team of 50 athletes, I have no doubt we are on track to succeed once again.”My abiding memory of chef Dom Robinson’s Renaissant, a fine-dining restaurant in Bagnor, Berkshire, is of witnessing the greatest standoff over a tasting menu I’ve ever seen. A couple had foolishly arrived for their Saturday-night booking, imagining there to be an à la carte menu, rather than just a bespoke seven-course experience that lasts about three hours. “But we went out for lunch,” they pleaded. “We’re too full to eat the full seven courses. Can’t we have just, say, three?” Sadly, this was impossible. Unthinkable, even. It was the full shebang, or nothing. A painfully polite, low-volume “discussion” then ensued, during which the server made no attempt to consult the chef. Or even offer a goodwill gesture to cancel, say, the “baguette française, Normandy butter” course, or the Victoria pineapple plate that comes around the midway point. It was almost as if the staff already knew that not one amuse-bouche could be missed. “Well, we’ll go then,” the customers eventually said, calling Renaissant’s bluff. A long silence hung in the air, followed by the sound of footsteps crunching across the car park gravel as the pair huffed back to their car. It was only 7pm. I hasten to add that the handful of staff at this beautifully restored, 17th-century pub were charming about our own request to take pork off the menu; they’re not tyrants. Yet Renaissant, the rebirth of the Blackbird, which was also run by Robinson and his wife, Marliz, is a determinedly serious restaurant. Not that its predecessor wasn’t itself pretty serious – the Blackbird had a Michelin star but at least you could get a Sunday roast or even a burger there – perish the thought. Renaissant is much more scallop à la russe and wild boar africaine, with a framed menu from Marco Pierre White’s Harveys on the wall and Edith Piaf on the stereo. As one arrives on a crisp winter’s evening, the outside is secluded, glowing and pristine, and all quite heavenly. Inside, the decor is sleek, but still strangely rustic. Robinson describes the place as a “sauce restaurant”, which, for a certain contingent of readers, I must add has nothing to do with his love of HP and everything to do with Georges Auguste Escoffier’s kitchen brigade system and the culinary tradition of classic sauces such as Véronique, lie de vin or Nantua. Producing top-tier sauces, gravies and stocks is a long-winded, highly skilled labour of love that has been known to break the spirit of many an adequate chef and is the crux of a traditional Michelin-starred meal. Which is possibly why you can’t just pitch up here and say: “Just sling me the fillet of brill lie de vin. I need to be back before Ant and Dec’s Limitless Win.” So, yes, three hours we stayed, with course one being warm bread, then a fairly long gap before the second act, a play on Russian salad involving brunoise potato, beetroot and carrot set in a mould and topped with scallops – a bit like a shuba herring salad and delicious, if a touch stodgy. Up next was a large, delicately executed crayfish raviolo featuring good fresh pasta enveloping a crayfish tail that came on a scallop and salmon mousse, and was served with a very sweet sauce Nantua made with crayfish stock, parsley and rather a lot of diced carrot. There is no doubt that Robinson is a confident, technically brilliant chef who worships at the altar of kitchen gods such as Nico Ladenis and the Roux brothers. His cooking is a paean to butter and time spent huddled over pans, and to dancing a fine line between the almost-too-rich and the almost-too-much. It’s just that type of cooking, and it won’t be for everyone. It certainly wasn’t for those two guests who “amicably agreed” to go home. But there’s a reason a certain type of chin-stroking, star-watching food obsessive is pitching up at Renaissant. After another long intermission, a very delicious plate of thinly sliced Victoria pineapple appeared topped with ricotta, powerfully scented marjoram leaves and a scattering of pine nuts. Hour two heralded my favourite course – seared brill with pomme puree in a world-class, glossy, red-wine sauce and topped with a clove of mellow roast garlic – followed some time after by a cheese course that included comté and bleu d’Auvergne with a highly unpretentious half-dozen Carr’s water crackers, and I now fully expect to be barred from my home city for raising an eyebrow. Over the course of the third hour, there was a pear-based, egg-cup-sized palate cleanser and two choices of dessert, of which the better was a slab of dark-chocolate Negus mousse – fiercely rich, yet deceptively light – with armagnac-soaked prunes, which are one of my favourite things on Earth and technically one of your five-a-day. Renaissant is a bizarre, 19th-century Cannes aristocrat’s supper room hiding in a hamlet outside Newbury. If you’re into that type of thing, by all means give it a go. Just don’t ask them to make you a quick sandwich. • Renaissant Bagnor, near Newbury, Berkshire, 01635 581232. Open lunch Thurs-Sat, noon-2pm, dinner Weds-Sat, 6.30-8pm. Five-course lunchtime menu du jour, £55 a head; seven-course dinner menu hommage, £95 a head, both plus drinks and serviceWe’d like our readers to help us find out more more about the cost of living across Europe. How are people managing financially at the moment? How much do items in your weekly food shop cost? How much do things like a meal out or an energy bill compare to last year? Are there any particular items you think have risen in cost substantially? We’d like to hear from people living both inside and outside of the EU. Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.It might be forbidden to say so openly in the House of Commons, but most of Boris Johnson’s political opponents – and, probably, some of his supporters – would agree he has a reputation for telling lies. He has been accused of telling fibs big and small throughout his premiership on everything from Brexit to the Downing Street parties. So how did he do this week? The Guardian has looked at his various statements and rated them for honesty. Monday Claim (in Daily Mail op-ed): “[W]e had the fastest vaccine rollout and the fastest booster rollout of any major European economy … And that was at least partly because of Brexit” Facts: The UK was certainly among the quickest countries in starting vaccinations, but defining “fastest” depends where you draw the line, with several neighbours having since vaccinated more per head of population. The connection to Brexit has been debunked. EU countries could temporarily authorise vaccines unilaterally if needed – as the UK did in November 2020, when it was still under the Brexit transition agreement. Verdict: Partly true-ish, partly lie. Claim (in the Commons): Keir Starmer, when director of public prosecutions (DPP), “spent most of his time prosecuting journalists and failing to prosecute Jimmy Savile” Facts: Starmer was DPP from 2008-13, a period when the broadcaster was interviewed by police and died without being charged for decades of sexual offences. He also apologised for prosecution failings. But he had no connection to decisions over the case, and the idea he did emerged later in conspiracy theories mainly shared among the far right. Verdict: Lie – and eventually partially withdrawn by Johnson. But his longstanding policy chief, Munira Mirza, resigned after he failed to apologise. She said: “There was no fair or reasonable basis for that assertion. This was not the normal cut-and-thrust of politics; it was an inappropriate and partisan reference to a horrendous case of child sex abuse.” Claim (in the Commons): “The [Sue Gray] report does absolutely nothing to substantiate the tissue of nonsense that he [Starmer] has just spoken – absolutely nothing” Facts: Another angry response to Starmer, this appeared to refer to the Labour leader’s claim that the interim Gray report showed “evidence of serious and flagrant breaches of lockdown”, or perhaps that there had been “absurd denials” about parties. While Johnson is correct that the police have not yet charged anyone, the fact the report showed 12 events had sufficient weight of evidence to merit an investigation does demonstrate Starmer’s claim also had weight. Verdict: Overblown – and perhaps desperate. Claim (in the Commons): The UK “has the fastest growth in the G7” Facts: Johnson says this regularly, and it is, at best, disputed. The UK is top in terms of the latest year-on-year GDP G7 growth table, but was fifth in the two most recent quarterly figures, from the second and third quarters of 2021. Verdict: Debatable. Claim (in the Commons): “What we are actually doing is cutting crime by 14%” Facts: This claim is taken from crime statistics for England and Wales for the year to the end of June 2021. Crime did fall by 14% – but only if you exclude fraud and computer misuse. Overall crime rose by 12%. The fall in non-theft crime came largely from fewer thefts, which was in turn because of repeated lockdowns. Verdict: Lie – and Johnson was later criticised for it by the UK Statistics Authority. Wednesday Claim (at prime minister’s questions): “It is a quite extraordinary thing that there are now record numbers of people in work – 420,000 more than there were before the pandemic began” Facts: There are more payrolled employees than before Covid, but the total number of people in work, if you include the self-employed, is still slightly lower. Verdict: Misleading. Claim (at prime minister’s questions): “Our Covid recovery plan is vital in helping people with the cost of living: lifting up universal credit payments by cutting the tax that people effectively pay” Facts: This is a reference to October’s budget, which changed the so-called taper rate for universal credit, so that the amount of the benefit a worker will lose for every pound they earn above their allowance was reduced to 55p in the pound from 63p. This is, however, not a “tax”. At £2bn a year, it is also notably less than the £6bn for the £20-a-week UC uplift brought in during the pandemic, now scrapped. Verdict: Misleading. Thursday Claim (in interview with Five News): “Let me make it absolutely clear, because people keep going on about this, and no one is commenting, least of all me, about the personal involvement of the leader of the opposition in the handling of that case” Facts: This was in response to a question about Johnson’s comments on Starmer and Savile, and the subsequent resignation of Mirza. But, as we saw above, Johnson’s initial comment very much did seek to implicate the opposition leader. Verdict: A lie about a lie.Britain’s efforts to halt the flow of Russian “dirty money” into the UK have been called into question in the aftermath of a threat by the foreign secretary, Liz Truss, to hit Kremlin-linked oligarchs with economic sanctions if Ukraine is attacked. Labour and anti-corruption campaigners this week accused the government of failing to curtail Russian wealth and influence in Britain, despite years of provocative actions from the Kremlin. “We’ve seen Russia engage in assassinations and human rights abuses, annexations and invasions – but it has taken 100,000 Russian troops at the border to push Britain towards a change of policy,” said James Nixey, a director at the Chatham House thinktank, which recently published a paper on the UK’s kleptocracy problem. Truss would not spell out who might be targeted, partly for legal reasons, but she told MPs it could include “those who own or control” companies that have economic or strategic significance to the Russian state. Roman Borisovich, an anti-corruption campaigner, who runs “kleptocracy tours” highlighting Russian oligarch-owned properties in London, said Truss’s threat sent out the opposite signal. Because sanctions would come only in the event of an invasion, the implied message was, he said, “play nice, you are welcome to come with your stolen loot”. As fortunes were made following the fall of the Soviet Union, Russian elites, who owe their wealth to an all-powerful Kremlin, have been eager to move money from home. So vast is the flight of capital it has been estimated that Russians hold as much as $1tn in wealth abroad, according to the Atlantic Council thinktank. Transparency International, an anti-corruption watchdog, believes that 150 properties, mostly luxury mansions in Britain worth an estimated £1.5bn, are owned by Kremlin-linked Russians. More may be held by offshore companies, whose true ownership is hard to determine. Politicians have benefited. Russian-born donors or individuals with business links to Russia have given nearly £2m to either the Conservative party or individual constituency associations since Boris Johnson took power in July 2019, according to Electoral Commission figures. Checks were minimal in some cases. Seven hundred wealthy Russians were among those allowed to enter the UK on tier 1 investor visas between 2008 and 2015, a period when no state checks were carried out. All tier 1 visas granted in that period are now subject to a Home Office national security review, says the NGO Spotlight on Corruption. Former insiders – from policing and Whitehall – complain about a lack of resources and, by implication, political will. “Proving the illicit nature of the funds often needs information from the source country, very hard in some cases,” said one. “The subjects are rich and will employ the legal system of this country to its fullest degree.” Too many agencies are involved, a former senior security official added. “The British state has not put enough effort and money in tackling fraud across the board – illegal economic activity, dirty money. It’s too spread out between the National Crime Agency, the Serious Fraud Office, City of London police and even local forces.” A week ago, Theodore Agnew, a former Lords Treasury minister, said one of the reasons for his resignation was that a proposed economic crime bill had been “foolishly rejected” for the next Queen’s speech by business managers. On Wednesday, in a U-turn, Johnson told MPs it would be put on the list. “Contrary to some of the myths that are peddled, this government have come down very hard on dirty money from Russia and everywhere else,” the prime minister added, and highlighted recently introduced anti-corruption measures, such as unexplained wealth orders. These orders were introduced in 2017 and intended to force politically exposed persons to explain the origins of the money, if they had bought an expensive property that appeared beyond their means. The property or asset could, in theory, be seized if no adequate explanation were provided. The Home Office predicted that 20 orders would be issued every year. In fact, only four are known to have been issued in four years, and none since Boris Johnson took office, according toChatham House. No Russian has been targeted either. The shadow foreign secretary, David Lammy, said British interests were being damaged. The Labour MP said: “The Conservatives’ inexplicable record of failure in stopping corrupt elites from Russia and other authoritarian regimes storing money in our country is weakening Britain’s security, harming our national interests and undermining our diplomacy.” Such is the level of Russian influence in the UK, that the US is said to have become worried. Max Bergmann, a senior fellow at the Center for American Progress, a Joe Biden-aligned thinktank, told the Guardian he believed “there is clear concern in the US government about the influence of Russian money in the UK”. A week earlier, Bergmann had written a widely picked up report into the Ukraine crisis, calling for the US to establish a joint kleptocracy working group with the UK “to prod stronger action” from the Conservative government. This week, the White House said it was proceeding with it in tandem with the UK. Economic sanctions would focus on individuals “in or near the inner circles of the Kremlin”, an administration official said, should an invasion take place. Lists of targets have been drawn up: a shortlist of eight by allies of the jailed opposition leader Alexei Navalny, which was debated in the UK parliament last year. A public list of 35 also appears in the Putin accountability bill, put forward by members of the US Congress last month. But economic sanctions are unlikely to involve those who have gone on to make millions in donations to the Conservatives. None feature on the two lists – and it is unlikely the Tories would in effect admit money had been taken from people deemed too close to the Kremlin in the event of war. Borisovich, meanwhile, told the Guardian he plans to restart his “kleptocracy tours” in London this spring, as the pandemic subsides. This time, he hopes there will be an extra twist. “I would like to extend an invitation to MPs from the foreign affairs select committee,” he said.Good morning. About 6,500 people are under evacuation orders after a fire at a North Carolina fertilizer plant and fears that it could result in the largest US explosion ever. The risk of an explosion at the Weaver fertilizer plant, which contains roughly 600 tons of ammonium nitrate, has “greatly diminished” over the days since the blaze ignited. The fire, which started in the north of Winston-Salem on Monday, is within a one-mile radius of about 2,500 homes, several schools and churches, a correctional facility as well as other commercial and government buildings. Has it caused air pollution? Locals say the fire has created fumes that “get in your throat and look like a very thick fog”. What is the Environmental Protection Agency’s role in this? It is not required to regulate facilities with ammonium nitrate under the Clean Air Act risk management plan. Environmental lawyers are calling for this to change. Woman killed and four others injured after California bus shooting A 43-year-old woman has been killed and four others injured after a man began shooting on Greyhound bus stopped in northern California. Police arrested the suspect, 21-year-old Asaahdi Coleman, naked inside a nearby Walmart. Coleman had been exhibiting “paranoid behavior”, the Butte county sheriff, Kory Honea, said, and had accused a bus passenger of being an undercover police officer. He then opened fire as people were exiting the Los Angeles-bound vehicle, which had stopped at an AM/PM convenience store in Oroville, firing more than a dozen times. The woman died at the scene. An 11-year-old girl, a 25-year-old woman who is pregnant, a 38-year-old man and a 32-year-old man were also injured. At least one of the victims was shot multiple times. What do we know about the suspect? Coleman was wanted on a warrant out of another county for being a prohibited person in possession of a firearm. Did gun violence rise during the pandemic? The US saw its highest-ever recorded annual increase – 30% – in murders in 2020, FBI statistics show. Tensions grow as truck blockade paralyzes Ottawa Hundreds of truck drivers have descended on Ottawa to protest against public health measures, bringing the Canadian capital to a standstill in a situation that some fear could erupt into violence. The protest has been sparked by a requirement that truckers crossing from the US into Canada be vaccinated against Covid. The vast majority of truckers, and Canadians, are vaccinated. Police, who say their strategy is to defuse tension, say they believe a number of drivers have weapons, and that there are fears of violence as people call for a counter-protest to the blockade. Critics of the police response say that other protests, including those by Indigenous peoples, are often met with force. What does Justin Trudeau say? He dismissed suggestions of using the military to end the blockade, saying it was not going to happen “right now”. In other news … Facebook’s parent company has suffered a record single-day fall in stock market value, losing $230bn. Meta’s price fell by 26.4% after the company reported its daily user numbers had dropped for the first time ever. Xi Jinping and Vladimir Putin are meeting on Friday as tensions grow between Russia and the west. The summit, as Beijing kicks off its Winter Olympics, is the Chinese’s leader’s first face-to-face meeting with a world leader in two years. The German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, is starting to come under fire for being “inaudible” over the mounting crisis in Ukraine. He has been criticised by Kyiv and other east-central European capitals for Germany’s restrictions on weapons exports to crisis regions. Another adviser to the British prime minister Boris Johnson quit on Friday, following the resignation of four key No 10 officials on Thursday – a day dubbed the “meltdown in Downing Street”. More than 10 MPs have publicly called on Johnson to step down. Stat of the day: World’s richest 10% accounted for 49% of CO2 emissions in 2015 Wealthy people are responsible for a growing proportion of the world’s emissions, new research shows. In 2010, the richest 10% emitted 34% of global CO2; by 2015, this was 49%. In contrast, the world’s poorest half were responsible for 15% in 2010, falling to 7% in 2015. “High consumption and large carbon footprints are spatially concentrated in high-income cities and suburbs – while their negative effects, such as air pollution, typically spill over into less affluent areas,” study author Prof Aimee Ambrose said. Don’t miss this – Mitski: ‘I’m a black hole where people dump their feelings’ After the pandemic brought concerts and tours to a screeching halt almost two years ago, singer-songwriter Mitski found time to “learn how to live like a regular person”, baking and gardening at a base in Nashville. The respite from touring followed the success of her fifth album, Be the Cowboy, and the “cultish keenness” of her fanbase that came with it. She tells Ben Beaumont-Thomas about the need for boundaries, when “everyone need[s] a piece” of her, and about what it’s like to be “consumed” as an artist. “I’m a woman in public, allowing myself to be consumed. I put out songs, but really what people are buying is the product that is me.” Last Thing: Kleptomaniac New Zealand parrot steals GoPro When a family of hikers left their GoPro out to capture footage of Aotearoa’s native alpine parrot species, the kea, they didn’t expect a directorial debut from one of the New Zealand parrots. Flying off with the camera, the bird captured sweeping mountain views, avant-garde shots and, to close, a “slightly frenzied attack” on the GoPro. Sign up First Thing is delivered to thousands of inboxes every weekday. If you’re not already signed up, subscribe now. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.comUgo Monye Who will win? Ireland. They’ve gone quietly about their business, there doesn’t seem to be any great sense of hyperbole about them, but they beat New Zealand in the autumn, are coming strolling into the Six Nations and are red-hot favourites to beat the reigning champions. Predicted order Ireland, England, France, Scotland, Wales, Italy. Key match? The second week is crucial and, while Wales v Scotland could be pivotal, France v Ireland is blockbuster. France’s tournament begins for real then but it’s always tight and memories of Johnny Sexton’s late drop goal will still be fresh. Best player? Antoine Dupont may seem the obvious choice but he has not played too much recently and there is no hiding place for him as the world player of the year. Everyone will be looking to put pressure on the most influential player in French rugby. Breakthrough player? A few possibilities – Mack Hansen, the uncapped Ireland wing, could burst on to the scene like Louis Rees-Zammit last year and on the subject of Wales, Johnny McNicholl, Taine Basham and Ellis Jenkins could take the next step up. I can’t wait for … The chance to see players smiling post-match. Unfortunately it was an enduring image of last year’s tournament when Rees-Zammit had scored that wonder try against Scotland but had to wear a mask when doing his TV interview. Robert Kitson Who will win? France. Or Ireland. Or maybe Scotland. The championship grows more fiendishly competitive: the only certainty is that a grand slam will be a mighty achievement. Pin me down and I’ll plump for France on points difference. Predicted order France, Ireland, Scotland, England, Wales, Italy. Key match? There are plenty but France v Ireland in Paris in round two will fundamentally influence the title outcome. Most important player? Johnny Sexton. As long as he stays fit, Ireland will believe they have all angles covered. Breakthrough talent? If Ulster’s James Hume gets a run he will make opposition centres sit up. I can’t wait for … Scotland v England. Tension-filled, tumultuous – and that’s just the weather forecast. A home win in front of a raucous Murrayfield crowd will put the “din” in Edinburgh. Andy Bull Who will win? At their best, France are a cut above every other team. They’ll win a grand slam, with one or two nail-biting last-minute victories along the way. Predicted order France, Ireland, Scotland, England, Wales, Italy. Key match? France v Ireland in the second week is the showdown between the two top teams from last autumn and, unlike England and Wales, they’ve both got (mostly) fit squads to pick from. Most important player? Antoine Dupont, stand-in captain, world player of the year, and a man who can crack open the best defences. Expect him to make the difference in at least one close game. Breakthrough talent? This time last year, Melvyn Jaminet was playing in the French second division. Has landed 92% of his shots at goal and scored 89 points, in six Tests since he made his debut. I can’t wait for … After the past two years, the first trip out and about among a crowd. The prospect of a wet and windy weekend at Murrayfield never seemed so tantalising. Gerard Meagher Who will win? Ireland. Will need a win in Paris or at Twickenham but their two defeats last year were by fine margins and they have improved significantly since then. Predicted order Ireland, France, England, Scotland, Wales, Italy Key match? England v Ireland. Can’t see a grand slam this year but there’s every chance both sides will be two wins from three by their round four meeting. The victors will then take some stopping on the final weekend. Most important player? Tadhg Furlong. When he is playing at the top of his game, Ireland tend to be doing similarly. The leading tighthead prop in the northern hemisphere and he has returned to fitness just at the right time. Breakthrough talent? Alex Dombrandt. Has been consistently demonstrating his rich talents at Harlequins for a while and this year’s competition will be all the better if he can do so for England. I can’t wait for … South Africa to join the championship. In the meantime, though, this is shaping up to be one of the most unpredictable tournaments in recent memory and with an emphasis on attacking intent it should not disappoint. Michael Aylwin Who will win? Ireland. But any of the top four in my list could finish anywhere, bar sixth. Oh, and then there’s Wales, who are the actual champions, remember. Ireland will probably lose in Paris or London. Predicted order Ireland, Scotland, England, France, Wales, Italy. Key match France-Ireland. The winner will be two from two and motoring. If France lose, they’ll probably fall apart. If Ireland win, they host Italy, then go to Twickenham. I think Ireland will win. Most important player Well, this is always a fly-half, isn’t it. Unless you’re being difficult. I already feel as if I’ve been difficult in tipping French travails (not that there isn’t ample precedent). So Sexton. Obviously. Breakthrough talent This is where you can be difficult, so I’ll go for Paolo Garbisi of bottom-placed Italy. They have spent decades trying to find a No 10. Now they have one, they need to find a team to go with him. I can’t wait for … The bleating about the state of modern rugby after the first bad game. Rugby has lots of massive, possibly terminal problems, but the spectacle on the field is better than ever. Do not be fooled by the edited best bits of yesteryear.The owner of the Upper Crust sandwich chain has reported a drop in sales as concerns about the Omicron coronavirus variant kept customers at home but said it was hopeful of better performance as commuters return to offices. SSP Group operates fast food chains targeted at railway stations and airports, which also includes Camden Food Co, Ritazza and Burger King franchises at travel locations. Hit hard by pandemic restrictions on travel, sales in the eight weeks from 6 December were only 57% of the equivalent in pre-pandemic 2019, the company said in a trading update. That compared with 66% of 2019 levels across October and November. Omicron was designated a variant of concern by the World Health Organization on 26 November, prompting a renewed wave of travel restrictions and concerns about the global economic recovery. SSP, which lost more than £400m in the year to September, said sales were “resilient” during December but that they had “softened” in early January. Over the first four months of its financial year, group revenues were at about 62% of 2019 levels. “The spread of the Omicron variant around the world and the subsequent government restrictions have inevitably had an impact on passenger numbers in many of our markets,” SSP said. However, the company added it was “confident in our ability to manage any short-term volatility” and “well-positioned” for the summer. It also said sales in recent weeks had been “more encouraging” as governments again sought to lift restrictions following evidence that Omicron caused proportionally fewer cases of severe Covid-19. Railway locations showed the fastest recovery, at 71% of 2019 levels, thanks to the gradual return to offices after the lifting of work-from-home guidance in England on 24 January. In the longer term, SSP will have to contend with the expected permanent increase in people working from home on one or more days a week. Fewer than two in five UK workers worked from home during 2020 even at the height of lockdowns, but of those a significant proportion is expected to maintain some of the flexibility enforced by the pandemic. SSP, which cut 5,000 jobs in June 2020 in response to the pandemic, said it had not changed its medium-term target to return to like-for-like revenues and profit margins “at broadly similar levels to 2019 by 2024”, suggesting it still expects a drawn-out recovery.The stepmother of a 19-year-old woman from Canada allegedly murdered in Essex as she visited the UK for the first time has paid tribute to her “strong, smart and witty” daughter. Ashley Wadsworth, from Vernon, British Columbia, had reportedly never left Canada before arriving in the UK in November to stay with Jack Sepple in Chelmsford, Essex, whom she had met through an online dating app. She was due to fly home to see her family this week. Sepple, 23, has appeared in court charged with her murder and was remanded in custody. Wadsworth is understood to be a Mormon who had converted to the Church of the Latter-day Saints at the age of 18. Her stepmother, Charmaine Wadsworth, told CBC News: “We are just remembering how strong, smart and witty Ashley was – how kind she was and how she was always 10 steps ahead of all of us. She will be dearly missed by each and every one of us.” Her older sister, Hailey, wrote on Facebook: “I love you so much baby girl you’re the bestest little sister I ever could have asked for.” She had earlier said: “My poor baby sister, we will get justice baby girl, I love you so much I miss you every day your big sissy loves you.” Friends paid tribute to her, with one woman writing on social media: “My heart aches to hear this tragic news. The last time we talked we were planning to hangout right? Ashley was one of my best friends that I’ve met here in Canada. We lost a beautiful soul.” Another said: “Rest In Peace sweet girl. I remember the most beautiful, brightest; most special moments watching you grow up. I will cherish them forever.” A third wrote: “I hope heaven is everything you read about in church and more. And Ashley just know, I love you. I promise I will do my best to take care of your family for you. Till we meet again.” Sepple, of Tennyson Road, Chelmsford, is accused of killing Ashley Wadsworth at a property in Chelmsford on Tuesday. Essex police attended the address in Tennyson Road shortly after 4pm.Parents of men killed by Tajikistan forces have called on the international community to step in and urgently protect ethnic groups being targeted by the Tajik regime. In a rare interview, families from the Pamiri ethnic minority have demanded that soldiers who killed their sons be brought to justice and urged the UN to prevent a new phase of conflict in Tajikistan, a landlocked country in central Asia. The president of 28 years, Emomali Rahmon, is seen by the Pamiri people as wanting control of the autonomous province of Gorno-Badakhshan (GBAO). “We want justice and the truth about why our children’s blood was spilt,” said Pevistamo Aqdodovna Abdulmuminova, 65. Her son, Gulbiddin Ziyobekov, 29, was killed on 25 November last year by Tajik security forces during an operation in the village of Tavdem, in GBAO province. The Tajik authorities said Ziyobekov, who was the subject of a criminal investigation for allegedly harassing a Tajik prosecutor, resisted arrest and was killed in a shootout. But witness accounts and mobile phone footage, published weeks after, appear to show him being arbitrarily executed. After the incident, relatives and neighbours took the body to the central square of Khorog, the capital of GBAO, where there was a spontaneous demonstration of several thousand people. During the protest, two more men, Gulnazar Murodbekov and Tutisho Amirshoev, were killed and 17 others injured when government forces reportedly opened fire on the protesters. “The situation is becoming unbearable,” said Abdulmuminova. “The government must explain to us why this happened. Our sons did nothing wrong. They weren’t criminals. They were innocent.” After the protests, authorities visited the homes of the victims’ relatives, the mothers of the dead men claimed, with threats that, if they did not follow the police orders, the same fate would befall them. “There is no justice here,” said Amchigul Tutishoevna Amirshoeva, 50, the mother of Tutisho Amirshoev, who was killed. “People no longer trust the authorities. They have lost faith in the institutions.” “I have seen the changes in my country and governments from 1957 to today,” said 90-year-old Dustnazar Marodbekov, whose son was shot dead by police last autumn. “But what’s been happening in recent months is something I’ve never seen before. My wife is paralysed, my son has died, and my grandchildren have now lost their father. The authorities accuse us of violating the law, but it is they who are violating the law and the constitution.” Conflict between Rahmon’s government and the Pamiri has continued for decades, with the minority group suffering discrimination in employment and housing and human rights abuses. The Pamir region has been the only place in the country where protesters against government oppression still take to the streets, despite the heavily authoritarian regime. Since it gained independence from the former Soviet Union, Tajikistan has been involved in a sometimes violent border dispute with neighbouring Kyrgyzstan. During the Tajikistan civil war of 1992 to 1997, thousands of Pamiris were killed, in what some human rights activists have described as “ethnic cleansing”. In 2012, during clashes seen by many in GBAO as an attempt by the Tajik government, which has little influence in the area, to bring the autonomous region under its full control, at least 40 civilians were killed. Prof Parviz Mullojanov, a political scientist, said the repression was yet another confirmation of the “obsession of the central government to take control of the entire country”. “It was a natural centralisation power process,” he said. “They started from the centre and gradually got rid of the independent commanders in the country, mainly in GBAO region. “While in the rest of Tajikistan the level of unemployment is about 15–18% of the population, in the GBAO it is estimated to be as much as 30%,” said Mullojanov. “Pamiris are underrepresented in the government and discriminated against within the administrative structures.” Viola von Cramon, a member of the European parliament with an interest in the region, said the EU was considering an inquiry. “We should be careful not to see the recent incidents as an isolated event.” “It goes way back,” she said. “The autocratic rule in Tajikistan and lack of the rule of law boils up the ethnic tensions. The use of excessive force and the shooting of protesters, even if they were throwing stones, is unacceptable and contributes to the spiral of violence. These events need to be urgently investigated and everyone who overstepped their authority needs to be prosecuted. “We are considering an inquiry and a resolution on the November events that still have strong ramifications – as people in GBAO are largely deprived of the freedom of expression and families of the killed are demanding justice.” During the protests, mobile and internet coverage was blocked in GBAO, which constitutes 45% of Tajikistan, with a population of nearly 230,000. The internet is still only available to state institutions and key bank staff. Security checkpoints have been reinforced, and hundreds of people who took part in the demonstrations have reportedly been banned from leaving the region. Special forces numbers have increased and, in January, Pamiri youth leader Amriddin Alovatshoyev disappeared. Alovatshoyev’s family said they were only told this week by Tajikistan’s interior ministry that he was in custody. Over the years, a number of activists have left to escape repression and arrest. At least 15 Tajik citizens have been kidnapped or have disappeared in Russia or Turkey since crackdowns on opposition in 2015 in Tajikistan. Repression in GBAO has been yet another conflict in central Asia which, in recent months, has seen an escalation of tensions. In Kazakhstan, peaceful protests in early January turned into violent unrest that left 225 people dead. Clashes between security forces and anti-government protesters in the energy-rich ex-Soviet state prompted President Kassym-Jomart Tokayev to declare a state of emergency and call in help from a Russian-led military bloc. “This is actually the result of a combination of several factors, both internal and external,” said Mullojanov. “The internal factors are mainly the crisis of the existing political and economic model, which was created after the collapse of the Soviet Union. That economic system required reforms and the local government is not able to do that now. This is why we are facing such a crisis. It is like a domino effect – it started in Kyrgyzstan and then shifted to Kazakhstan, with Tajikistan and also Uzbekistan facing a similar crisis.” Mullojanov said other factors have contributed to the destabilisation of the area, such as the collapse of Afghanistan, the intensification of jihadist activity and interference from Russia and China. • This article was amended on 5 February 2022. The order of some names were changed to give the surname last, according to traditional naming conventions.Nathan Chen insisted this was not about redemption. The world’s most dominant figure skater over the past 47 months has not spent much time dwelling on his catastrophic Olympic debut in 2018, saying that he is motivated not by the scoreboard but by treating every competition as an opportunity to showcase his hard work while trying to enjoy himself the best that he can. But results do matter. And from the crisp opening quadruple flip of his short program in the Olympic figure skating team competition on Friday morning, it was clear the American’s struggles on the sport’s biggest stage are firmly in the past and his arc remains firmly on course for a storybook ending in next week’s main event. The 22-year-old from southern California by way of Salt Lake City put down a flawless skate to open his second Olympics and finished with a personal-best score of 111.71 – the second-highest tally of all time and a scant .11 off the world record held by Yuzuru Hanyu, the Japanese superstar who is Chen’s primary rival in the men’s singles and did not compete on Friday. The Americans are off to a flying start thanks to Chen in their chase for a third straight medal in the team competition, a lead that held up through the rhythm dance and the pairs’ short program. “Any time you skate a good program whether it’s in practice or competition, it feels good,” Chen said afterward at the Capital Indoor Stadium. “It feels great to be able to have a short program that I actually skated well at an Olympics. I’ll take as much as I can from this experience and then take it day by day here.” Chen, a junior at Yale who has taken a leave of absence from his studies to focus on the Olympics, has gently pushed back on the redemption narrative throughout the run-up to Beijing, preferring to frame his journey in terms of personal fulfillment. But there’s no question that Friday’s mesmerising performance to Charles Aznavour’s La Bohème, which included a gravity-flouting quad lutz-triple toe loop combination, will help turn the page on his greatest disappointment. Four years ago, Chen arrived in Pyeongchang on a tailwind of hype as the joint-favorite with Hanyu. Inside, he was a ball of nervous energy. His error-prone performance in the team event – where he ultimately helped the Americans claim a bronze medal – presaged a nightmarish short program in the men’s singles where he tumbled to the ice on his opening quadruple lutz, failed to complete his required combination and was unable to land a single jump cleanly. Not even a redemptive, personal-best long program that netted the highest free-skate score in the field could lift him into medal position. Instead, Chen settled for fifth overall while Hanyu became the first men’s skater to defend an Olympic gold in 66 years. “I think you learn the most from your mistakes,” Chen said on Friday. “And I certainly learned a lot from that competition. I don’t think I’d be able to be here where I am now without having had that experience. So I think rather than that being a demon, it was a very helpful learning experience.” Since then, Chen has dominated the circuit like few skaters in recent memory – topping the podium in three straight world championships, three head-to-head meetings with Hanyu and all but one of the 17 competitions he’s entered overall – while expanding his repertoire to push the sport’s outer technical limits. Even on the rare occasions when the American has stumbled, he has roared back with ferocity and verve. When he fell in competition for the first time in two years on a quadruple lutz during his short program at last year’s worlds in Stockholm to fall into third place, Chen responded with a sublime free skate peppered with no fewer than five four-rotation jumps to win by more than eight points. “As much as I can, I try to stay present,” Chen said. “Be within every second basically, try not to think too far in the future, don’t look too far into the past. Although that might be hard, it’s always good for everyone to sort of try to stay present.” Having done his part for country in the team event – which continues on Sunday with the women’s short program and men’s free skate and concludes on Monday with the pairs, ice dance and women’s free skates – Chen’s focus will turn to next week’s showdown with Hanyu, who enters the Olympics under a cloud of uncertainty after missing the entire Grand Prix season due to an injury suffered in a November training fall. But cast the 27-year-old Japanese star as an underdog at your peril: Hanyu’s knack for raising his level when the lights burn brightest makes the climax of their six-year rivalry – starting with Tuesday’s short program and ending with Thursday’s free skate – one of the must-watch events of the coming weeks. “I’m honored to be alive at the same time as him,” Chen said of Hanyu. “It’s pretty crazy what he’s doing and I’m looking forward to being able to see him again in person. It’s been a really great adventure and journey for me to be able to have someone like him to share the ice with and certainly he’s just been a great inspiration to me.”When Viktor Yanukovych sought to flee Ukraine as he was removed from the presidency in 2014, Vladimir Putin urgently summoned the heads of his military, security, and spy agencies for an all-night meeting on how to extract him. As they broke up at seven in the morning, he recalled, he told them: “We must start working on returning Crimea to Russia.” In Putin’s telling, he was alone with his top security officials when he made one of the most fateful decisions of his political career. Since then, Russia’s growing isolation has only strengthened the so-called siloviki, the Russian security men who have surrounded him, many of whom served in the KGB and have maintained conservative, often conspiratorial political views. We do not know exactly how Putin makes his most important political decisions. Tatyana Stanovaya, the founder of political analysts R.Politik, recently divided the Russian elite into two groups: technocrats who dominate government but “have no remit to interfere in security matters” and the siloviki who “dominate the agenda, fuel Putin’s anxieties and provoke and escalate tension”. As Russia gathers troops and appears ready to launch an attack in Ukraine, these security advisers may have an outsize effect on what happens next. Nikolai Patrushev The head of Russia’s security council and a “hawk’s hawk”, Patrushev plays the informal role of Putin’s national security adviser. A career intelligence officer, Patrushev has known Putin since the 1970s, when the two men worked together in the Leningrad KGB. He later succeeded Putin as head of the FSB and has chaired the security council since 2008. His interviews have revealed him as a conspiracy theorist who believes that western powers are seeking to destroy Russia. The United States “would much rather that Russia did not exist at all. As a country,” he said in a 2015 interview. His rhetoric on Ukraine, which he calls a “protectorate” of the west, has resembled that of Putin. “At any moment, there’s potential in Ukraine for an outburst of tensions so strong that millions of Ukrainians will flee to seek refuge in other places,” he said in a recent interview that predicted a possible conflict. Patrushev has also been accused of approving assassinations and other illegal operations. A UK public inquiry in 2016 found that “the FSB operation to kill [Alexander] Litvinenko was probably approved by Mr Patrushev”. And diplomatic sources have told the Guardian that the Russian operatives accused of trying to overthrow the government of Montenegro in 2016 were allowed to leave the country on Patrushev’s plane. He also chairs the Russian volleyball federation. Sergei Naryshkin The head of Russia’s foreign intelligence service, Naryshkin is reportedly a former KGB officer and has known Putin since at least the 1990s, when the two worked at the St Petersburg mayor’s office. Naryshkin is a Putin loyalist who followed the Russian leader into the Kremlin, serving as his deputy head of economic development from 2004, then as the head of Dmitry Medvedev’s presidential administration from 2008, and then the chairman of the State Duma parliament from 2011-2016. He is an effective functionary and polished speaker who has occasionally been suggested as a potential successor to Putin. Naryshkin is also a hardliner who engages in conspiracy theories. In an interview earlier this year, he said that the poisoning of Kremlin critic Alexei Navalny was a western plot to support the Russian opposition by finding a “sacrificial victim”. Earlier this year, he compared the government of Ukraine to “Hitler’s occupation”. He also has an edge: asked if he had ever been betrayed, he told an interviewer that “one thing soothes me: these traitors have either already burned in the fires of hell or will certainly do so”. He heads the Russian Historical Society, which has played an aggressive role in promoting favourable interpretations of Russia’s history, a pet project of Putin’s. Alexander Bortnikov The head of Russia’s FSB, the domestic security and intelligence service, Bortnikov plays a key role in maintaining Putin’s control of the country. The sprawling security apparatus employs hundreds of thousands of people and is responsible for everything from counter-terrorism to border security, counterintelligence, electronic surveillance and, unofficially, terrorising the political opposition. Bortnikov has also known Putin since the 1970s, when both served in the Leningrad KGB. He is seen as having less influence on Putin than Patrushev or Naryshkin. Bortnikov and Patrushev’s sons have become powerful Russian officials. Dmitry Patrushev is Russia’s minister for agriculture and Denis Bortnikov is the deputy president and chairman of the state-run VTB Bank’s management board. US lawmakers have included both on draft lists for sanctions because of their fathers’ proximity to Putin. Sergei Shoigu Shoigu did not serve in the KGB or the military and his role as minister of defence makes him as much a technocrat as a silovik. But his oversight of the modernised Russian military, including the aggressive GRU military intelligence agency, means that he is often involved in key security decisions or at least in their implementation. It was Shoigu’s order that ended the sudden buildup of troops in March-April that first set alarm bells in Europe ringing about the potential for a new Russian invasion of Ukraine. And he has appeared in Belarus this week to oversee war games that could serve as a cover to prepare for an attack. Shoigu is from Tuva, a Buddhist republic in Siberia that borders Mongolia. Putin and Shoigu regularly take short hunting and fishing vacations in Siberia, which give Shoigu direct, unimpeded access to the Russian president. Evgeny Minchenko, a political analyst who puts together a power ranking of Russian officials, said earlier this year: “Right now, there’s only one member from the cabinet who is in the ‘politburo 2.0’. And that’s Shoigu.”Twenty-eight months after it began in a clandestine shipyard deep in the Brazilian Amazon, one of the more unlikely criminal voyages of all time came to an end on Tuesday with the seven sentences handed down by a court in north-west Spain. Agustín Álvarez, a 31-year-old former Spanish amateur boxing champion, was jailed for 11 years for piloting a semi-submersible “narco-submarine” carrying 3,068kg of cocaine worth an estimated €123m (£104m) across the Atlantic. His two crewmates, Ecuadorian cousins Luis Tomás Benítez Manzaba and Pedro Roberto Delgado Manzaba, received the same sentence, while four Spaniards who conspired with Álvarez to help guide the sub ashore were jailed for between seven and nine years. Not surprisingly, the case, a wildly improbable but true saga involving the Colombian Gulf Clan cartel, a bespoke 21.5 metre-long fibreglass boat christened Che, a pair of telltale pants and several miraculous escapes during the 27-day, 3,500-mile odyssey from Brazil to Spain, has made headlines around the world since the vessel was scuttled in a Galician cove on 24 November 2019. A little over two years later, the story of the first fully laden drug “sub” detected in European waters has given rise to a new “sub-genre” of Galician narco-chronicles. Last month, Javier Romero, a Voz de Galicia journalist who specialises in drug crime, published Operation Black Tide, a meticulously researched, 313-page account of the the epic yet doomed enterprise. At the end of February, a drama inspired by the case, also titled Operation Black Tide, will begin on Amazon Prime Video. The fictional series will be followed in March by a four-part documentary on the same platform, called, inevitably, Operation Black Tide: The Suicidal Journey. Romero remembers rushing down to see the boat that Sunday morning after a police source tipped him off about its discovery. He arrived at the Ría de Aldán beach, where, coincidentally, both he and Álvarez had spent their childhood summers, to see the sunken outline of Che, its grey prow emerging half a metre above the water. “One day, a narco-sub appeared on our coast – the first in Europe,” says the reporter. “How is that not going to grab your attention? It was just another level of drug trafficking.” At the time, however, neither Romero nor the police knew much about the craft and its crew. The vessel’s arrival in Galicia had been a hastily improvised “plan C” put together as fuel ran out and after two previous attempts to rendezvous with cartel boats off the coast of the Iberian peninsula had fallen through. In desperation, and exhausted after a crossing that had lasted very nearly twice as long as planned, Álvarez turned to three childhood friends from his home town of Vigo in the hope they would help bring him, his crew and the cocaine to safety. But neither the rescue, nor its subsequent rewards, were ever to materialise. An international police operation involving the UK National Crime Agency and officers from Spanish, Portuguese and US agencies meant the authorities were waiting for Che’s arrival in Galicia. The South American cousins – who could barely swim – were arrested shortly after the boat was scuttled, while Álvarez was arrested after hiding in a nearby abandoned house for five days. Romero, who spent two years researching the case and talking to police and to some of those who knew the convicted men, eventually pieced together the fateful voyage. He learned that Álvarez had been the cartel’s second choice of captain. Their first – another Galician – had travelled to Brazil to examine the €1m craft but turned down the job after deciding it was a suicide mission. Álvarez and the Ecuadorians had fewer qualms. After leaving their Amazon base, the three spent almost a month squeezed into a dark and stinking cabin behind three tonnes of cocaine and 20,000 litres of fuel. Food was energy bars, rice, biscuits and sardines; the toilet a plastic bag. “From then on,” writes Romero, “it was nothing but constant noise, suspicion, more darkness, stenches, possible betrayals, pain, leaks, damp, grease, fear, cold sweats and communications that either failed to arrive or were perhaps intercepted.” Even today, Romero can’t fathom how the trio endured those 27 Stygian days and survived three storms, a near miss with a huge ship, and the attentions of police boats and helicopters. The book doesn’t stint on details about Álvarez’s boxing career, about semi-submersible specifications, and about how investigators concluded the secret shipyard was somewhere near the Brazilian city of Macapá after finding a pair of pants and a receipt with the name of a local shop among Luis Tomás Benítez Manzaba’s belongings. But its focus is on Álvarez and his three friends, one of whom called on his father for help, and on how friendships formed in a schoolyard eventually led to a prison yard. As Romero puts it, the story is not just about sicarios (hitmen), superstition and submarines: “It’s about how these kids – apart from Agustín [Álvarez], who accepted a lot of money for his part – have fucked up their lives.” Today, all seven are behind bars and Che itself is on show at the National Police Academy museum in Ávila, which, by accident or design, is pretty much as far inland as one can go in Spain. Romero has seen the sub for himself and is all too familiar with its dark belly. “It’s awful,” he says. “It’s claustrophobic; it’s unspeakable. It just shows how little the drug organisations care about their own people. It’s cruel. It’s just a deathtrap.” The reporter tried to interview Álvarez but his request was declined. Since his arrest, and for obvious reasons, the former boxer’s lips have remained as tightly sealed as the 153 bales of cocaine he brought across the Atlantic. But should they ever meet, Romero knows what his questions would be. “I’d ask him to tell me more about those 27 days and what they were like. How did he feel in the jungle when he saw the submarine and inspected it? Did he feel safe? Or did he feel that climbing inside it would be madness?”He was supposed to be Spotify’s biggest acquisition, one who would transform the music streaming company into a one-stop shop for all kinds of online audio. But controversy over “misinformation” on Joe Rogan’s podcast precipitated a hellish week for the Swedish firm as high-profile boycotts, a social media backlash and a share price drop challenged the viability of its meteoric growth. With questions mounting over whether streaming companies pay artists their proper due, a second and arguably bigger issue has emerged: whether Spotify can be held responsible for all of the material on its platform. The row started when a group of more than 250 US professors and public health officials called on the company to crack down on Covid-19 misinformation after an episode of The Joe Rogan Experience included “several falsehoods” about vaccines. Later, when Neil Young issued an ultimatum to Spotify to remove either his music or Rogan’s podcast from its platform, the company chose to back Rogan, whose podcast is its most popular, with an estimated audience of 11 million. Despite an apology from Rogan, in which he pledged more balanced and better-researched content, and a decision by Spotify to add content advisories to episodes discussing Covid, there were a slew of further boycotts, including from Joni Mitchell, Nils Lofgren, India Arie, and the podcasters Roxane Gay and Brené Brown. Prince Harry and Meghan Markle, who have a podcast deal with Spotify, said they had previously raised the issue of misinformation with the company. On the same day that Spotify staff were reportedly up in arms about the chief executive Daniel Ek’s defence of Rogan, there was an intervention from the White House calling on it to “do more”. But when Spotify paid a reported $100m (£73m) in 2020 for an exclusive licensing deal with Rogan, known for his brash and often polarising content featuring members of the so-called “intellectual dark web”, it made a value judgment that the boost to revenue was more attractive than avoiding any future controversy. At the time, Spotify had begun to assert itself as a key player in the podcast world, buying up rights to more and more shows, including from the Obamas. It has now spent more than $1bn on podcasts, with revenues from podcasts up 627% year on year. “To be frank, had we not made some of the choices we did, I am confident that our business wouldn’t be where it is today,” Ek is reported to have told staff this week. According to Mark Mulligan, an analyst at Midia Research, “Spotify with Joe Rogan is where Netflix was with House of Cards. It’s original audio content.” He explained that when Spotify got going, “radio basically owned the rest of the audio business, but in the intervening years podcasts have become much bigger. If it wasn’t doing podcasts, other companies would take some of its listening time away.” Spotify, he added, “doesn’t own the music catalogue, it’s entirely dependent on record labels. A podcast is a way of saying ‘we’ll invest in our own content and we’ll generate a much higher profit from that content’.” The debate has become larger than Spotify itself, touching on the cornerstones of today’s culture wars such as free speech and censorship. MailOnline ran an article headlined “Why Spotify must stand up to the luvvie bullies trying to stifle free speech – especially if Meghan and Harry join the Joe Rogan witch-hunt”. Another in the Hill read: “Can Joe Rogan save free speech?” Andrew Hartman, the author of A War for the Soul of America: A History of the Culture Wars, said the dustup was the latest in “a long list of controversies over pop culture and censorship, with capitalism and commerce in the mix.” Most of these battles, Hartman said, had historically entailed efforts by conservatives, often religious conservatives, to censor liberals wishing to express transgressive views – for example, efforts to censor Martin Scorsese’s Last Temptation of Christ. “Now we have liberal musicians working to kick Joe Rogan off a platform for expressing or giving voice to views that are seemingly conservative,” he said. All of which leaves Spotify facing a heady cocktail of crises. The UK’s competition watchdog recently launched a study of whether streaming services such as Spotify hold excessive power, after a scathing report by MPs called for a “complete reset” of a model in which they said only big labels and superstar acts profit. “It’s like waiting for a bus,” Mulligan said. “Suddenly, many crises will come along at the same time. Arie removed her catalogue because of an episode Rogan did on race. Now more and more artists will be looking at all the other stuff he’s said, and other podcasts Spotify is supporting, and think: is this the place I want my music?” But comparing and contrasting streaming companies is difficult business. Since leaving Spotify, Young has directed his fans to use Amazon Music to stream his songs – a company criticised for its treatment of workers. His music remains on YouTube, which factcheckers say is a major conduit of fake news. “Surely there is misinformation on YouTube, Apple and Amazon, much of it worse than Rogan’s show – why are these artists not withdrawing from them too?” said David Hesmondhalgh, a professor of media, music and culture at Leeds University. While Spotify continues to retain more paying subscribers than any other audio streaming service (more than 406 million monthly users and 180 million paying subscribers), its market share is declining. This week the company’s shares briefly fell as much as 18% after it forecast current-quarter subscribers lower than expectations. “If I was Spotify I’d be more worried about that than about the Joe Rogan debacle,” Mulligan said. “The attention economy – how much time we spend with stuff – was peaking before lockdown and then boomed when everybody had a lot more time on their hands. That was always going to start receding when normal life resumed.”The only hat I own is a beanie, and I wear a gold chain rather than pearls. I don’t match my coat to my dress or my bag to my shoes and I wouldn’t be seen dead in sheer tights. Yet the Queen is, without a shadow of a doubt, my ultimate fashion icon. My style crushes come and go, but I bow down to Her Majesty. Is it treason to call one’s monarch a badass? Sorry, ma’am, but it’s true. At 95, she still rocks more hot pink than a Molly Goddard catwalk show. Why stick to tasteful neutrals, when you can wear chartreuse tweed with yellow tulips on the matching hat, as she did in London last spring? When I am old I shall wear purple, as the poem goes. How about purple, lemon, lime, royal blue and emerald? The royal wardrobe has been serving up pop-art colours since silkscreen portraits were just a twinkle in Andy Warhol’s eye. There are many style lessons to be learned from the Queen, but the first is the power of colour. The Queen has made head-to-toe colour, in every shade of the rainbow, her signature look. Colour brings a tiny dopamine hit of surprise to every public appearance. It spotlights her as the centre of attention in any scene, but is cheery and accessible rather than fancy. If Farrow &amp; Ball neutrals are the coded status symbols of a certain class and culture, the Queen’s bright coats and dresses are the paint-pot shades of every nursery school in the land. The second style lesson is that a great wardrobe is never about trends. No one has played the long game better, carving out a formula that can be dressed up or down. Clothes say who you are before you have spoken a word, which is why people who stay true to a signature style are those whose looks we remember. If you stick to a formula, you can have fun with clothes without looking flighty. The Queen rarely looks sombre, unless the occasion specifically calls for sobriety, yet no one would mistake her for anything but a serious person. A tight focus on one look – whether it’s prim tweeds, or a white shirt and old jeans – will always say strength of character. Good style doesn’t come between you and what you need to get done. The third lesson from the royal playbook is that clothes should help you do your job, never hinder it. In case you were still under the impression that style icons had to wear heels, I point you to Her Majesty’s favourite black loafers, the most useful all-purpose shoe in existence. The Queen also uses her handbag to communicate. I’ve heard that putting it on the table indicates she would like to leave dinner, and moving it from her left hand to her right signals that she would like an exit from a conversation. If anyone can figure out a way to make this system work without a bevy of aides, please do write in, as it sounds super helpful. But while I’m waiting, I will flag that the Queen’s diplomacy-by-diamonds approach – match the brooch to the state banquet, that sort of thing – can be utilised in a low-key way by us common folk. I would never, ever go to a party of the standing around making small-talk kind without wearing at least one piece that doubles as a conversation card. (My go-to: a pair of vintage Dolce &amp; Gabbana chandelier earrings, made from farfalle pasta shapes cast in resin.) There are as many lessons from the Queen’s wardrobe as she has had years on the throne. I could go on. I won’t – but I hope she will. Blazer and skirt, sandro-paris.com; bag, zara.com, hat and brooch (comes as part of hat), Nerida Fraiman from fenwick.co.uk; shirt, withnothingunderneath.com; necklace, hannahmartinlondon.com; hair and makeup, Sophie Higginson using Sam Mcknight and Pat McGrathWhen Jabari Banks first learned of auditions taking place for the lead role in Bel-Air, a dark reimagining of his favourite 90s sitcom, he heard his destiny calling. “I was like, ‘Oh, I’m perfect for this!’ I knew at that moment: this has got to be me.” At the time, Banks was just 23 and still a musical theatre student who had never starred in anything, but what he lacked in work experience he made up for in relevant life experience. Banks is a talented rapper who knows his way around the basketball court and, like the song says, he’s “West Philadelphia born and raised”. In other words, he has a lot in common with the original Fresh Prince of Bel-Air, Will Smith, who was a 21-year-old rapper in 1990 when his own life got, in the words of the show’s theme tune, flipped-turned upside down. It started as a chance meeting with TV producer Benny Medina and within six weeks, Smith had relocated cross-country, co-written a brilliantly catchy theme tune with the legendary Quincy Jones (another of the show’s execs) and was on set filming the first episode. The sitcom’s premise was based on Medina’s own teenage experience of moving in with a rich white family in Beverly Hills, after growing up poor in South LA, but it also mirrored Smith’s own Philly-street-to-LA-stardom journey. Thirty years later, the life-imitating-art-imitating-life cycle continues, says Banks: “My life parallels Will’s life in the show so specifically, it’s really crazy. To be in front of the camera, and to play on this level is so beautiful.” The first episode of Bel-Air features Banks’ character Will enjoying a slower, more reflective version of the “Yo, homes, smell ya later” cab ride depicted in the sitcom’s opening credits. Shooting the part where Will steps out of the cab to gather his thoughts and enjoy the view was surreal: “I’m sitting there on Mulholland Drive and Will, the character, is looking out; but that’s Jabari’s first time on Mulholland Drive too, y’know?” When The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air debuted in September 1990, it met an audience already familiar with, and enthusiastic about, Black sitcoms. The Cosby Show, depicting an upper-middle class doctor’s family in Brooklyn had been on air since 1984 and its slightly edgier spin-off, A Different World, about students at a historically Black college in Virginia, had run from 1987. In the UK, Desmond’s, starring Norman Beaton as the grumpy-gregarious proprietor of a Peckham barbershop, was already a flagship show among Channel 4’s proudly multicultural output. Yet The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air still felt fresh, and has remained so in the decades since, through re-runs and into the streaming era: “I wasn’t even born before it was off the air,” says Banks. “My family had this six-series boxset that would be on repeat in my home. So I definitely caught all the episodes, for sure … This show basically raised me.” Many others share that abiding affection. The show’s theme tune has become a karaoke standard among millennials, and the teary televised reunion in 2020 was warmly received by a lockdown audience eager for nostalgic comfort-viewing. Even before then, The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air was present enough in the ether to inspire the creativity of Morgan Cooper, a 27-year-old filmmaker from Kansas City. He created Bel-Air, a four-minute fan film, in the form of a trailer for an imagined reboot and uploaded it to YouTube in March 2019, where it has racked up 7.2m views. Among those viewers was Will Smith – now a 50-year-old movie star and father of three with a mansion of his own. Uncle Phil would be proud. In his new guise of Hollywood mogul, Smith helped usher a real show into existence, with Cooper on board as a co-executive producer and director. Their first major challenge was to find a lead: “We needed a unicorn, because that’s exactly who Will was in the original,” says Cooper. “We needed a young man who had the charm, the charisma, and [who was] able to give you dramatic performances while still having great comedic timing.” Auditions were held nationwide, but it just so happens their unicorn shared Smith’s hometown. “I remember meeting Jabari in Philly and within five minutes, I knew he was our Will.” Bel-Air’s other characters and premise have also stuck close to their model, but the episodes have lengthened, from sitcom-standard 22 mins to encompass a widening perspective. Banks summarises this as “if all of the characters from the original wrote in a diary, and we got to open up that diary and dive deep into their feelings”. That tone is matched by a visual style that translates the royal reference of the title into Pan-Africanist imagery, reminiscent of Beyoncé’s Black Is King 2020 visual album, all rendered in a refined palette of teal and grey. Sadly, that means no backwards caps or 90s neons for this generation’s Will. It would be too obviously retro. “We’ve been asking ourselves, how do we recreate that style, but for now,” says Banks, before adding more hopefully, “and, y’know, maybe it’d be a good Halloween costume for me, for next year?” Another thing that hasn’t changed too much is the subject matter. Cooper believes there’s still much progress to be made in terms of Black representation on TV. “There are so many Black stories that still need to be told,” he says. “In Bel-Air, we see Black people from different places and with different perspectives having uncomfortable conversations with each other. I think that discourse is incredibly important.” In fact, The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air was always about expanding the narrow on-screen depiction of Blackness. Medina’s real-life adoptive family had been white, but he made the TV version Black because, as he explained to Ebony magazine in 1991: “That way we could explore Black-on-Black prejudice as well as Black class differences.” The writers of the sitcom were mostly white, as was standard in the industry at the time, but the cast felt their voices were heard. Script changes were made “whenever we would come across moments that they wrote, that was like, ‘This wouldn’t happen … Black people don’t do this,’” said original Carlton actor, Alfonso Ribeiro in the reunion special. “[That] was what made this show special, because we made sure that we were authentic every episode.” OG fans and recent re-watchers may remember the show’s frequent moments of political engagement, such as Aunt Viv’s reaction to Will’s Malcom X T-shirt in season one – “You can wear the T-shirt, you can put up the posters … but unless you know all the history behind it, you’re trivialising the entire struggle.” Or the time when Jazzy Jeff refused to lower his hands to testify in court: “Dude’s got a gun. Next thing you know I got six warning shots in my back.” So it is testament to the sitcom’s legacy that Bel-Air has room to go further still. For instance, while it’s easy to imagine the Bel-Air scene in which Carlton (Olly Sholotan) and Will fall out over the N-word appearing in the 90s show, it’s harder to imagine how they could have mined the same emotional depths back then, without being cut short by a punchline or a move to commercial break. Then there are the subtle but significant shifts in characterisation. In the 90s, the wider Black diaspora was represented by Geoffrey, a Jeeves to Will’s Wooster, played – very properly indeed – by the Saint Lucia-born, Surrey-residing Joseph Marcell. Now Geoffrey is played by Jimmy Akingbola. He’s no longer posh, but still a commanding presence, as a smart-casual, iPad-wielding “house manager”. Akingbola’s depiction of Black British masculinity is one that would not have made sense to US audiences, prior to Idris Elba and Daniel Kaluuya reaching the heights of Hollywood’s A-list. “Woo! He’s cold isn’t he?” agrees Banks, with an admiring chuckle. “And you know what? Jimmy’s been so adamant and so meticulous to depict the Black British experience differently than that perception from an American standpoint, which is that all British people speak the Queen’s English.” Bel-Air is in many ways a faithful heir to the Fresh Prince’s throne, but the kingdom all around is changing. Now social media exists to pick up what the show puts down, and Banks is already eagerly anticipating what comes next: “I know Black Twitter’s going to take to it, and that’s the thing we need to do, that’s how we move forward as society; we need to start having difficult conversations.” Bel-Air will be on Peacock from 14 February on Sky and NOWLast week, the New York Times published an expansive and affectionate interview with Jason “Wee Man” Acuña, a 48-year-old skateboarder and celebrity who cut his teeth (and likely some other body parts) as a member of MTV’s notorious Jackass crew. It was the latest in a line of publicity ahead of the release of Jackass Forever, the fourth instalment in a film franchise that began in October 2002, when Jackass: The Movie cannonballed into cinemas. Last year, de facto leader Johnny Knoxville was on the cover of GQ and in an article for Vogue, culture writer Emma Specter reflected on the friendships at the heart of the show. With every new instalment, the Rotten Tomatoes score has increased; as reviews flooded in for Jackass Forever, critics were overwhelmingly positive. It is a generally accepted truth, as of 2022, that Jackass is good. It’s a far cry from the outrage that the boys generated at the height of their fame; from the moment the television show first aired on 1 October 2000, notoriety and controversy have not been far behind. The stunts and pranks that Knoxville, Steve-O, Bam Margera and co executed caught the imagination of hapless teens and young adults, who – despite the show’s myriad warning screens – sought to emulate their idols by undertaking outlandish (and often dangerous) skits of their own. Injuries, lawsuits and a letter to MTV’s parent company from a concerned state senator followed. The New York Times, back in 2002, seemed generally bemused by Johnny Knoxville. But I’ve always been a true believer. During a miserable coming-of-age, which was plagued by physical and mental illness, Jackass never failed to make me smile, no matter how many times I watched the same stunts. We spend our lives being told to do everything we can to avoid putting ourselves in harm’s way; the wilful defiance of daredevils has entertained the masses for centuries (before Jackass, there was Buster Keaton, before Keaton, there was Harry Houdini) purely because it feels antithetical to how we’re supposed to live. The appeal of Jackass is simple: some things are inherently funny, no matter how juvenile (James Joyce was fascinated by farting, after all.) And it’s not all poo jokes and pratfalls; the artistry that goes into the skits and stunts is very much present in the franchise’s latest outing. The films are known for their bombastic opening sequences and Jackass Forever doesn’t disappoint; while impressive slow-motion camera work and a truly staggering number of camera angles bring stunts to life, the film’s surreal opening – featuring Chris Pontius’s penis painted green and dressed up as a giant dinosaur, terrorising a small city which his co-stars inhabit – lays the groundwork for a raucous 96 minutes. Naturally, there are callbacks to earlier fan favourite bits, including Knoxville’s Bad Grandpa Irving Zisman and the “Bungee Wedgie”, but the stand-out sketch, “Silence of the Lambs”, involving night-vision goggles, a pitch-black room, rubber snakes and Tasers, reminds us – in an age of lacklustre YouTube pranksters – just how skilled the crew really are. Jackass takes a wicked imagination, exquisite planning and a willingness to put one’s body on the line, all in the name of entertaining audiences. There’s also something particularly poignant about this reunion in our present moment. After an extended societal isolation period, where so many of us have seen relationships put on hold, or worse, time spent with friends is more precious than ever. The Jackass gang aren’t without loss; Ryan Dunn’s untimely death in 2011 is still sorely felt, and during production of Jackass Forever, Margera – who has struggled with addiction and relapse since Dunn’s death – was banned from the set after allegedly threatening director Jeff Tremaine. The way the rest of the gang speak about these tribulations is mature, with Knoxville reflecting: “When someone’s struggling, everyone tries to help that person. And at the end of the day, that person has to want help. Sometimes they don’t. Yet.” This speaks to what is most compelling about the show. While the stars of Friends or Harry Potter might have seemed a little stilted next to each other at their recent reunion shows, Jackass was born out of real-life friendships and a sincere commitment to the collaboration. Miraculously, while artistic fallouts are ten a penny in Hollywood, these bonds have remained intact, and you can’t fake that sort of chemistry. This shines through in Jackass Forever; the stunts and pranks are as boneheaded as ever, but there’s a sense, deeply felt, that the driving force behind everything this motley crew do is the impulse to make each other smile. Our formative friendships shape and enrich our entire lives; there’s no greater testament to this than the endurance of MTV’s favourite rascals. Amid the blood and vomit and faecal matter, there’s a warmth and enviable sense of camaraderie. They might still be Jackasses, but their hearts are solid gold. Hannah Strong is digital editor at Little White LiesAfter languishing in his car boot for several years, Jordan Bassett’s CD collection – mostly dating back to his teenage years – will soon be on proud display in his newly converted home office space. Bassett, a commissioning editor at the NME, has no means of playing the CDs and, in any case, his musical tastes have moved on. But the 100-150 thin, shiny 5in discs have sentimental value – and, who knows, one day they may be part of a revival similar to vinyl among music aficionados. Although the decision by Tesco this week to clear its shelves of CDs was an unambiguous indication of the decline of the once-revolutionary music format, it’s not dead yet. Last year, UK sales of physical entertainment products fell 18.5% to just over £1bn, while digital revenues rose by 8.3% to £8.7bn, according to the Entertainment Retailers Association. In 2007, at the height of the CD market, more than 2bn discs were sold globally. The digital streaming platform Spotify launched in 2008, and CD sales started their trajectory downwards. But towards the end of last year, there was a blip on the graph. CD sales rose by 15%, mainly thanks to Adele’s 30, which sold nearly 900,000 in CD form, Abba’s Voyage and Ed Sheeran’s =. In a love letter to CDs published in Rolling Stone last month, Rob Sheffield wrote: “Compact discs were never about romance – they were about function. They just worked. They were less glamorous than vinyl, less cool, less tactile, less sexy, less magical. They didn’t have the aura that we fans crave. “You didn’t necessarily get sentimental over your CDs, the way you fetishised your scratchy old vinyl, hearing your life story etched into the nicks and crackles …. But CDs work. They just do. You pop in the disc, press play, music booms out. They delivered the grooves so efficiently, they became the most popular format ever.” He lauded CD “boxsets, bootlegs, mixes from friends old and new, young bands whose albums I buy from the merch table at live shows”, and lamented the ephemeral nature of streaming culture. A recent article in Wired magazine also praised the CD format, and its “ridiculous affordability”. Streaming was for the masses, vinyl was for hipsters, said the author, but his experiment in CD listening had brought “unexpected joys”. Despite the convenience of streaming music at the touch of a keypad, some fans prefer to have tangible collections, complete with liner notes, to pore over, arrange and rearrange. And, as Adele pointed out to Spotify when threatening to pull her latest album from the platform unless it hid the shuffle button, “our art tells a story and our stories should be listened to as we intended”. Bassett said: “We may be seeing the end of CDs as a mass-market product, but we could also be seeing the beginning of the repositioning of the CD as a more fetishistic item.” But, he added, it was unlikely to match the vinyl revival of recent years. “There is not the same romance, the magic of dropping a needle on to vinyl. The plastic cases cracked easily. I remember listening to Nirvana’s Nevermind on the school bus and every time that the bus went over a bump, your CD would skip.” Sean Jackson of Reckless Records in Soho, which has been in business for almost 40 years, said some customers insisted that the quality of analogue sound was superior to digital. “But unless you’re really concentrating, you probably wouldn’t notice the difference,” he added. “There’s a market for everything – vinyl, CDs, cassette tapes. Formats go in and out of fashion, but music doesn’t.”It is Tuesday night at Aggborough and a couple of hours before kick-off against Leamington FC, the Harriers Arms, a pub attached to the main stand, is heaving. Later, after a 3-0 victory that moves the club four points off the top of the National League North, the Kidderminster manager, Russell Penn, mingles there with elderly fans to chew the fat. It is also the place where celebrations continued after the team beat Reading to secure a spot in the FA Cup fourth round, with West Ham the visitors on Saturday. “I was apparently dancing around with a mop at midnight,” says the chairman, Richard Lane. “I want to make sure that everybody who has put a huge amount of effort in, on and off the pitch, enjoys this moment.” For the past couple of weeks, it has been a diet of 14-hour days and precious little sleep for those behind the scenes. West Ham represent the club’s ninth game in four weeks. There are four full-time office staff – five if you count Toby the apprentice – including Helen Macdonald, the ticket office manager whose duties extend to preparing for 500 hospitality guests, and who, as the longest-serving staff member, has witnessed the highs and lows of the past 20 years. She worked as a volunteer when West Ham last came to the Worcestershire town in 1994, eliminating Harriers in the fifth round of the Cup. “In years gone by, as family and friends we would often speak about the time we played West Ham,” Macdonald says. “I only came in and made a few cups of tea but it was a massive occasion. It is brilliant for the area, local businesses, families; everyone has bought into it.” As Macdonald speaks, the assistant manager, Jimmy O’Connor, pops into reception. Outside the club shop (which stocks commemorative mugs adorned with the West Ham crest) a snaking queue of supporters wait to buy wristbands for the fan zone – where Penn and O’Connor have promised Lane they will sing if they pull off the unthinkable – from the bar manager, Lorna Parsons. Jon Wilson, a volunteer who attended the West Ham game, is selling programmes. “The ground was totally different then. Over the far side where we stood was affectionately called ‘the cowshed’,” Wilson says of what is now the East Stand, which backs on to the Severn Valley Steam Railway. “They put extra scaffolding in for extra seats. The place was packed.” There is plenty of symmetry with that Cup run in ’94. In the third round that year they overcame Birmingham City, then run by the now West Ham directors David Gold, David Sullivan and Karren Brady, and in the fourth round they breached a Preston defence that included the now West Ham manager, David Moyes. Lane, whose father, Graham, was a director at Kidderminster, recalls being in the directors’ box at St Andrew’s when Jon Purdie scored the winner. For fans such as Matthew Hatton, who follows Kidderminster home and away, the tie marks a special occasion. “I will be up there with my Dad, Colin, who has been taking me to home games since I was five,” Hatton says. “To be able to stand there with him and see a game of this magnitude is brilliant. You can feel the buzz throughout the town. I missed my cousin’s wedding to go to Eastbourne away … but I did manage to get back for last orders.” The stadium announcer, Scott Jones, a volunteer since 2007, gives a pre-match rallying call: “It is time to get behind the boys in red: Aggborough, let’s make some noise.” A minute before kick-off Stuart Pearce takes a seat in the directors’ box. Among the crowd is the Led Zeppelin singer Robert Plant, a Wolves vice-president who counts Kidderminster as his second team, and on Saturday the VIP list will include the former England and West Ham striker Sir Geoff Hurst. Alan Irvine or Pearce, both of whom are on Moyes’s staff, have been at the Harriers’ past four matches. Penn and his assistant attended West Ham’s game with Leeds amid their relentless schedule. “Fifth in the Premier League coming to Kidderminster Harriers?” Penn says. “It is scary … whatever the result, we have to enjoy the experience. Everyone in non-league is rooting for us.” When Spennymoor Town visited in October, there were nine members of the press strewn around the stadium but more than 100 media personnel will be here on Saturday. Everybody has wanted a piece of the pie, the club swamped by commercial interest. A clip of Penn’s post-match dressing room team talk after the Reading win went viral. Where was Lane? Having a celebratory pint of Bathams upstairs. There have been TV crews at training and the BBC has set up a studio at the stadium, ready for Match of the Day coverage, which is worth £110,000 to the club. In total sixth-tier Kidderminster, the lowest-ranked team left in the Cup, hope to generate more than £200,000, which will help fund new stadium floodlights and an irrigation system at the training ground. They started the season with a £400,000 playing budget, about the amount West Ham’s highest-paid player, Kurt Zouma, earns every month. “We will put our very small budget against a very big budget and the world will be able to see whether it is justified or not,” Lane says. The club have fielded media inquiries from Bermuda, Brazil and beyond. There will be a Scandinavian contingent in the stands, supporters from Harriers of Norway, a fan group that followed the team after being inspired by a YouTube clip of Bo Henriksen, a Danish striker who was signed by Jan Molby, walking out of the dressing room, past the tunnel and manager’s office and into the Harriers Arms, via a side door. They have constructed a “mini Aggborough” in Aalesund, a replica terrace to watch DVDs of matches sent by the club, and paid for a new ice machine for the club. As full-time approaches Jones reads the attendance over the public address system: 1,668, including 55 away fans, a fraction of the expected sellout crowd on Saturday. The North Stand terrace is rocking. Bobbing supporters bang on advertising hoardings – not publicising conglomerates but a local bedding centre and salvage company – and break into song, serenading striker Amari Morgan-Smith. Jaiden White, a teenager who came through the academy, adds a third goal with a minute to play. “Controlled, controlled,” Penn says as a trio of players, including Keith Lowe, 36, who is in his third spell with the club, complete a warm-down. He knows there is a delicate balance between his players relishing the occasion and being overawed. “I’ve been there as a player: you run an hour’s worth of legs in 10 minutes and then you blow up after an hour, but that’s natural,” Penn says. “They are going to have adrenaline up to their eyeballs but we have to curb that because there is still a game to play. They are going to see 5,000 through the turnstiles, lights everywhere, flashing phones, but we have to get rid of that one second after kick-off because then it’s game on.”Exhibition of the week Suzanne Jackson: In Nature’s Way … Space-invading, multilayered paintings with a hint of Rauschenberg in their richness, from this artist based in Savannah, Georgia. • Modern Institute, Glasgow, until 19 March. Also showing Danielle Dean A video installation that explores the nature of 21st-century capital, with special reference to a little business called Amazon. • Tate Britain, London, 5 February to 8 May. Emilio Vedova Splashy canvases first shown at Documenta in 1982 by this expressive Italian painter. • Thaddaeus Ropac Gallery, London, 10 February to 26 March In This Moment Sound, vision and touch create a cosmic experience, devised by artists Gawain Hewitt and India Harvey with young people from Bethlem and Maudsley Hospital School. • Bethlem Gallery, Beckenham, south London, 5 February to 14 April. Thao Nguyen Phan Meditations on the Mekong river and what it reveals about the environment, folk traditions and changing face of Vietnam. • Tate St Ives, 5 February to 2 May. Image of the week The Nigerian potter Ladi Kwali garnered international renown for her fusion of traditional Gwari forms and modern pottery techniques. “Her work went from functional domestic jars into works of art through glazing and the introduction of new technology,” explains Jareh Das, curator of Body Vessel Clay: Black Women, Ceramics and Contemporary Art, which explores 70 years of ceramics in Black culture and shatters western myths of the potter’s wheel. At Two Temple Place, London, until 24 April. Read the full article here. What we learned The damaged statue of the Bristol slave trader Edward Colston should be displayed in a museum, says a commission Van Gogh’s ‘magical, mysterious’ self-portraits get five stars There are concrete trees inside the London School of Economic’s £145m new building Theaster Gates will make his Serpentine Pavilion in London a modern Pantheon Port Talbot prepared to bid its Banksy farewell A mystery artist who makes sculptures out of books raised £50,000 for charity Fabled Indigenous Australian art went on show 40 years after it disappeared Mike Nelson has channelled pandemic despair into a claustrophobic installation … … while a Zimbabwean sculptor’s Covid-inspired work will travel to China A retrospective celebrates rebel ceramicist Edith Heath Masterpiece of the week The Dream of Saint Helena, c 1570, by Paolo Veronese She looks like a sensual dreamer painted by a late Victorian symbolist, all passion spent as she rests her eyes with her legs spread out and a hand on her silky skirts. In fact, Veronese’s model is posing as Helena, mother of the Roman emperor Constantine, who found the true cross after dreaming of its forgotten location. Veronese had form when it came to making religious themes look secular. He was interrogated by the Inquisition after filling a Last Supper with realistic, bacchanalian details. Here he does at least include a big cross in the sky, St Helena’s attribute. But he takes the story as an opportunity to depict a woman alone, lost in thought, in this subversive, precociously modern vision. • National Gallery, London Don’t forget To follow us on Twitter: @GdnArtandDesign. Sign up to the Art Weekly newsletter If you don’t already receive our regular roundup of art and design news via email, please sign up here. Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.comBrexit checks on food and farm products entering Northern Ireland from Great Britain must continue pending a judicial review of the order made by Stormont’s agriculture minister, Edwin Poots, the high court in Belfast has ruled. Mr Justice Colton said he was “suspending the order or the instruction given by the minister of agriculture until the further order of this court”. At the same he granted leave for an application for judicial reviews against the minister’s decision. “There shouldn’t be any confusion hanging over those in the civil service, so I am persuaded this is a case where there should be interim relief. “I therefore make the order to suspend the instruction given by the minister for agriculture until further order of this court.” Poots took the unilateral decision to order officials to halt all checks on Wednesday after taking legal advice from the former attorney general John Larkin. However, it emerged during the hearing that these checks were due to continue until noon next Monday. Colton made no comment on whether the Poots move was lawful or not but said the issues were important enough to proceed to judicial review. His ruling means the Brexit checks will continue until at least 7 March when the next hearing on the matter will take place. It transpired that a similar case was already pending for that date after an anonymised individual launched a legal challenge against Poots’s predecessor, Gordon Lyons. Ciaran O’Hare, of the law practice McIvor Farrell, which is acting for the anonymised member of the public, said the case was a “matter of urgency” as civil servants charged with the orders needed “certainty”. The decision by Poots to halt the checks was part of a wider DUP protest against the Brexit checks, which also led to the first minister, Paul Givan, resigning from his post at Stormont.Great Britain’s energy regulator could update the energy price cap as often as every three months as it braces for further volatility across global markets. Jonathan Brearley, Ofgem’s chief executive, said it would be better to have the option to update the price cap more frequently to allow households to “adjust much more quickly” to some of the changes in the market. Currently, the price cap is reviewed every six months. Ofgem raised the cap on average household energy bills by 54% to £1,971 on Thursday, the biggest increase since it introduced the cap in 2019. The increase will take effect from April, following the last increase six months before in October. Soaring household energy bills reflect an extraordinary period on wholesale gas markets, with the cost paid by suppliers quadrupling in the space of a few months amid increased demand during the recovery from the coronavirus pandemic. The oil and gas producer Shell on Thursday announced its highest quarterly profit in eight years. The increase will hit household budgets at a time when overall consumer price index inflation has risen to a 30-year high, with prices reflecting shortages caused by the coronavirus pandemic. “What we’re now saying is that we need to look to the future, and the difficult news for all of us is that this volatile market might be with us for some time,” Brearley told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. “To do that we’ve got to change our entire regulatory package to make sure the market can better adapt.” He acknowledged that more frequent updates would have meant prices rose more quickly this winter but said equally that customers would see the benefits of price drops more quickly as well. An Ofgem spokesperson said the regulator was consulting on the changes, which would only come in after October if agreed. Ofgem also confirmed it will have the ability to make further ad hoc changes to the cap in between the regular reviews in “exceptional circumstances” if five tests are met “in the interests of stabilising the market and making sure consumers and suppliers pay a fair price”. The move would likely help suppliers by allowing them to raise prices more quickly, after the collapse of 29 energy companies, most of whom had not protected themselves sufficiently against wholesale cost increases. The regulator and the government have faced criticism for not introducing measures to prevent the crisis. About 10% of the rise in bills – about £68 a household – went towards paying for the costs of emergency measures to continue providing gas to customers whose supplier collapsed. Brearley said suppliers “need to be much more financially resilient” but claimed the best way to avoid a repeat of this winter’s crisis would be to push faster towards increased energy efficiency, renewable energy and nuclear energy. “Looking into the long term, the real way for the country to get out of the volatility we’ve seen is to diversify our energy sources and push harder on getting towards our net zero target,” Brearley said.Shaftesbury, which owns swathes of Chinatown, Soho and Covent Garden, said West End crowds were returning despite the Omicron variant, with the prospect of an extended period of uninterrupted trading. The landlord, which owns a 16-acre (6-hectare) portfolio in the heart of London, said its vacancy rate had fallen below 5% for the first time since the pandemic started, to 4.9% in recent weeks – just above the 4.8% recorded in March 2020. Brian Bickell, the chief executive, said the strong rebound in confidence and activity since last summer had continued into the key pre-Christmas period and the recovery was on track, despite short-term disruption from Omicron. City centres have been hammered by Covid-19 lockdowns over the past two years, with shops, restaurants and bars forced to shut their doors for several months at a time, forcing many out of business. During the first lockdown in spring 2020, the West End ground to a halt, and as many as 180 of the 630 flats owned by Shaftesbury were vacated as people moved out of London. When the new, highly contagious Omicron variant emerged in early December and the government imposed fresh restrictions, including ordering people to work from home where possible, some restaurants and bars closed temporarily and footfall in shops plummetted. The number of shoppers, tourists and office workers coming into the West End fell back to levels seen last summer. But with the lifting of restrictions in late January, “visitors and the West End’s important working population are now returning”, Bickell said. “Together with an improving outlook for international leisure and business travel, there is now the prospect of an extended period of uninterrupted trading growth. “Robust occupier interest across all our uses and in each of our locations has continued throughout the period, our vacancy levels are trending lower towards pre-pandemic levels and rent collection rates continue to improve.” Bickell told investors at the landlord’s annual meeting that visitor numbers in the West End were higher over the last weekend of January than at the same time in 2019. Businesses that were struggling to pay their rent during the pandemic are now mostly paying it again: for the quarter to 31 December, Shaftesbury received 88% of rent, with 10% outstanding and 2% waived. The landlord now only grants rental support on an exceptional case-by-case basis. John Cahill, an analyst at the US investment bank Stifel, said: “Short-term staffing issues also appear to be abating, and the long-term outlook is improving with the prospect of a return of international tourists and business travellers.”Austria has become the first country in the EU to make vaccinations against Covid-19 mandatory for all adults, but questions remain over whether it can sway those sceptical of taking the jab and how much the Alpine state’s government is willing to press those who won’t comply. The upper house of the Austrian parliament, the Bundesrat, on Thursday evening voted 47-12 in favour of a general vaccination mandate, formally approving a law that will see those over the age of 18 who decline to take a jab face penalties of up to 3,600 euros, unless they are pregnant or severely ill. The legislation, which was signed by Austria’s president Alexander Van der Bellen on Friday and will come into effect over the coming days, has been followed with great interest across Europe, where other nations have considered taking a similar step. Already approved by the lower house of Austria’s parliament with a clear majority last month, Austria’s vaccine mandate is due to come into effect in three stages. Every household is to be informed of the new law via post by 15 March, after which police will start monitoring people’s immunisation status via spot checks and issuing fines of 600 euros, rising to up to 3,600 euros in case of non-compliance. In the third phase, those who cannot show proof of vaccination by a certain deadline are to be automatically fined, but it is unclear whether the government still keen to enforce its mandate to such a degree. In an interview with public broadcaster ORF on Thursday morning, health minister Wolfgang Mückstein was unable to give a date for the crucial deadline. As Austria has inched closer to a decision on mandatory vaccinations, the conservative-Greens coalition government of chancellor Karl Nehammer has simultaneously loosened restrictions for the unvaccinated. A “lockdown for the unvaccinated” was lifted on Monday, and shops, restaurants and hotels across most of the country will soon be able to receive visitors who haven’t got a jab, as long as they can show a recent negative test result. Political developments around the mandate have been followed closely in Germany, where government calls for a similar law have become more cautious in recent weeks. “Since the government announced the compulsory measure in mid-January, it has done everything to undermine, soften and make its own project redundant,” wrote Munich-based German newspaper Süddeutsche Zeitung in a comment piece. “The message is clear: we didn’t really mean it.” Gerald Loacker, a health spokesperson for liberal NEOS opposition party, said waning political enthusiasm for mandatory vaccinations was impossible to ignore. “What we are dealing with here is a vaccine mandate that comes into effect just as the government is making it possible for those who aren’t vaccinated to enter a bar with a subsidised free test result and raise a glass to their resistance,” Loacker told the Guardian. “That’s not a coherent policy, and people in Austria are taking note of that.” Karl Stöger, a professor of constitutional law at Vienna university, said that seeming incoherence was partly a deliberate choice. “The vaccination mandate has legal teeth, but it is also a law that is very aware of the limits of what a state can force people to do,” he said. Stöger, who has advised the government in its handling of the pandemic, said it was possible that Austria’s constitutional court could still stymie the vaccine mandate, especially if an “endemic” situation of the virus with low hospitalisation rates no longer makes vaccinations appear vital. Like many other European countries, Austria is experiencing record rates of Covid-19 infections, but the number of patients in intensive care beds with the virus is declining. With 68.8 % of its population having received at least two shots of a vaccine, however, the government argues that only mandatory vaccinations will bring immunisation rates to a sufficiently high level to weather another wave of the virus later this year. Last December’s emphatic endorsement of the vaccine mandate idea on behalf of the government, then still fronted by interim chancellor Alexander Schallenberg, has also made it politically difficult for the conservative Austrian People’s party (ÖVP) to change its mind without losing face. “There’s a sense the whole of Europe is watching us: a government U-turn at this stage would amount to a huge loss of face,” said Clemens Schuhmann, a journalist for Oberösterreichische Nachrichten newspaper. Yet enforcing the mandate could come with the risk of further stoking divisions in a society already polarised over the course of the pandemic. Upper Austria, the northern state that Schuhmann reports on, has one of the lowest vaccination rates in the country, with fewer than 60% of residents fully vaccinated in some municipalities bordering on southern Germany. “Those who will get vaccinated because of the mandate are the ones who can’t afford to pay the fines”, he said. “The risk is that others will get further radicalised and rather go to prison than take the jab.”“There’s just something so cathartic about getting hit in the head with a pillow,” posits Steve Williams as he grills a couple of steaks on the back deck of his catamaran. Catfish spin in the yacht’s neon stern lights, scanning the water’s surface for scraps of food on the Boca Raton harbor. He cues up a video on his phone. It’s the second ever exhibition match produced by Pillow Fight Championship (PFC), an organization Williams founded in south Florida with the goal of turning pillow fighting into a professional sport. The match took place back in October, but tonight it’s available for the first time, free of charge, on Fite.tv, the premier direct-to-consumer streaming service for combat sports. Despite a full stomach, two empty bottles of cabernet and the hum of trade winds, there’s a hint of anxiety on Williams’s face. “I’m dying to know the stats for this fight,” he says. People cheer on fighters at the PFC Pillow Fight Championship. Photograph: Bryan Cereijo/The Guardian As Williams sees it, those stats, or number of streams, will determine the long term viability of his latest venture. In one week he will host the PFC Pound Down in Miami, his company’s largest organized pillow fight and the first pay-per-view event, where the sport’s inaugural champions will be crowned. A willing audience would be a boon for his cause. “You don’t really need to explain [pillow fighting] to people – that’s the beauty,” says Williams. The pillows – which make a crinkling sound like a dry diaper when held still and crack like a horsewhip when connecting with a cheekbone – are queen-sized, stuffed with foam and encased in nylon sailcloth. Fighters are matched up according to relative size and experience levels by what’s called a “matchmaker” in the universe of combat sports. There are only three 90-second rounds because hurling a broad, 2lb pillow with the torque of a golf club becomes virtually impossible after the four-minute mark, even for athletes in elite shape. A serial entrepreneur with a very niche dossier – from third-party cellphone roaming services to airport “crash phones” to a kind of proto-iTunes music subscription platform – Williams has a gift for marrying usefulness with novelty. As he sees it, pillow fighting is not just a gimmick. Steve Williams founded the Pillow Fighting Championship. He is working towards making pillow fighting a professional sport. Photograph: Mary Beth Koeth/The Guardian “There’s hardcore aggression with pillow fighting, but nobody gets hurt. A lot of people don’t want to see the blood and violence any more.” Williams is framing PFC as the next UFC – the largest mixed martial arts (MMA) organization in the world – borrowing heavily from the latter’s franchising business model and lurid, aggressive branding. Going door-to-door selling the martial-arts studios and boxing gyms of south Florida on his concept, he recruited dozens of active MMA fighters, reality TV stars, bare-knuckle boxers, mechanics, single moms and veterinarians to start training with his pillows. Then he hosted exhibition matches in south Florida gyms and casinos. Professional fighters appreciated the intensity and competition as much as the laypeople. Due to the severity of the whupping in a MMA match, competitors can only handle one or two a year. PFC embodies the notion of fighting without risking serious bodily injury. “I’ve been in martial arts my entire life, and I can tell you that this is going to be bigger than all of them,” says Yuri Villefort, a Brazilian professional MMA fighter who runs Indio Dojo in Boca Raton, one of the first gyms to partner with Williams. “Anyone can compete, and anyone can win. It doesn’t matter your size, age, or background.” Santiago Seijo swings against his opponent, Markus ‘Maluko’ Perez. Photograph: Bryan Cereijo/The Guardian Williams’ first pillow fight exhibition match took place last September, the second in October. They weren’t ticketed, but they generated video content, which was all Williams needed to spread the word outside of south Florida. Short clips went viral on Instagram, got picked up by Barstool Sports, and ended up on morning shows in England, which stoked a wave of new applicants. “I’ve never seen anything take off like this,” he says. Williams tallies that he’s spent over $350,000 of his own money to produce these fights and hasn’t made a dime in return. In his estimation, it’ll all be worthwhile this Saturday, when the bell rings at the Pound Down, the first “professional” tournament, which loosely means that athletes will be paid for their performance. Championship belts will be on the line, and the world will (with any luck) be watching. *** “Live around the world, we’re set for two explosive rounds of nocturnal neck support combat,” says the announcer in an ill-fitting tuxedo jacket. It’s 9pm inside a sprawling industrial park 20 miles west of downtown Miami. A throng of marginally famous social media influencers and fighters with blooms of cauliflower ear gather ringside. Resplendent in a blue velour blazer, Williams poses for pictures with Logan Paul’s boxing trainer. The VIP section is a bunkbed above the seating area, where a smartly dressed couple recline awkwardly. All told, there are a few dozen spectators and potential investors. Everyone else is associated with the byzantine video production effort. With five months’ experience, Terrell ‘TJ’ Jenkins is considered a veteran of the sport. Photograph: Bryan Cereijo/The Guardian Sixteen men and eight women from across the US and South America are competing in a single-elimination bracket for a shot at the title and the $5,000 purse. All matches are two rounds, with the exception of the final, which is three. Certain upgrades are evident: each fighter now has a trainer and a cut man in their corner, and a PFC branded uniform. (In Williams’ previous exhibition matches, competitors wore golf gloves and their own mismatched gym clothes.) On an overhead big screen, a live feed shows Terrell “TJ” Jenkins on his slow march from the locker room to the ring for his first fight. The crowd chants his name as he climbs through the ropes. He flexes and smiles wildly. Staring menacingly in the opposite corner is professional MMA and bare-knuckle fighter Mike Trujillo. Having all of five months’ experience, Jenkins is one of the few veterans of the nascent sport. For several weeks leading up to his first professional bout, he’s been weight-training and practicing MMA at Villefort’s dojo. TJ Jenkins squares off against Mike Trujillo in the PFC Pound Down event. Photographs: Bryan Cereijo/The Guardian “You can’t apply too much technique. Otherwise, you’ll freeze up,” he says. “I’m fine with being the underdog. It’s part of my identity.” Jenkins, who is 6ft 2in with shoulders like Dwight Howard, had an admittedly troubled upbringing in Yonkers, New York. “We didn’t have the things that most people have – money, stable home, father figures. And whatever you’re lacking at home you seek elsewhere.” He spent a decade on probation in New York and several weeks being homeless after landing in south Florida in 2019. He slowly saved up to start his own mobile detailing business – his first office was in a commercial building owned by Williams. “We hit it off right away,” Jenkins says. When Williams started PFC, he invited Jenkins to try out. “I felt like a little kid again,” he says wistfully. “It brought back waves of that same joy and excitement. I needed to pass that on to other people.” He appears to be in a state of perpetual awe concerning how his life turned out – a business owner who’s able to employ members of his family, and a local favorite to win the main event on Saturday. “When I get in the ring, I’m thinking about my past, I’m thinking about all the stuff that tried to break me,” he says. *** “Work the back hand, and stay on him!” Villefort yells from Jenkins’ corner. Jenkins holds the pillow with both hands and swings like he’s trying to send a baseball out to left field. In this case, the ball is Trujillo’s head, and twenty seconds into the second round Jenkins does the unthinkable: he sends Trujillo to the canvas. The referee stops the fight, declaring Jenkins the winner by technical knockout (TKO)—the first victory of this kind in the short history of PFC. The crowd goes ballistic. Jenkins climbs out of the ring and hugs his brother. “I hope he’s alright,” he says, watching as the ringside doctor promptly escorts Trujillo out of the ring and to the hospital. So much for not getting hurt. In the midst of all this excitement, one of the women fighters, Meriah Hall, calmly bounces her one-year-old son, Alaric, on her knee. She looks unexpectedly relaxed. A week earlier, she exhibited a similar manner, pushing Alaric through a park on the west side of Delray Beach, Florida. Hall prefers to train outside rather than in the gym, her workouts consisting of long runs and meditation. In the ring, she’s known as the “Shuttle Launcher” – a reference to her hometown near Cape Canaveral and her fighting style. PFC fighters Meriah Hall, Xavier “Hurricane” Santana, Phillip Aughinbaugh and Krystal Tait get hit during their fights at the PFC Pillow Fight Championship Pound Down event. Photographs: Bryan Cereijo/The Guardian “I needed it,” she says about pillow fighting. “Things changed when I became a mother. It was an outlet to vent all my frustrations about my new life, motherhood and the pandemic.” Last October, around the time of the second exhibition hosted by PFC, her cousin died of complications from Covid-19, leaving a husband and three children. A few weeks later, her aunt died too. Hall won both of her exhibition matches last year. She’d like to protect that undefeated record, but most of all, she wants to honor her late relatives. “Who knows where all this will take me,” she says. “But it has a new meaning now that they’re gone.” *** Hall is more conservative than usual when she enters the ring on Saturday night. Her supporters speculate as to whether this is a strategy or an off night. Regardless, she still wins her first fight handily against a jiu-jitsu blue belt from the Bronx and advances to the semifinals. But Hall has no answer for Brazilian UFC fighter and two-time Muay Thai world champion Istela Nunes, who goes on to win the women’s division and hoist the title belt at the end of the night. Hall is introduced before her fight. Photograph: Bryan Cereijo/The Guardian Sipping a beer ringside, watching the men’s semifinals, Hall is visibly exhausted. “I feel like I did after my first fight. I guess I didn’t train hard enough,” she says. “I could also use a babysitter.” Jenkins, on the other hand, still has a title fight on the line. In the semis, he faces Hauley Tillman, a local boy, but loses in a split decision. A crescendo of boos rises behind the judges’ booth – the crowd says it was a robbery. Before stepping out of the ring, Jenkins hugs his opponent. “It’s all love,” he says. “I put my name on the map. No one in my family has ever done that. I’ll be back” Of the many winners and losers at the PFC Pound Down, the person who had the most to gain is Williams, and by Sunday morning he’s doing victory laps in the tide of predictably corny headlines, from the New York Post to Haaretz, that has surged overnight. Hall turned to pillowfighting as a way to combat the stress of motherhood and the pandemic. Photograph: Mary Beth Koeth/The Guardian “You wouldn’t believe what’s going on,” he says over the phone. “Japan, England, Brazil, America – they all want to know about pillow fighting.” His plan to install the program in schools, gyms, and dojos all over the world is being hatched expeditiously with mail-order model – call PFC and have a box of the (patent-pending) official PFC pillows delivered to your gym’s doorstep in one week. The wheels continue to turn as he thinks about the kids’ league, noting that the connection between contact sports and neurological diseases such as CTE has made parents less inclined towards football and martial arts. And then there’s the advertising: he says the absence of blood and gore makes this more attractive for mainstream corporations. “Bed, Bath, and Beyond would make sense,” he muses. Current sponsors include a bedding company called Pillow Guy. “Not to be confused with ‘the MyPillow guy’ – we’re not trying to get political.” Istela Nunes is declared winner of her fight against Meriah Hall. Nunes won the women’s division of PFC Championship. Photograph: Bryan Cereijo/The Guardian That anxiousness from the previous week has clearly been supplanted by elation. Williams says that he has the streaming numbers from Saturday’s Pound Down but doesn’t want to publicize them, either because they’re paltry, or so strong that he wants to play them close to the chest. This is yet one more reminder that it’s his sport, and he makes the rules. No matter, he’s still flush with confidence. “I’m sure that one day we’ll have a multimillion-dollar pillow fight, and the world will be watching.”Households can expect their water bills to rise to an average of almost £420 a year from April, compounding a record rise in energy costs and an increase in national insurance contributions that are due in the same month. Bills will rise by an average of 1.7% in England and Wales from April, according to the industry body Water UK, pushing up the typical annual bill by roughly £7 to £419 a year. In some parts of England bills could rise by up to 10%, while others may experience a modest decrease. The increase will come as further unwelcome news to hard-pressed households after Thursday’s announcement of the imminent £693 increase in home energy bills, which will drive the cost of gas and electricity to an average of £1,977 a year and plunge millions of homes into fuel poverty. Christine McGourty, the chief executive of Water UK, said customers would pay “little more than £1 a day for their water and sewerage service” and there was “a wide range of support available for those in need”. “But we know this is a difficult time for many, and no one should have to worry about their household essentials,” she added. Jess Cook, who leads the water poverty programme for National Energy Action, a fuel poverty charity, said research had shown that more than 40% of those struggling to pay their water bills would bathe less to reduce their water bills. Almost a quarter would cut back on food or personal hygiene products in order to save money. Although many households qualify for a social water tariff, which can save about £148 a year from the average bill, about five out of six customers who cannot afford their water bill are not receiving the financial support they need. “Water is often overlooked when it comes to saving money but there are many ways to reduce your bill,” Water UK said. “These savings could help free up precious pounds to cover other rising costs, including energy, food and national insurance contributions.” The deepening cost of living crisis facing households has prompted the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, to offer a £9bn package of measures from the Treasury to help households shore up their ailing finances. These include a repayable £200 discount off their energy bills in October, while council tax payers in England in bands A to D are to receive a rebate of £150 from their bills in April, which will not have to be paid back. Announcing the support on Thursday, Sunak said the rise in energy costs, which will affect 22m homes, would mean that bill payers would “feel the pinch”, and warned households to brace themselves for further increases in energy costs later this year. “The price rise is so significant that it’s not just those families who are on benefits that are going to feel the pinch, it’s actually middle income families as well,” he said.Selfridges is to offer sex therapy and drug-free “psychedelic trips” in the luxury department store’s latest gambit to tempt shoppers back into stores. From 28 February, the retailer, which has outlets in Manchester, Birmingham and London, will offer the headline-grabbing services as part of its Superself event, which it claims “takes visitors on a journey of uplifting self-discovery and nurturing self-care”. The therapy sessions are being provided in partnership with The Stack World, a women-focused online media outlet that was spun out of the Beautystack beauty marketplace founded by the former stylist Sharmadean Reid. The 45-minute £150 “sex life reboot” is being led by Dr Karen Gurney, a clinical psychologist and psycho-sexologist who promises “to evaluate and reset a couple’s or an individual’s sex life through a Sex Life MOT”. Other options include a £50 confidence coaching session or £99 “creative breakthrough” meeting with a hypnotherapist. The “psychedelic trips” are provided via hi-tech pods operated by technology specialist Sensiks, where users are bombarded with “bespoke fragrances, infrared light, heat and sound”. The colourful constructions, which resemble giant seed pods, use virtual reality technology to help users “drift through” a “calming universe” of kaleidoscopic forms and relaxing music. Selfridges claims the experience is “much like a short meditation”. Superself is the latest in a long line of Selfridges events, with themes ranging from literature to the environment, that have aimed to tempt shoppers into stores in the digital age. This year is particularly tricky as city centres, and especially London where Selfridges has its flagship store, have been hard hit after the pandemic prompted a shift to working from home and decimated tourist travel. The trading conditions promoted Selfridges to cut 450 jobs in 2020 – 14% of its workforce – after the 114-year-old business experienced its “toughest year” in living memory. Neighbouring department stores on Oxford Street – House of Fraser and Debenhams – have both closed their doors in the past year as sales in the area dived by £8bn to £2bn in 2020 and were expected to reach just £5bn last year. Westminster council, which oversees the Oxford Street area, has pledged to spend £150m on improvements. However, it has delayed its regeneration plans after they got off to a disastrous start with the £6m Marble Arch Mound, which drew ridicule. Selfridges is now in the process of changing hands after the Weston family, which has owned the group since 2003, agreed to sell to a Thai retailer and an Austrian property company for an estimated £4bn.The US is testing robotic patrol dogs along its frontier with Mexico that it says could provide “mechanical reinforcements” for border guards, in a move criticised by a leading domestic rights group as a “civil liberties disaster”. Adding to the outcry, the company that developed the dogs, Ghost Robotics, has previously showcased a four-legged robot that has a sniper rifle attached to its back. The Department of Homeland Security (DHS) said this week that its research and development arm had offered border guards “a helping hand (or ‘paw’)” to work to “force-multiply” patrols. “Due to the demands of the region, adding quadruped mechanical reinforcements is a smart use of resources,” the DHS said in a blog post. Gavin Kenneally, the chief operating officer at Ghost Robotics, said the unarmed 45kg robot dog was “bred” to walk on sand, rocks and hills, as well as human-built environments such as stairs. The robots were tested in El Paso, Texas, on the international border. “In a desert area, the dogs were programmed to go on simulated sentry duty,” DHS said. It suggested that the bulky metal robots could even be used “as cover” for border guards. “Just like anywhere else, you have your standard criminal behaviour, but along the border you can also have human smuggling, drug smuggling, as well as smuggling of other contraband – including firearms or even potentially, [weapons of mass destruction],” agent Brett Becker, of the US Customs and Border Protection (CBP) innovation team, was quoted as saying. Federal agents operating along the Mexican border have long been accused of misconduct and mistreatment of the migrants and asylum seekers attempting to enter the US. Joe Biden’s administration has been sharply criticised by refugee advocates for the growing number of immigrants being held at private facilities. The American Civil Liberties Union warned on Thursday that Washington’s plan to use robot patrol dogs on its borders was “a civil liberties disaster in the making”. “The government must retract this dangerous proposal, and the Biden administration must put the brakes on our country’s slide into an anti-immigrant dystopia,” the advocacy group said. In its post, DHS said people should not be “surprised if in the future we see robot ‘Fido’ out in the field, walking side-by-side with [CBP] personnel”.The first thing Martin Glass thought about was his daughter, when he heard the news on Monday evening that his home town team, Raith Rovers, were signing a man ruled to be a rapist by a civil court. Lillie is just seven and a half months old but 26-year-old Glass is a first-time dad and he’s already looking forward to taking her to her first game. “I want my daughter to have good role models. If I’m part of a club that has a rapist as an idol then that’s on me.” His second thought was to set up a fundraising page for Rape Crisis Scotland. “Let’s make a difference,” he wrote, introducing the online appeal. By Friday morning, he had raised more than £12,000. “I needed to show Raith and football fans in general did not support this,” Glass said. “It’s a small bit of good out of the darkest moment in our club’s history.” Raith Rovers’ decision to sign David Goodwillie, who was ordered to pay damages to the woman he was found to have raped in a landmark case in 2017, resulted in a ferocious backlash that escalated as the week progressed, with sponsorship withdrawals, multiple resignations and the women’s team moving to sever ties. On Thursday, the Scottish Championship club announced in a contrite statement that it had “got it wrong”, would not select Goodwillie and was reviewing the 32-year-old striker’s contract. But Glass echoes many Raith supporters whose response to the U-turn has been only a qualified welcome. “If this is all that happens, I won’t be back this season. The board should resign: they came up with this, they should take the consequences rather than the fans, volunteers and players.” Aileen Campbell, the chief executive of Scottish Women’s Football, agreed that the statement on Thursday was “only the first step” in rebuilding trust with supporters. While questions have been raised about why there was not a similar reaction when Goodwillie returned to Scotland to play for Clyde in 2017, Campbell said this week’s outcry marked a shift in expectations in recent years. “It shows that society has moved on and we don’t want this to be part of our game.” As head of the governing body for women’s association football in Scotland and a former Scottish government sports minister, Campbell’s priority this week has been offering support to the women’s team, describing the impact on the players and ensuing spotlight as “overwhelming”. It is ironic, she adds, that the women’s team was forced to seek alternative sponsorship and a new ground at which to play, at a time of growing momentum for the women’s sport. “We’re at a really important juncture in the game with the visibility of women’s football increasing, as well as generating that critical financial support and sponsorship. There is lots of scope for it to grow and we have inspiring role models, women who have often defied the odds in combining work and family.” Eve Ralph, a football coach co-founder of Her Game Too, a campaign set up by 12 female fans last summer with the aim of ending sexism in football, believes the conversation among football supporters is changing too. “Football culture across the UK has come a long way, with more women going to matches and men more likely to call it out if their friend says something unacceptable. There’s more discussion about what’s acceptable behaviour and what’s not”. High-profile arrests for alleged sexual violence, including of the Manchester United forward Mason Greenwood on Sunday, have raised questions about how Premier League clubs handle such allegations. “There’s still a sense that a lot of players are not facing the consequences for their actions,” says Ralph. A Bristol City fan, she mentions how Women’s Aid ended its partnership with the club last year after it signed Danny Simpson, a player with a domestic abuse conviction. “Footballers are huge role models for men and women, and the attitude of ‘he’s got a past but he’s a great player’ has a terrible effect on anyone who may think ‘I can get away with it if I’m famous’.” Some younger Raith fans have pointed out that one of the only sections of supporters supporting Goodwillie are some of the teenage boys who make up Raith’s youth fanbase. One young woman told the Guardian: “They’re the ones on Instagram saying it’s really unfair. To them he’s just some guy who got away with a threesome.” “Some people will say Goodwillie deserves a second chance,” says the SNP MP Hannah Bardell, who spent four years working at Livingston FC before she became a politician. “But there have to be boundaries around certain crimes, and yet again this is putting men’s careers over women’s lives.” Bardell contrasts Goodwillie’s lack of public contrition – which she accepts may be legally advised – with that of David Martindale, who was made Livingston manager last year amid some controversy, having spent time in prison for drug dealing. “These are complex questions and we need to have a framework that enables us to make these fine judgments. Rehabilitation is a cornerstone of any civilised society. “Nobody’s saying Goodwillie shouldn’t be able to live his life, but being a footballer at that level, being a role model, is difficult.” This is part of a broader discussion, she says, about the pedestal footballers are put on, how much they are paid, and the culture surrounding them. After withdrawing her shirt sponsorship from the men’s team on Tuesday, the crime writer and devoted Raith fan Val McDermid stepped in to pay for new strips for the women’s team, without the club crest. This Sunday, Bardell will head to Windmill Park, Kirkcaldy, to watch the recently renamed McDermid Ladies play at 2pm. The women’s team are expecting a big crowd.It has been called a textbook example of discrimination against Black voters in the US. And a ruling on it from the supreme court is expected any day. It isn’t the kind of explicit voting discrimination, like poll taxes and literacy tests, that kept voters from the polls in the south during the Jim Crow era. Instead, it is more subtle. Let us walk you through the case with our visual explainer. The case focuses on Alabama, where the Republican-controlled legislature, like states across the US, recently completed the once-a-decade process of redrawing the boundaries of congressional maps. If partisan politicians exert too much control over the redistricting process, they can effectively engineer their own victories, or blunt the advantages of the other side, by allocating voters of particular political persuasions and backgrounds to particular districts. Under the new districts, Black people make up 25% of the Alabama’s population, but comprise a majority in just one of the state’s seven districts. In late January, a panel of three federal judges issued a 225-page opinion explaining how the state was discriminating against Black voters. “Black voters have less opportunity than other Alabamians to elect candidates of their choice to Congress,” the panel wrote. The judges gave Alabama 14 days to come up with a new plan and said the state had to draw two districts where Black voters comprise a majority. Now Alabama is asking the US supreme court to step in and block it from having to redraw its congressional districts. In a brief to the supreme court, lawyers for Alabama argued that by creating two majority-Black districts, they would be prioritizing race over other the state’s traditional redistricting criteria such as keeping communities whole and keeping districts as compact as possible. The plaintiffs in the case dispute that. In their own brief to the supreme court, they noted that several of their sample maps comply with Alabama’s redistricting criteria – some even more so than the map the state enacted. It is possible to simultaneously have two Black districts and observe these criteria, they say. There is also an element of common sense involved, say plaintiffs, who point to the fact that the Black belt – named for its rich topsoil – has been an area with a high concentration of Black people for hundreds of years. “You have the Black belt … In Alabama it is such a well-known and unique feature of the state. Everyone knows that’s where Black folks live and have lived for 200 years and are still concentrated,” said Deuel Ross, an attorney at the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund who is representing some of the plaintiffs in the case. “This is a community that has been together.” The supreme court ruling could have big consequences for section 2 of the Voting Rights Act (VRA), a crucial part of the landmark 1965 law that prohibits any voting practice that discriminates on the basis of race, and which is commonly used to bring challenges like the one in Alabama. If the justices side with Alabama, it would probably make it very difficult to bring similar future challenges under section 2. Michael Li, a redistricting expert at the Brennan Center for Justice, said Alabama was taking a “swing for the fences” argument to try to take down a “major part of the edifice of the Voting Rights Act”. “It’s really a very aggressive stand,” he said. “What Alabama really is saying is the VRA has to be subordinate to the state’s neutral criteria. And if you can’t draw a VRA district while complying with the state’s neutral criteria, there’s no liability, which would be a big change. “It subordinates federal law to state law. States then could define all sorts of neutral criteria that would make it impossible to ever draw a VRA district,” he added.Jordan Houghton had not long arrived with his wife, Harley, at a family-run Italian restaurant in Plymouth’s dockside Barbican quarter when they turned to his phone to tune into the FA Cup fourth-round draw. “We were streaming it a few seconds behind,” Houghton says. “A load of messages started coming through but nobody actually said who it was. There were just emojis popping up, so I thought: ‘We must have drawn a big one.’ Then the next ball out was Chelsea. We started cheering and people were turning around thinking: ‘What are they doing?’ It will be the first time I’ve gone back since I left the club.” Houghton’s 16-year association with Chelsea began when he was six and attending sessions in Isleworth before signing his first contract a couple of years later when the Roman Abramovich era was bubbling. He was released in 2018 without making a senior appearance but on Saturday is set to play his first competitive first-team game at Stamford Bridge for Plymouth Argyle, who will be backed by almost 6,000 supporters. His family, including his elder brother, James, a youth coach at Chelsea, will be among those in the away end. Houghton played the odd reserve game at the stadium but his fondest memory there came in the FA Youth Cup in 2014, when he scored as Chelsea came out on top of a topsy-turvy two-legged final against Fulham. “I’ve got my medal and shirt signed by all the lads framed, but also the pair of boots I wore in the game framed because it is a special memory I hold,” he says of a final that was played before a crowd of 13,125. “I read Gary Neville speaking about the crop that came through at Manchester United, the Class of 92, where they talk about even though he has won so many things in his senior career, that the Youth Cup was one of the highlights of his career. The Youth Cup is like the World Cup for an academy player. The pinnacle.” Among his teammates that day were Ruben Loftus-Cheek and Andreas Christensen, both of whom he could line up against on Saturday. While at Chelsea he grew particularly close to Loftus-Cheek, with whom he often played alongside an age group up. He remembers the day Jim Fraser, the assistant head of youth development, told him as a 15-year-old that he and Loftus-Cheek were wanted to train with the first team. “At Cobham you have the road that goes between the academy and the first team so you’re literally stepping across the road to the first team. It felt like a huge thing ‘to go across the road.’ We would be on the training pitches five or 10 minutes before training, just passing the ball about with no one there, and the first-team players would slowly drip-feed out of the building: [John] Terry, [Didier] Drogba, [Frank] Lampard, Deco, Ashley Cole … just one star after another. It was a surreal experience, seeing them up close and them coming over, shaking everyone’s hands and introducing themselves. You’re thinking: ‘You really don’t need to do that.’” Houghton saw several high-profile managers come and go. He believes Roberto Di Matteo helped bridge the gap between the academy and first team, and recalls José Mourinho making a point of visiting each individual pitch at a summer camp to greet every youth player when he was a shy under-nine. “I was quite a reserved kid so I was sitting at the back watching on and everyone else was running up and jumping,” he says, smiling. Later, in Mourinho’s second spell, Houghton was called up to his squad for a post-season tour of Australia and Asia. “I’ve still got videos on my phone of when we arrived and the amount of fans at the airport entrance … hundreds and hundreds going mad; loads of people at the hotel waiting. It was an incredible experience.” That tour saw him play alongside Terry, his hero growing up, who returned to Chelsea in December in a coaching role. Houghton joined Chelsea as a right-sided midfielder but was shifted to centre-back and stayed there until he was 16. That schooling has helped him refine his game as a defensive midfielder, at the fulcrum of a Plymouth side determined to return to the Championship. “John Terry was my idol so it was surreal to get to meet him, to train with him at 15, and to have him in my phonebook is a strange thing. That he is back working with the academy is brilliant for all the boys coming through. When he was at the highest level, he still had time for the academy players and wanted to make sure everything was right for them.” Houghton also counts the former Chelsea defender David Luiz as a good friend, someone who taught him “not to take life too seriously”, and he recently spoke to Mason Mount and Reece James, with whom he also played. He grins at the mention of Diego Costa – “a few stories, but I can’t tell you those ones” – and it is clear he is grateful for his education at Chelsea. “It was like going to the Cambridge or Oxford of academies, the best of the best,” he says. “It is a shame I cannot go back now with my 26-year-old brain into that 15- or 16-year-old’s body and almost record everything because you would take in so much more. At the time you don’t realise certain things.” Going back to Stamford Bridge promises to be an emotional occasion. “We were one big footballing family back then,” he says of his youth days. “There were 20 people growing up in a squad together. Good friendships, good people. Maybe one day when we retire we can have a good reunion and reminisce.”If the government were a company, the shareholders would have thrown out the chairman and board of directors by now. If it were a school, Ofsted inspectors would have judged it inadequate and put it into special measures. If there had potentially been lawbreaking, the police would have been involved a lot sooner. But the government knows it is bigger than any such institution, and consequently thinks it can’t be moved. Its behaviour over the past few weeks has chillingly echoed the pattern adopted by many organisations accused of something horrendous, which is to double down, evade, attack accusers, hide behind investigations, and ultimately use the shield of an apology to say – as Mark Zuckerberg has been saying for half his life – that clearly we didn’t get everything right, and we must now look to a future where such things never happen again. Look at the examples of churches hiding abusive priests, banks involved in money laundering, racist cricket clubs, national broadcasters disciplining a duplicitous reporter, a political party investigating antisemitism, specialist care homes looking into complaints of assault, police departments investigating failings within their ranks or schools protecting an abusive teacher. They all consistently adopt a classic and rotten playbook now being used with some commitment by the prime minister and his cabinet. After stern denials comes manufactured outrage, for example, in the wake of the Allegra Stratton video: “I was also furious to see that clip”. Then comes a firm commitment to investigate, “to establish the facts and report back as soon as possible”. At this early stage, the organisation’s instincts is to police itself, so keeping any findings away from the public sphere. Unfortunately, in this instance Simon Case, whom Boris Johnson had only recently appointed to his job as cabinet secretary, had to recuse himself since he appeared to have held a gathering in his own office. No worries. There are other blunter but heftier weapons in the backpack. Sue Gray may be more formidable, but in a neat jiujitsu move, you can use that to your advantage. “Look, we’ve asked no less ferocious an investigator than Sue Gray to examine this, so that shows how transparent we’re being.” Since everything’s above board ( with someone who wasn’t your first choice), this gives you the chance to question the motives of those who persist in challenging you and the opportunity to belittle them. It’s a thread that connects failing schools or special care units that vilify complaining families, Labour party members who call out antisemitism being attacked as disgruntled opponents, a graphic designer being sidelined by the BBC after raising concerns about Martin Bashir, or Ghislaine Maxwell’s lawyers questioning the sanity of those who accused her. With “partygate”, the same playbook has been used, taking in attacks on the media for wanting to engage in tittle-tattle, Jacob Rees-Mogg denouncing the Scottish Tory leader, Douglas Ross, as “a lightweight figure” and the sinister decision by Johnson himself to drag a rightwing online conspiracy theory about Keir Starmer and Jimmy Savile into the broad daylight of mainstream news. With gaslighting in full throttle, a parallel manoeuvre is also under way: to hide behind legal technicalities wherever possible. These can often involve absurd twists of logic, as when, for example, Prince Andrew’s lawyers tried to argue he couldn’t be sued since he was protected by an agreement the complainant had made with a dead paedophile. There was a degree of absurdity on Tuesday when the disinformation minister, Chris Philp, before a parliamentary committee scrutinising his online safety bill, refused to distance himself from the online disinformation about Starmer – the kind that his bill is intended to root out. It’s a position that has also been taken publicly this week by our ministers for culture and justice. But that’s how the rot spreads. If a sociopath is at the heart of an organisation, then the organisation itself begins to take on the characteristics of the person controlling it. Each one close to him or her becomes infected, because it’s now too late to do anything else. The best they can do now is delay; say they’d love to tell you everything, but their hands are tied. They rely on the fact that we’ve all got lives to be getting on with, we can’t keep paying lawyers, and some of us have died, while others are just tired. A government is different, though: its adversaries are, potentially, all of us. It may be that there are just too many of us following the smell of something rotten for this to end cleanly for them. Armando Iannucci is a film and TV writer whose credits include The Thick of It, In the Loop, and VeepThe carbon dioxide emissions of new cars sold in the UK dropped to the lowest level ever in 2021 thanks to the unprecedented surge in electric vehicle sales, industry data suggests. Average new car CO2 emissions fell by 11.2%, to 119.7g for every kilometre driven, according to the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders (SMMT), a lobby group. Battery electric vehicles accounted for only 12% of UK sales during 2021, but they rapidly drag down the figures because they produce zero exhaust emissions. Increased sales of hybrids, which include a battery alongside an internal combustion engine, also contributed to the fall in emissions, which was previously stymied in recent years by the rise of sales in higher-emission sports utility vehicles (SUVs). In 2021, the SMMT reported a 38% drop in average new car emissions since 2000, although those data were produced under a different test methodology so are not directly comparable. Car sales data for January, also published on Friday, showed that the number of battery electric cars more than doubled year on year to 14,400, accounting for 12.5% of cars sold. Total new car sales rose by 27.5% year on year in January, although that was compared with January 2021 when the UK was in a strict lockdown and car showrooms were closed. The industry reported that sales were still limited by the months-long shortage of computer chips that has forced carmakers to favour key vehicles, including electric cars – which are vital for meeting emissions legislation. Mike Hawes, the SMMT’s chief executive, said: “Once again it is electrified vehicles that are driving the growth, despite the ongoing headwinds of chip shortages, rising inflation and the cost-of-living squeeze. “[This year] is off to a reasonable start, however, and with around 50 new electrified models due for release this year, customers will have an ever greater choice, which can only be good for our shared environmental ambitions.” Sales of electric cars are expected to rise further during 2022, but it will probably still be several years before electric cars make a serious dent in total UK transport emissions. SMMT data published in May showed that battery electric vehicles and plug-in hybrids made up only 1.3% of the 40.35m cars on UK roads. In 2019, road transport accounted for 25% of the UK’s carbon dioxide emissions, according to government data. Ben Nelmes, the head of policy and research at the thinktank New AutoMotive, said: “Electric car sales have doubled in the last year, but there is still a mountain to climb to reduce the UK’s carbon emissions from cars. The 90,000 internal combustion engines that rolled off forecourts this month will continue to pollute and hit motorists in their pockets for another 14 years, on average.” The SMMT said that sales of electric cars are still limited by the perceived lack of charge points. Government data showed there were 28,400 public charge points available across the UK on 1 January, but the lobby group has previously said the country may need four or five times that amount. The emissions data came as MPs on the transport select committee said that the move to electric cars meant the government should urgently work on plans for road pricing, under which drivers would pay by the mile. The government rakes in about £28bn a year in fuel duty paid on petrol and diesel, a tax that does not affect electric car drivers. There is “no viable alternative” to road pricing to fill the gap in the budget, the MPs wrote in their report.Once upon a time, the Brit awards and the Grammys were an annual staple in the TV calendar of even the most casual music fan. Drawing millions of viewers, the ceremonies offered a feast of entertainment, ranging from the unpredictable to the spectacular. Think Chumbawamba chucking a bucket of ice water over John Prescott at the 1998 Brits or Lady Gaga emerging from an egg at the Grammys in 2011. More recently, Brits sets by Stormzy and Dave have marked an important shift in mainstream recognition of Black British talent. For audiences, however, the shine seems to have worn off. Last year’s ITV broadcast of the Brits, which was postponed from February to May due to Covid-19, recorded 2.9 million viewers – a figure that plunged for the fourth year running. The 2021 Grammys were the lowest rated in history, delivering an audience of just 8.8 million viewers for CBS, down a staggering 53% on the year prior. (These declines aren’t exclusive to music award ceremonies: the Oscars also recorded a 58.3% dip in viewers last year.) This is not the whole picture: both events have made efforts to digitise their offerings and could boast high engagement on social media. The 2021 Brits had a global audience of 1.7 million for its YouTube live stream, while the Grammys saw more than 77bn impressions on social platforms that same year. But beyond the numbers, there have been other challenges. In 2016, the #BritsSoWhite campaign shone a light on a lack of racial diversity. That year, there were just four artists/groups of colour (Naughty Boy, Rudimental, Izzy Bizu and Arrow Benjamin as a featured singer) nominated in the British categories, from a total of 52 entries, and all the winners were white. Gender has also been an issue: from 2011 to 2021, female acts represented only 31.5% of nominees in the four main categories, and last year, Little Mix were the first girl band to win best British group in the Brits’ 41-year history. The Grammys too has been accused of racial bias – both Drake and Frank Ocean snubbed the 2017 show for that reason – and, in 2020, the first female president and CEO of its parent organisation, the Recording Academy, Deborah Dugan, exited after less than six months, calling the event “ripe with corruption”. More recently, the Weeknd has said he’ll snub the Grammys due to a lack of transparency in the voting after he received no nominations. While that might seem like sour grapes, he isn’t alone: Drake, who has withdrawn his two nominations for 2022, last year called for the ceremony to be replaced with something new. For all the criticism, both the Brits and Grammys are at least showing a willingness to innovate. The Grammys responded to inequality claims by setting up a diversity and inclusion task force, with the Recording Academy publishing the steps being taken to address the “systemic and ongoing under-representation” of minority groups. The Brits voting academy, meanwhile, is refreshed each year and in 2020, the male/female split of voters was 51%/49%, with BAME representation at 24.5%. This year, the Brits’ gendered categories have been scrapped to make room for non-binary artists (after Sam Smith said they weren’t eligible for inclusion in 2021). Still, these attempts at a refresh have brought their own problems. The lack of a specific category for female talent poses the risk of fewer women being celebrated. We know this is what happens on other platforms: on UK radio, female acts took a minuscule 20% share of airplay in the first six months of 2021, according to figures from the Why Not Her? collective. The founder of Why Not Her?, Linda Coogan Byrne, says: “If you have gender-neutral awards categories, what you get reflected back at you is the discrimination that exists in the music industry. The people on those judging panels can only choose whoever has been nominated. Who submits the work? It’s predominantly the record labels. And if only 20% of those they sign are female-identifying artists, how many women are going to win?” Perhaps the biggest challenge facing both sets of awards is maintaining relevance. It is hard to capture the attention of today’s youth when they can spend time on pretty much whatever they want – be it Lil Nas X’s pole-dancing descent into hell or a video of a cat laughing – by just picking up their phones. And, crucially, that generation has grown up on streaming, where the focus is more on songs. Awards shows have struggled to get their heads round this new digital world. Subscription streaming, while accounting for 79% of consumer spend on music in 2021, doesn’t really pay well unless an artist is in a rarefied tier of megastars. That means that using sales as a barometer of success – as the Brits, where entries are only eligible if they reach the Top 40, does – isn’t particularly representative of the world musicians live in today, either. Acts who have a lucrative touring life, or are popular in a myriad of other ways, are bypassed. It is striking that Little Simz is a Brits best new artist nominee this year because she scored her first Top 40 album, despite the fact it’s her fourth overall, and she has been independently successful for many years. Still, aside from the changes both ceremonies have already made, and will surely make in future, the idea of them being replaced by “something new” seems unlikely, given that the events are organised and owned by the music industry. “They are an advert for what the respective industries have managed to create over the past 12 months. Also, winning an award and getting up on stage at the ceremony suggests you are pretty wonderful and that’s quite a good feel for artists,” says Ted Cockle, the president of publisher Hipgnosis Songs, who sits on the Brits Committee. What’s more likely is that both events chug on, chopped into ever-shorter clips, while TV viewership continues to dwindle until the format becomes obsolete. The magic of those unpredictable moments that happened in less polished times may be lost but, hey, at least there’s an endless number of funny animal videos to watch. The Brit awards airs on Tuesday 8 February, 8pm, ITV.Someone on Twitter recently asked if it was it appropriate to use the term “new world” in relation to wine. Over the past couple of decades, it’s been a useful, if lazy, shorthand for the mainly southern hemisphere countries such as Australia, New Zealand, Chile and South Africa that provide much of our more affordable drinking, but I don’t think most people who use the term see it as derogatory, or would want to imply that new is inferior to old. It’s more a way of telling consumers what to expect from a wine. By “new world”, they’re essentially talking about the modern wine industry, rather than those countries and regions where things are done in much the same way as they always have been, as well as wines that are generally fruitier, more full-bodied and have higher ABVs than traditional old-world wines. But the term’s critics do have a point: at the end of the day, it doesn’t bear a whole lot of scrutiny. For a start, most of these so-called “new-world” countries also have old vines, as well as winemaking traditions that go back at least 100 years (New Zealand’s achievement, however, is all the more remarkable, because it doesn’t). Australia’s grenache and shiraz, South Africa’s chenin blanc (which used to be known as steen) and pinotage, Chile’s carignan and pais, which was introduced by Spanish missionaries in the 16th century, still produce remarkable and distinctive wines. (South Africa’s Old Vine Project, for example, has done a great job of highlighting the value of that country’s older vineyards.) Tastes have also changed, so you now find some “old-world” producers making wines in a bolder, more “fruit-forward” (that’s winespeak for “fruity”) style, while many “new-world” producers are embracing more traditional methods such as the use of amphoras, natural yeasts and foot treading, while the natural wine movement is almost as popular in the new world as it is in the old. Even regions as traditional as Bordeaux and Rioja will have exponents of different styles. In Rioja, for example, you can find bodegas making classic, oaky gran reservas and other producers, such as Roda, who use names rather than classifications for their top cuvées. This can cause tensions with producers who feel that the regulatory bodies are too restrictive and no longer represent the way they want to make wine. So much so, in some cases, that famous appellations such as Saint-Émilion and Cava have seen member producers split away, most recently Château Angélus from Saint-Émilion. So how can you tell who is in the “old” camp and who’s “new”? Ask your local wine merchant. Look at the imagery and description on the label. Or just buy it, try it and make up your own mind. Four new-world wines that could be old-world Bouchon Pais Viejo 2020 £11.84 Weavers of Nottingham, £12.10 Nickolls &amp; Perks, 13%. A vibrant, juicy red you’ll enjoy if you’re into beaujolais. Marea Syrah Valle de Leyda 2019/20 £12.99 (on mix-six) Majestic, 14.5%. A dark, savoury, spicy red that’s more Rhône syrah than shiraz. Found White Grenache 2020 £8 (by the case) Marks &amp; Spencer, 14%. A dry, savoury, full-flavoured South African white of the kind you more commonly find in southern French blends. Block 1A Chardonnay The Lane 2019 £14.75 Corney &amp; Barrow, 12.5%. Tasted blind, you could easily mistake this seductively creamy Aussie chardonnay for burgundy. And one old-world red that tastes new-world Tapa Roja Old Vines Monastrell 2019 £6 (by the case until 31 January, £7 thereafter) Marks &amp; Spencer, £7 Ocado, 13.5%. This fruity, modern, Spanish red gets mixed reviews on the Ocado website, but I think it’s pretty good for the price. Rich, spicy and plummy – spot on for the time of year. • For more by Fiona Beckett, go to matchingfoodandwine.comI have a relationship problem and I feel stuck. I met my partner two years ago via online dating. Since then he has rebuffed all my attempts to meet any of his friends or family members. One time, we ran into a family friend, and he instructed me to hide behind something so I would not be seen with him. I’ve also had to leave his house on more than one occasion because one of his family members was in the neighbourhood. He is unimaginably cruel to me about my appearance, but I can’t bring myself to leave. I do not know how this relationship serves me, but I’m getting older and I’m too scared of what will happen. Recently, I found out that he’s been going on dates with another woman and confiding in her about how much grief I give him. I asked him about this, but he denies any wrongdoing. I’m not bound to this man by anything, it seems. We have no children, and he refuses to talk about the future. The fact that I have stuck around for two years may be linked to my difficult childhood and my self-esteem issues. Please help me with some words of encouragement. I need a gentle jolt in the right direction. What a horrible situation you find yourself in. Sometimes, we’ve become so used to the way things are, we need to tell others what is happening so we can see it for what it is. I would have liked for you to expand when you said, “I’m too scared of what will happen.” I wasn’t sure if you meant you feared for your safety if you left (if so please have a look at the Refuge site), or if you were afraid of being alone. Someone being “unimaginably cruel” about your appearance is someone being abusive. It is done to erode your self-esteem, and he’s succeeding. It’s easy for people to tell you to leave but if it were that easy you would have done it. You say you’re not bound to this man by anything, and it sounds as if you don’t live together. These are massive positives. What support do you have? Family? Friends? Who or what makes you feel good? Spend more time with these people. Do you want to be here, with him, in a year, in five years’ time? If someone you love was being treated like this, how would you feel? What would you tell them? Something compelled you to write in for help, which suggests you know you are worthy of more. But you have another, critical voice that keeps you where you are. Whose is this voice? It sounds like your childhood and self-esteem issues may need exploring with a trusted friend, if not a therapist. A little, personal story. When I was much younger I had a boyfriend who didn’t treat me well. Every day I promised myself I’d end it, but every day I didn’t. He went away on holiday, without me, and asked if he could take my stereo with him. I loved my stereo. I’d saved up for it and bought it when I was 16. It had been everywhere with me. I lent it to him and when he came back he didn’t have it. He made up some stupid excuse, but he had either lost it or sold it for drugs. Incredible and silly though this sounds, what he had done to my stereo angered me so much I found my courage to leave. It isn’t easy but staying with him will be harder in the long run. Please get support and treat yourself as someone you love – someone who deserves to be shown off, not asked to hide. • Every week Annalisa Barbieri addresses a family-related problem sent in by a reader. If you would like advice from Annalisa on a family matter, please send your problem to ask.annalisa@theguardian.com. Annalisa regrets she cannot enter into personal correspondence. Submissions are subject to our terms and conditions: see gu.com/letters-terms. • Conversations With Annalisa Barbieri, a new podcast series, is available here. • Comments on this piece are premoderated to ensure the discussion remains on the topics raised by the article. Please be aware that there may be a short delay in comments appearing on the site.Concacaf has expressed its “extreme surprise and concern” that the St Kitts and Nevis Football Association (SKNFA) has again claimed it consulted the continental governing body over the appointment of a coach accused of sexually abusing and harassing female players in Barbados. Ahmed Mohamed was the subject of an investigation in Barbados after 27 players from the senior women’s team signed a letter at the start of that month urging the Barbados Football Association to investigate claims made by one of their teammates. It understood that the player alleged the coach raped her at a hotel when she was 18 and that she previously received a series of unwelcome text messages from him. Mohamed has not responded to questions from the Guardian. Atiba Harris, the president of the SKNFA, has said Mohamed stepped down as technical director of the BFA last year for “family reasons” and was chosen as the new director of football after Harris “reached out personally” to the BFA president, Randy Harris, who is the president of the Caribbean Football Union (CFU) and a vice-president of Concacaf and “also other officials within Concacaf and Fifa”. However, a Concacaf spokesperson told the Guardian: “At no point has anyone from the St Kitts and Nevis FA contacted the Concacaf administration to seek information regarding this individual.” Fifa said it would be contacting the SKNFA to request more details. Techell McLean, the general secretary of the SNKFA, sent a letter to its member clubs on Thursday reiterating it had “conducted a serious and fulsome due diligence exercise involving consultations with members of the Barbados Football Association, Concacaf and other persons who knew Mr Mohamed personally”. “The SKNFA was and remains fully satisfied that Mr Mohamed is a good character – the allegations made against him being false,” he added. “And he has the requisite technical ability to perform his functions and take SKNFA football to higher levels.” But in a letter that has been seen by the Guardian, Philippe Maggio, Concacaf’s general secretary, directly responded to McLean. “With extreme surprise and concern, we have noticed that the St Kitts Football Federation, through various mediums, has affirmed that Concacaf was consulted in relation to the hiring process of Mr Ahmed Mohamed as technical director of the SKNFA,” it reads. “In this respect, we want to unequivocally reaffirm and stress as we have done in recent days that no one in the Concacaf administration was or has been consulted in relation to the engagement of Mr Mohamed with the SKNFA. Concacaf takes the allegations against Mr Mohamed extremely seriously and have duly noted that Fifa will look into the matter.” It is understood that clubs in Barbados will discuss on Friday whether to call in an independent investigator, with several having privately expressed concerns over the BFA’s handling of the case and its leadership. Randy Harris, who was re-elected unopposed as president of the CFU last year, said he would look into the case on his return to Barbados. “I don’t know of these things that I am hearing about pertaining to the BFA,” he told Barbados Today. “So, I would have to deal with it on my return and see if I could find out if any of these issues are true because they are very serious and no report has been made to the BFA about them.” Asked last week whether he would like to comment about the claim he recommended Mohamed, Randy Harris replied: “No sir.” Mohamed is understood to be in Anguilla with the St Kitts women’s team, who beat their hosts 3-0 in a friendly on Thursday.Boris Johnson gathered his rapidly diminishing No 10 team in the cabinet room on Friday morning and invoked the spirit of the Lion King film, telling them “change is good”. After five senior departures from Downing Street in the past 24 hours alone, including that of his longstanding policy chief Munira Mirza, Johnson’s official spokesman said he had sought to reassure colleagues. “He reflected on the privilege of working in No 10, in order to deliver for the British people, and reiterated his and No 10’s commitment to serving the public by keeping people safe, improving lives and spreading opportunity,” the spokesman said. “The prime minister acknowledges that this is a challenging time as we go through a period of change. But as he reiterated to the whole team today, there’s an important job to do,” he added. The spokesman confirmed that Johnson had said “change is good”, telling aides he was quoting from the Lion King. Mirza quit dramatically on Thursday, citing Johnson’s attempt to smear Keir Starmer over the failure to prosecute the paedophile Jimmy Savile, for which the prime minister has refused to apologise. In a fresh blow for Johnson, health secretary Sajid Javid publicly distanced himself from the prime minister’s remarks about Savile on Friday. He said Keir Starmer had done “a good job” as director of public prosecutions, “and he should be respected for it.” He added, “it’s a tough job and he deserves absolute respect for that”. Javid added that the prime minister had “clarified those remarks, and that’s important”. The chancellor, Rishi Sunak, distanced himself from Johnson for those comments, saying: “I wouldn’t have said it.” Three more resignations were announced later on Thursday, in what was widely seen as an attempt to seize back control of the narrative. But another adviser, Elena Narozanski, then resigned from the No 10 policy unit on Friday morning. Johnson’s spokesman said the three men whose departures were announced on Thursday evening – the communications director, Jack Doyle, the principal private secretary, Martin Reynolds, and the PM’s chief of staff, Dan Rosenfield – would stay on for a short period while their successors are recruited. Reynolds is a civil servant, who is expected to return to his former department of the Foreign Office. The spokesman said recruitment for his post, a powerful role whose holder acts as a gatekeeper to the prime minister, would begin immediately. Johnson had been promising MPs a drastic overhaul of his Downing Street operation since Sue Gray’s report into lockdown parties identified “failures of leadership and judgment”. He told MPs on Monday after the report was published: “I get it and I will fix it.” The prime minister moved quickly on Thursday to appoint Andrew Griffith, who had previously acted as his liaison with Tory MPs, to a ministerial post as the new head of the No 10 policy unit, succeeding Mirza. Johnson’s spokesman said further announcements on a new structure inside No 10 and who would take over from departing staff members, would be made in the coming days. The prime minister has been fighting for his political life since the Metropolitan police announced they would be investigating a string of lockdown gatherings. Tory whips are braced for more potential departures, with the solicitor general, Alex Chalk, reported to be on “resignation watch”. However, while Chalk did raise concerns about the Savile comments during a meeting with Johnson, it is understood he did not threaten to resign. Thursday’s exodus from Downing Street came on a day when No 10 had hoped the headlines would be dominated by Sunak’s measures to alleviate the cost of living crisis – the latest in a packed relaunch week that saw Johnson fly to Ukraine, and the publication of a long-awaited levelling-up white paper.George Fouracres, best known as a comic, recently appeared on the Globe’s stage as Twelfth Night’s Andrew Aguecheek in a piece of exquisite casting. He returns as the avenging prince Hamlet, again under Sean Holmes’s direction, but this is not the Dane or the drama as we know it. It is Hamlet: The Comedy, or a “farcical-dramatical” as Polonius might say, with plenty of quizzical thrown in. Fouracres’s Hamlet is a modern-day Morrissey-singing indie-type stuck inside a period-dress court and speaks in a Black Country accent (Fouracres’ own). Sometimes he japes or raves, occasionally he verges on tears. That is all good and well, but Fouracres also flattens the poetry and rhythm in his character’s magnificent soliloquies, deliberately it seems, speaking them slowly, simplifying them so they sound almost like modern demotic. He also mines his character’s suicidal angst for laughs. This is entertaining – albeit strange, too – but sucks the tragedy out of the play. Fouracres performs with an easy confidence but it seems like pastiche and his antic disposition is flip and wacky without carrying in its pretence a genuine anger and mental upset. The most profound moments – his soliloquies, his ruminations on Gertrude’s hasty marriage and his confrontation with her after Polonius’s death – feel deflated as a result. As an idea, there is great chutzpah in this production and some of it works: Irfan Shamji’s Claudius appears in stripes, like a court jester, and his giggling, giddy dance with Gertrude (Polly Frame, also convincing) in their first scene shows them to be irresponsible, amoral fun-lovers. Anna Watson’s gothic lighting throws big shadows across the walls and the play gradually turns darker after Polonius (well played by John Lightbody) is killed. Ed Gaughan’s score goes from breezy to creepy, with uneasy sounds plucked from an electric guitar. When the comedy momentarily ebbs and characters perform straight-faced, such as Claudius’s prayer scene and Hamlet’s sudden tears just before the dumb show, there are sparks of real tragedy which might have been powerful, if sustained. But it feels like confection because the things that make Hamlet a tragedy and give it emotional intensity are not there – or not for long enough – and we never get beyond the novelty value of the central “comic” idea, which hangs like an ill-fitting coat. The play’s existential depths are not plumbed and neither do we buy into the pain and passion of Hamlet’s romance with Ophelia (Rachel Hannah Clarke). There is no chemistry between them, and when she unravels she appears in modern dress and encourages a sing-along moment in the auditorium. It is an amusing twist, but her character lacks a unified vision. A gender-swapped Laertes (Nadi Kemp-Sayfi) is underpowered in grief and does not bring enough tension to the final duel. The ghost of Hamlet’s father (Ciarán O’Brien) seems like an evil creature when he appears in Gertrude’s bedroom, almost drowning young Hamlet in the set’s small, central pool (nifty design by Grace Smart), which does not cohere with the ghost as a force of moral rectitude in this rotten court. Maybe what is needed with a vision as left-field as this is tautness, but the pace is baggy, the laughs lukewarm and the drama drags. Just when we think we have made it to the gravedigger scene, Gaughan delivers a prolonged skit in which he unpicks its meanings. The production begins to show its intention to reach a younger audience here, explaining the joke about Hamlet’s banishment to England (“The subtext of this bit is that all English people are mad” says Gaughan). Is this, then, a Hamlet desperate to appeal to young audiences? It is certainly a fittingly counterintuitive follow-up to the Globe’s anti-romance Romeo and Juliet, directed last year by Ola Ince. Maybe some will celebrate its fun and daring and there is entertainment in it. But it seems too confusing a melange of comedy and gothic horror with other Shakespearean cross-references thrown in (Romeo and Juliet’s balcony scene and a fleeting impersonation of Richard III). It never quite arrives at tragedy and is, in the end, hoist with its own petard. • At the Sam Wanamaker Playhouse, London, until 9 April.The use of synthetic pesticides in parks and other green public spaces in urban areas is to be banned in the EU, with member states obliged to cut overall use by 50%, according to a leaked draft regulation. The move is said by the European Commission to be necessary owing to the failure of a number of EU member states to act on previous guidance on reducing the use of chemical pest control. Officials say in the draft regulation that as a result of the proposals, “EU consumers could see increasing food prices, which might lead to increased imports from third countries with less strict regulation of pesticide use.” But officials have said they will examine ways to mitigate the impact, adding that the EU needs “to shift to a fair, healthy and environmentally friendly food system”. Under the regulation, pesticides would also be banned in nature protection areas. About 70 towns and cities in the UK are taking steps to reduce pesticide use, but there is not a prohibition in law. A spokesperson for the Pesticide Action Network UK (PAN UK) called on the British government to follow Brussels’ lead. He said: “PAN UK has been calling for such a measure for many years and to see the European Commission bringing forward plans to end the unnecessary use of pesticides in urban areas is very welcome. It will be a huge benefit for the citizens and environment of the EU. PAN UK would like to see the UK follow suit and end the use of pesticides in our towns and cities.” The draft EU regulation, which will need to win the support of member states and the European parliament, received a mixed reaction from environmental activists in mainland Europe. Concerns have been raised over the lack of strictures put on farmers to use methods such as crop rotation and mechanical weeding. Potential loopholes around the 50% target have also been identified, relating to lack of confidence in the collection of accurate data. Sarah Wiener, a Green MEP, said she feared the regulation would amount to empty promises. She said: “The commission’s proposal on the sustainable use of pesticides in the EU is anything but watertight. On the one hand, the commission acknowledges that the old directive gives the member states too much leeway and consequently wants to turn it into a regulation. On the other hand, the commission lists only insufficient measures to implement this basically good idea. “Not only that but the commission does not even want to make the basics of integrated pest management binding, which would be the absolute minimum to achieve lower pesticide use and protect human health and biodiversity.”Journalists working for Rupert Murdoch’s News Corp have had their email accounts hacked in what the company believes was an espionage operation linked to China, raising fears for the safety of confidential sources. The cyber-attack affected a limited number of individuals working for outlets including News UK – the publisher of the Times and the Sun – as well as the Wall Street Journal and the New York Post. “Our preliminary analysis indicates that foreign government involvement may be associated with this activity, and that some data was taken,” said News Corp in an email to staff. The company said it was concerned for the wellbeing of its staff, its journalists and sources who have communicated with its reporters. An initial assessment by the cybersecurity company Mandiant, which was called in when News Corp discovered the apparent attack on 20 January, concluded that the attackers had links to China and “are likely involved in espionage activities to collect intelligence to benefit China’s interests”. News Corp said it was concerned about the protection of its staff and its journalists’ sources following the cyber-attack. “We are working closely with the leadership teams of the affected businesses to inform those employees whose accounts were impacted and help them take appropriate measures.” The email to staff described the attack as a “persistent nation-state attack” that had been contained. News Corp said it did not appear that any financial or user data had been targeted, suggesting the hackers may have been after information relating to its journalism. The company did not disclose how many email accounts were compromised by the Chinese-linked hackers, or what proportion of the compromised company email accounts belonged to its journalists. It does not believe staff at its other subsidiaries – such as the publisher HarperCollins or News Corp Australia – were targeted. Beijing has been accused repeatedly of running an aggressive hacking campaign designed to gather information from private companies and governments around the world. Earlier this week, the FBI director, Christopher Wray, used a speech to accuse the Chinese government of stealing “staggering volumes of information” using “a massive, sophisticated hacking programme that is bigger than those of every other major nation combined”, with well-funded operations based in every major Chinese city. News Corp said it would be informing other news publishers about the cyber-attack “We will not tolerate attacks on our journalism, nor will we be deterred from our reporting, which provides readers everywhere with the news that matters. “We believe it is important that other media organisations be made aware of this threat in order to take appropriate precautions, and we are providing technical details of the attack to the media information sharing and analysis organisation.”The governor of the Bank of England has come under fire from unions and earned a rebuke from 10 Downing Street for suggesting workers should not ask for big pay rises to help control inflation. Andrew Bailey said he wanted to see “quite clear restraint” in the annual wage-bargaining process between staff and their employers to help prevent an upward spiral taking hold. However, his comments drew a furious response from union leaders, as households face the worst hit to their living standards in three decades as soaring energy prices cause inflation to outstrip wage growth. Sharon Graham, the general secretary of Unite, said workers did not cause Britain’s cost of living crisis and should not be asked to pay for it. “Why is it that every time there is a crisis, rich men ask ordinary people to pay for it?” she said. “Enough is enough, we will be demanding that employers who can pay, do pay. Let’s be clear, pay restraint is nothing more than a call for a national pay cut.” Bailey was paid £575,538, including pension, in his first year as the Bank’s governor from March 2020, more than 18 times the UK average for a full-time employee. In a sign of a rift between the government and the Bank, the prime minister’s official spokesperson said pay restraint was not something he was calling for. “We obviously want a high-wage, high-growth economy, and we want people’s wages to increase,” he said. “We recognise the challenge of the economic picture which Andrew Bailey set out; but obviously it’s not up for government to set wages or advise on the strategic direction or management of private companies.” As the Bank raised interest rates to 0.5% on Thursday to tackle inflation, it warned household disposable incomes were on track to shrink by 2% this year, the biggest fall since comparable records began in 1990. It comes after the worst decade for average pay growth since the Napoleonic wars, with inflation-adjusted pay still below the pre-2008 financial crisis peak. The governor’s call for restraint comes after Johnson last autumn criticised company bosses for wanting cheaper workers from the EU. Bailey said restricting wage growth was vital for keeping a grip on inflation, telling the BBC’s Today programme it would help to stabilise the economy after the turbulence of Covid-19. “I’m not saying nobody gets a pay rise, don’t get me wrong. But what I am saying is, we do need to see restraint in pay bargaining, otherwise it will get out of control,” he said. Union leaders said Bailey’s comments were a “sick joke” as workers faced intense pressure to heat their homes and keep food on the table. Gary Smith, the general secretary of the GMB trade union, said: “The nerve of Mr Bailey is scarcely credible. Telling the hardworking people who carried this country through the pandemic they don’t deserve a pay rise is outrageous.” Despite urging restraint over pay, Bailey said it would take at least two years for high rates of inflation to stabilise. “It’s going to be a difficult period ahead, I readily admit, because we are already seeing and we’re going to see a reduction in real income. “We’re going to start coming out of it in 2023. And two years from now we expect we’ll be back on to a more sort of stable, certainly inflation, position.” Economists question whether workers have sufficient bargaining power to demand bumper pay rises, despite low rates of unemployment, after a steady decline in trade union membership since the 1970s when big pay settlements contributed to higher rates of inflation. Kate Bell, the head of economics at the TUC, said inflation was being driven by rising energy costs, not pay demands. “Working people need a pay rise now. And the best way to get one is to join a union,” she said. Threadneedle Street said on Thursday that inflation could peak at about 7.25% in April, up from the current 30-year high of 5.4%. The central bank is set a mandate by the government to target inflation at 2%. Bailey’s comments drew criticism from across the political spectrum. Julian Jessop, an economics fellow at the free-market Institute for Economic Affairs, said that loose monetary policy set by central banks should be blamed for high inflation rather than workers. “People should ask for the biggest pay rise they can get: wages are a relative price, like any other, and should be left to the markets,” he said. David Blanchflower, a member of the Bank’s monetary policy committee between 2006 and 2009, who is critical of the central bank for raising rates, said Bailey’s comments were “clueless”. “Just as real wages go strongly negative, clueless Bailey tells workers it is their fault and need to get lower pay, even though he won’t – public sector workers have had their pay frozen for a decade of Tory rule. What kind of a world is this? Time for workers to tell him to get lost,” he said. Much of the rise in inflation is though outside the Bank’s control, caused by soaring prices on wholesale energy markets and disruption to global supply chains. However, Bailey said he was worried that expectations for high inflation would fuel bigger wage demands, embedding inflationary pressures in a wage-price spiral. The Bank forecasts wage growth, before taking account of inflation, will rise to about 5% later this year amid record job vacancies and low rates of employment. “I’m not saying don’t give your staff a pay rise, this is about the size of it frankly. Show restraint,” Bailey said.Alpe d’Huez – a great all-round family resort Located high on a sunny plateau in the centre of the French Alps, the thriving resort of Alpe d’Huez has some of France’s best snow conditions for downhill and off-piste skiing. Alpe d’Huez Grand Domaine is one of the world’s largest ski areas and boasts one of the greatest unbroken verticals in the world – the 16km-long Sarenne descent. The area is dominated by the mighty Pic Blanc, which is also the starting point for the Sarenne black run. With more than 250 kilometres of sublime slopes, Alpe d’Huez caters for skiers of all abilities. Some of the lower, wider slopes are dedicated to beginners, while maverick intermediate skiers will enjoy the 36 red runs, and more courageous skiers can test out their skills on the numerous black runs. Stay: Club Med’s all-inclusive Alpe d’Huez resort offers ski-in, ski-out access, three types of accommodation (superior, deluxe and suites), lounges, open bar, a heated pool, a spa, night entertainment and a kids’ club, welcoming children from four months old. La Rosière – ski over the border into Italy Spoil your family with a stay in the friendly Franco-Italian resort of La Rosière, situated at 1,858 metres in the Savoie region of France, where visitors can ski across the border into Italy. The resort is steeped in history and tradition, and is dotted with charming traditional chalets built from stone, wood and slate. Almost all the slopes are south-facing, and offer fabulous views of the dramatic mountains. La Rosière is known for the highest snowfall in France. Its proximity to Mont Blanc (the highest mountain in the Alps) and the Col du Petit Saint-Bernard mountain pass guarantees a long ski season. With its 40 sweeping pistes of mostly blue and red runs, the resort is ideal for intermediate skiers. It’s the only Franco-Italian ski resort in the northern Alps and shares the spectacular San Bernardo ski area, which links La Rosière with La Thuile in Italy. Stay: Guests at the Club Med’s new La Rosière resort can opt to stay in the superior room, with balconies offering spectacular views of the surrounding mountains. Non-ski amenities include a yoga school by Heberson Oliveira, fitness activities, a cardio training room, and a heated indoor and outdoor pool. Val Thorens – ideal for groups of friends and couples Val Thorens, in France’s Savoie region, is the highest ski resort in Europe (at 2,300 metres) and offers a strong chance of decent snow with great skiing conditions until early May. It is part of the massive skiable terrain known as Les 3 Vallées, where there are more than 600km of runs and enough space that you never have to ski the same run twice during a week’s holiday. The resort is good for advanced skiers, and the fun atmosphere is perfect for groups and couples. Before leaving Val Thorens, try the zip line from the top of the Bouchet chairlift in Orelle (3,230 metres), which whizzes down the mountain to the Funitel de Thorens in Val Thorens. Stay: Stay at the chic Club Med Val Thorens, where keen climbers can scale the impressive indoor climbing wall, or relax over wine-tasting and exotic cocktails at the Oxygen bar. Les Arcs – enjoy beautiful forest runs Situated in the Tarentaise valley of Savoie, the resort of Les Arcs has long been popular with UK skiers. There are some beautiful and peaceful forest runs to glide through on low-visibility days and wide cruising snow bowl runs to enjoy. The surrounding ski domain of Paradiski offers 425km of long, cruising runs, including 12 green and 132 blue runs for beginners, 65 sleek red runs for intermediate skiers, and 37 challenging black runs for advanced skiers. There’s a slick and ultra-modern lift system that carries skiers and snowboarders swiftly through the pristine mountains. Stay: Club Med’s Les Arcs Panorama is a ski-in, ski-out mountain retreat offering stunning views of the Alps. Upgrade to an Exclusive Collection suite and enjoy access to the Le Belvédère lounge bar and terrace, which features a jacuzzi. The all-inclusive kids’ club offers young skiers lessons with Ecole du ski Français (ESF) professionals. Tignes and Val d’Isère – Fantastic après ski Linked by a network of fast-moving lifts, Tignes and Val d’Isère are in the Savoie region of France and share the vast Val d’Isère-Tignes ski area, where there is 300km of snow-covered terrain to explore. It’s a good choice for early season skiing that’s suitable for all levels. Considered one of the birthplaces of alpine skiing, Val d’Isère (known as “Val” to locals) is also home to some of the most famous après ski and clubbing hotspot in the Alps. Stay: Club Med will open two new locations this year – one in Tignes and the other in Val d’Isère – and guests can now book for the 2022 and 2023 season. Club Med has been in Tignes since 1958 but, in December 2022, the new Tignes 4T family flagship will open its doors at 2,100 metres in the heart of Tignes Val Claret village. This stunning ski-in, ski-out resort includes an ultimate wellness hub with a 33-metre-long indoor heated swimming pool, a spa, a yoga studio, and all-day dining in a cosy piano bar, plus 25 exclusive contemporary luxury suites boasting a private living room space to relax and unwind. Club Med Val d’Isère will be a great choice for families, set in a perfect location in a popular ski resort in the Val d’Isère-Tignes area. It will be Club Med’s first Exclusive Collection 5-Trident resort in the Alps.It’s that time of the year again, when I sit down with my planner and laptop, searching for the perfect winter getaway with the hope to blast away those February blues – and this year, I’m dreaming of snowy vistas and alpine forests. Yearning for those mesmerising blanket-of-snow views and the gloriously cosy après-ski atmosphere, the obvious choice of holiday would be a ski break in the French Alps. Only, I’m not a natural skier. The two times I agreed to go skiing with friends, I had to be coaxed down the red runs by a mate, who patiently held my hand the whole way. I just couldn’t shake my worry around falling. So I decided that skiing wasn’t for me. But while skiing isn’t for me, ski holidays very much are. In fact, I love everything about a ski break – other than the actual skiing. For a start, it’s the perfect opportunity for my group of friends to enjoy some quality time together while getting plenty of fresh air. Val-d’Isère is one of my favourite regions, simply for its maze of cable car and chairlift experiences. During previous trips, I often found myself gasping with excitement as the ground faded beneath my feet and the cable car slowly climbed to dizzying heights, revealing enthralling views of a vast white carpet peppered with Lego-style spruce trees. While the others would take on the black runs, I’d usually spend afternoons tinkering around in village shops looking for hand-created arts and crafts, chatting to the market stallholders and stopping off at cosy cafes for a frothy hot chocolate. My favourite times, however, were when everyone reconvened in the early evening – showered and warm, we would sit around the fire in the après-ski bar sharing anecdotes from our widely varied days. Then we’d enjoy a well-earned sharing pot of gruyère fondue, steaming in its creamy, irresistible goodness. On other nights, a short walk to a restaurant in town would often lead us to more local flavours. We’d spend hours storytelling and reminiscing over fresh steak tartare, a light tartiflette, or raclette – for me, the most delicious food in the world. It couldn’t be any more perfect. The good news for the non-skiers among us is that there are holiday packages, such as those created by Club Med, whose wide range of activities and amenities allow everyone to indulge equally in the regional beauty. The high-altitude resort of Club Med Val Thorens, for example, is home to a luxury Sothys spa offering massages and a whirlpool bath with a stunning view of the mountains – exactly what you need after spending the day tramping through the snow. Club Med’s all-inclusive holidays often include gyms, fitness classes and heated pools – so you can get active without a pair of skis – while lively après-ski entertainment provides fun for every kind of guest. If you’re not a skier but still crave outdoor action and adventure, there are plenty of exciting alternatives in the French Alps. From open-air ice skating to snowmobiling, anyone can now enjoy the stunning views that, previously, could only be experienced by skiers. Here are five of the most alluring options: Snow mountain biking in Val Thorens Proving that these snowy hills aren’t just for the skiers and snowboarders, Val Thorens’ adrenaline-filled mountain biking experience is a thrilling way to experience the region’s wintery beauty. Specialised bikes with studded tyres can be hired at Club Med, and cyclists are free to explore the 370 miles of slopes across the glorious Three Valleys ski area before they open and after they close. Bobsleighing in La Plagne Home to France’s only bobsleigh track, La Plagne’s famous circuit was built in 1992 for the Winter Olympics. Today, the 1,500-metre frozen track is open to the public and takes willing participants up to speeds of 120km/h. Anyone is welcome to undertake a solo run or form a group for a team challenge. Ice skating in Tignes Gliding through the snow on a pair of skis is certainly not the only way to take in the pristine landscape of the Tignes resort. A frozen lake is an 800-square-metre ice rink, providing winter fun for visitors of all ages. Admission is complimentary with a ski pass and skaters can hire boots upon arrival at the lake. Any brave souls keen to explore what goes on below the ice can embark on an ice-diving adventure, too. Nordic and snowshoe walking in Valmorel Exploring the natural forests of the picture-perfect Aigueblanche valleys by foot is perhaps one of the most therapeutic activities to enjoy at this time of the year. Nordic walking (included in the price of Club Med holidays) is the practice of a mindful hike – typically with poles – and is perfect for a full-body workout. Snowshoeing involves wearing specialised footwear that spreads the walker’s weight over a large surface area, allowing them to venture into untouched snow-covered paths. Snowmobiling in Val Thorens Not many holidaymakers get the chance to explore the Alps under a starry night sky. In Val Thorens, the best way to do this is by snowmobile, carving your own path through the untouched snow while winding through the spruce trees. Guests at Club Med have the option to pay a little extra to sign up to one of three guided daily departures, typically leaving between 5:30pm and 8pm. Club Med ski holidays in the French Alps are the ideal winter break – visit here to find out more. Also discover Club Med’s exciting new luxury resorts Club Med Val d’Isère and Club Med Tignes for Winter 2022 and 2023.My body clock always wakes me up early and there’s no better start to a day of skiing than to watch the sunrise. In the French Alps, watching the sunrise feels like the ultimate indulgence. As pink turns to orange over snow-capped mountain peaks, everywhere is still and quiet. The higher you are in the mountains, the better. If there’s time, I usually try to warm up with 20 minutes of yoga. My favourite is sun salutations, mat facing the window. The movement warms up my body and mind, switching on core muscles (ideal for skiing) and gently stretching out any stiffness from the previous day. It’s the perfect, mindful ritual to kick off a day on the slopes, to really notice the mountains before the day of fun begins. Breakfast is crucial if you want to maximise your day. Without it you’ll find energy levels will start to drop by mid-morning, regardless of how much coffee you’ve had. I find fruit and yoghurt with nuts and seeds, followed by eggs for a protein boost, is the ideal start to my day of skiing – although a pain au chocolat often finds its way on to my plate, too. I plan my day using a piste map or the resort app – where to go, where to stop, which runs to ski. If some of your group or family are in ski school, arrange a midday meeting point before you set out, so everyone knows what they are doing in case a phone dies or a splinter group emerges. If it’s your first day, try to organise your ski equipment the day before, so you can get straight on to the pistes in the morning. There’s nothing more frustrating than spending the first few hours of your holiday chasing around after the right pair of boots or skis. A physiotherapist once told me that the best warm-up for skiing is walking to the lifts, so try to walk all the way there or get off the resort shuttle bus a stop early and make your way there on foot. If you’re staying in a ski-in, ski-out hotel (such as Club Med’s resorts in La Rosière, Grand Massif Samoëns Morillon and Val Thorens), take the stairs to breakfast or the ski boot room. Or warm up with a class in Club Med’s yoga school, where the programme has been created by renowned yoga teacher Heberson Oliveira. Then you’re out in the fresh air, clipping on the skis and taking your first run on perfect corduroy, freshly groomed snow. Take it slowly at first and practise every kind of turn you will use throughout the day – short turns to long, carving turns, warming up your muscles and getting your brain into the zone. I like to stop for a hot chocolate or coffee on the mountain at mid-morning for a refuel. Mountain huts are full of character, as are their owners. Lunch on the slopes is a highlight, but I try not to eat too much. If you overeat at lunch, your body starts to use a lot of energy in digesting food, which can make your legs feel wobbly. If you’re enjoying lunch outside in the sunshine, keep topped up with sunscreen – make sure you use at least SPF30. If you still have some energy, skiing until the lifts close is a must and slopes start to get less crowded as the day wears on. My favourite trick is to enjoy a hot chocolate, or cheeky vin chaud, at the highest restaurant in the resort and wait until the crowds clear before skiing down as the sun starts to set. It gets chilly, but is worth the effort as the mountains take on a magical aura at sunset. Just make sure you don’t miss the last lift back. There may be more restrictions on après this year due to Covid, but toasting the memories of another fantastic day of skiing is a must. Why not hop into a hot tub or, if you’re staying at a Club Med resort, relax your muscles with a swim in a heated pool – there’s no better way to wind down and soothe tired legs. Finally, indulge in a hearty supper – you’ve earned it! If you’re going for a cheese fondue or raclette, eat slowly – there’s always a time lag on feeling full and all of a sudden you can feel uncomfortably full (we’ve all done it). I’m such a ski purist that I love an early night, sinking into my duvet with a book and cup of hot water – at altitude it’s important to keep hydrated. If you can get between seven and nine hours’ sleep, the ideal number of hours according to experts, you’ll be fresh and raring to go skiing the next day. And what can be better than waking up to watch the sunrise in the mountains before a day of skiing? Nothing, as far as I’m concerned. Club Med ski holidays in the French Alps are the ideal winter break – visit here to find out more. Also discover Club Med’s exciting new luxury resorts Club Med Val d’Isère and Club Med Tignes for Winter 2022 and 2023.The government has been forced to publish documents that reveal how the disgraced former Conservative MP Owen Paterson directly lobbied a senior minister for a healthcare firm that was paying him to be a consultant. Paterson contacted Matt Hancock, then health secretary, in the early stages of the Covid pandemic to promote Randox, a healthcare firm that paid him £100,000 a year. Randox was awarded contracts worth nearly £500m during the pandemic without any other firms being given the opportunity to bid for them. The new documents reveal that following Paterson’s lobbying, Hancock chased his officials, saying he was “very worried” about how his department was treating Randox and other firms. Paterson told Hancock that he was “exasperated” that the government was slow to respond to Randox’s offer to help deal with the pandemic. Amid regular contact between the two politicians via WhatsApp, Paterson also appeared, after an article in the Guardian, to ask Hancock to “kill once and for all” the suggestion that Randox had been awarded a contract because he was being paid by the firm. Hancock appeared to agree. Labour MPs used a parliamentary motion to compel the government to publish documents. The Department of Health and Social Care had resisted disclosing documents relating to Randox amid criticism of cronyism. Last November, Paterson resigned from the House of Commons after an official investigation found he had broken parliamentary rules when he lobbied for Randox and another firm. The investigation by the parliamentary standards commissioner had been started after an investigation by the Guardian into Paterson’s lobbying activities. The documents were published by health secretary, Sajid Javid, who told parliament: “There are robust rules and processes in place to ensure that all contracts are awarded in line with procurement regulations and transparency guidelines … Ministers are not involved in the assessment and evaluation process for contracts.” They show how Paterson contacted Hancock on 26 January 2020 highlighting the services that Randox could offer to combat Covid. Hancock responds swiftly asking Randox for more information about potential Covid tests. On 25 February, as the pandemic began to take hold, Paterson complained to Hancock that it was “now 19 days since Public Health England (PHE) last contacted Randox at your request”. He added that kits to detect Covid were being shipped abroad, adding that “PHE’s attitude looks incomprehensible given current developments and time pressures”. Five minutes later, Hancock responded to Paterson, saying: “Are you sure? I chased them again about it yesterday.” Paterson complained that Randox had offered help to PHE, but added: “There was no sense of urgency … exasperating!” Hancock asked his officials for “chapter and verse” on how his department was dealing with commercial companies, adding: “I am very worried about this … if we are treating other companies like this we are failing.” On 1 March 2020, an official told Hancock that Randox was one of the firms whose technology had been prioritised for testing by the health department. Later that month, the Department of Health and Social Care awarded Randox a £133m contract to carry out Covid tests. It awarded the firm a second contract, worth £347m, in October 2020. Both contracts were given to the firm without other firms being given the opportunity to compete for them. The government suspended the normal rules on holding open competitions for public sector contracts under emergency powers designed to speed up the process during the pandemic. One civil servant raised concerns that the second contract had been awarded without competition, while another said the government was “paying dramatically over the odds”. In October 2020, Paterson appeared to send Hancock a message saying the Guardian “yet again ran the story that you only gave Randox the testing contract because I am a paid consultant. If it comes up can you kill this once and for all I know absolutely nothing about the contract.” The answer, on WhatsApp, appeared to come back from Hancock: “of course”. Paterson declared in his communications with the government that he was paid by Randox. A Randox spokesperson said: “It is clear from these papers that Randox contracts were awarded in full compliance with government procedures and protocols in place at a time of the emerging pandemic.” A spokesperson for Hancock said: “The extensive transparency publication proves Matt did nothing wrong. To suggest Matt should have ignored the UK’s biggest existing testing capacity because he was being contacted by Owen Paterson is absurd and would have been a dereliction of duty.”It can be tricky to find a winter family holiday that ticks all the boxes for everyone – somewhere young children can be entertained, teenagers can have fun, make friends and be semi-independent, and everyone can enjoy some family time together while also (especially the parents) finding time to relax, alone or as a couple. When my children were small, my main requirements from a winter holiday were that there was no cooking and cleaning to be done, and someone would help out with the kids at least some of the time. I’d also hope for good food, the occasional cocktail, activities for all and, if there was a spa and pool available, so much the better. Many parents, like me, want to spend time with their children on holiday while also having some time to themselves. They want luxury accommodation designed with families in mind and a break from dealing with life’s day-to-day organisation. Children generally want to have fun both with their parents and with kids of their own age, with plenty of activities on tap. For me, a ski break in the French Alps delivers all of the above. It also creates really special bonding moments. I don’t know whether it’s the adrenaline from all the outdoor exertion, the sublime mountain views or the indulgent food – or all three – that puts everyone in such good spirits. Then there’s the fact that many resorts in the French Alps, such as La Rosière, Grand Massif Samoëns Morillon and Alpe d’Huez, cater for skiers of different abilities, and offer plenty of fun activities for non-skiers too – making them a good choice for families. My first ski holiday with children was when they were just six months and two years old – a very different experience to the “do what you want, when you want” ski holidays of pre-parenthood. On-site childcare we could trust was an absolute must – we wanted to be able to make the most of the mountains and the children were obviously too young to ski. It was fabulous to get out and about by ourselves, while also knowing the kids were happy and in safe hands before we came back to collect them to take them sledging or to build snowmen. Skiing with your children once they are old enough can be a beautiful, bonding experience (although actually teaching them is usually best left to experts who are adept at making the experience fun and stress-free). It’s incredibly exciting to see them making their first turns and showing off what they’ve learned that morning in the jardin des neige, and then, when they are a little older, exploring the mountains together. Small children love the magical wonder of the snow, the fun of learning something new, the exciting sensations of sledging and snowball fights and the thrill of receiving their first Piou Piou badge to commemorate what they learned in ski school that week. Teens love the thrill of speed (especially overtaking their parents!), mastering new skills, and the opportunity to try a range of mountain activities. Skiing is something the whole family can enjoy together, from tiny toddlers mastering their snowplough to almost-independent teens mastering moguls and jumps. There aren’t that many activities that can keep an entire family happy – but skiing is certainly one of them. When it comes to accommodation, an all-inclusive holiday package can make budgeting easy and life simple. At Club Med, almost everything is included, from travel, kids’ clubs (for those aged four and above), lift passes and ski lessons, to premium drinks, snacks and gourmet meals, usually with a choice of restaurants. So you’ll know exactly what your trip will cost in advance, with no surprise hidden extras and no tedious signing for drinks or totting up bills. One of the most popular Club Med resorts for families is Les Arcs Panorama, a ski-in, ski-out location set at 1,750 metres in one of the largest ski areas in the world, Paradiski in the French Alps. It offers kids’ clubs for all ages from four months to 17 years (at no extra cost for those aged four and above). Ski lessons are included so children can learn to ski or snowboard, or improve their technique with ESF guides. Older children can join the Teen Snow Sports Programme, learning to ski moguls, slalom through the trees or perfect their powder skills. In the evenings, they can enjoy discos or watch a film. If you really want to up the luxury then opt for Club Med’s new and first exclusive collection ski resort in Val d’Isère, which holidaymakers can now book for winter 22/23. Set right on the pistes with interiors designed by Parisian designers Studio Marc Hertrich and Nicolas Adnet, all rooms include a lounge area and the main restaurant is chalet-style. Other features include an indoor pool, yoga school by Heberson Oliveira, room service, private transfers and champagne served from 6pm – the ultimate luxurious ski experience. Club Med ski holidays in the French Alps are the ideal winter break – visit here to find out more. Also discover Club Med’s exciting new luxury resorts Club Med Val d’Isère and Club Med Tignes for Winter 2022 and 2023.Alex Greenwood is in the grip of an addiction she never wants to kick. “I’m obsessed with football,” says the Manchester City and England defender. “Often, at home, all Jack and I talk about is football, we watch it and analyse it all the time. People ask what I do to get away from the game but I don’t want to escape it.” “Jack” is Jack O’Connell, the Sheffield United defender, famed for his ability as an overlapping centre-half, although a serious knee injury dictates that he has spent the past 18 months watching Greenwood perfect her transition from left-back to left-sided centre-half. “I wouldn’t want to try overlapping though,” jokes the 28-year-old as she prepares for Sunday’s all important Women’s Super League match at Chelsea. “That Sheffield United system was so unique I’m not sure it would be the style for me.” Gareth Taylor’s City play a different way but they, like Sheffield United at their Premier League peak under Chris Wilder, have recently begun blind-siding opponents once more. After recovering from a dismal start to the season, last year’s WSL runners-up travel to face the defending champions only five points behind Emma Hayes’s second-placed side. Fifth is still not where City want to be but, as last weekend’s 8-0 FA Cup demolition of Nottingham Forest emphasised, they are renascent. Given that 12 senior players spent pre-season on international duty at the Tokyo Olympics and an injury crisis engulfed the squad, Greenwood never panicked. “Every time we got a knockback it was tough and frustrating,” says the former Everton, Notts County, Liverpool, Manchester United and Lyon defender. “But, inside the camp, we knew results would improve and we always, absolutely 100%, believed in Gareth. In terms of what we do, not a lot has changed between the start of the season and now. We had the injuries and some new players and it was always going to take time for them to adjust and adapt to the way we play.” Along the way, City coped with the injury-induced absences of England’s goalkeeper, right-back and captain, but the recent return of Ellie Roebuck – a good friend of Greenwood – in goal and Lucy Bronze and Steph Houghton in defence has galvanised both Taylor’s team and one of the most intriguing WSL title races in recent years. After winning four trophies, including the 2020 Champions League, during a season spent at Lyon, Greenwood has no interest in treading water – and particularly not in the year when England hosts the European Championship. Although she remains in regular contact with the former England manager Phil Neville – “A top fella and a good person; it’s always nice to hear from Phil and have some banter about the Manchester clubs,” she says – her disappointment at his relocation to Inter Miami has been leavened by Sarina Wiegman’s installation as the Lionesses’ coach. After leading the Netherlands to Euro 2017 glory then to the final of the 2019 World Cup in France, Wiegman is tasked with improving on England’s run of semi-final appearances at major tournaments. “I love her,” says Greenwood, a Lionesses stalwart since winning a bronze medal at the 2015 World Cup in Canada. “She’s straightforward and quite direct and leaves no stone unturned. We believe in her – Sarina’s very good and what we needed. But she also gives us freedom to be ourselves; she never wants to change who you are.” This month England limber up for the Euros with a friendly tournament, the Arnold Clark Cup, involving Canada, Spain and Germany. O’Connell will doubtless “point little things out” as he assesses Greenwood’s international performances in Middlesbrough, Norwich and Wolverhampton. Yet the day cannot come soon enough when she, too, can offer him the “constructive” footballing criticism the pair have traded since he returned from an expat childhood in Málaga and they met as sixth formers at school on Merseyside. Until the start of last season their parallel careers ran on upward trajectories but, since O’Connell’s injury, there have been two operations and a brief, failed comeback. It cannot have been an easy time and, although Sheffield United remain optimistic he will make a full recovery, Greenwood is protective of his privacy. It is, though, safe to assume the day she returns to Bramall Lane to watch him play again will rank among the happiest of their time together. By then Greenwood believes City should be well on course for European qualification. “At times this season it felt like it was the world was against us but we knew it was a matter of time before things changed,” she says. “Everyone wrote us off but we had a belief we could surprise them.” Get to know the players in England’s top flight better with our WSL player in focus series. Read all our interviews at hereWeeks after the 2020 election, Donald Trump reviewed a draft executive order that authorized the national guard to seize voting machines and verbally agreed to appoint Sidney Powell, a campaign lawyer and conspiracy theorist, as special counsel to investigate election fraud. The two previously unreported actions of the former president – which is certain to interest the House select committee investigating the Capitol attack and Trump’s efforts to overturn his defeat – came during a contentious White House meeting on 18 December 2020. Trump never followed through with issuing a formal executive order authorizing the seizure of voting machines or appointing a special counsel. But four sources with detailed knowledge of what transpired during the 18 December meeting described to the Guardian how close he came to doing so. The draft executive order Trump reviewed was one of the final versions Powell had prepared. An early version of the document was published by Politico. Another version, obtained by CNN, empowered the Department of Homeland Security instead of the Department of Defense. But all versions included language that would have allowed Trump to appoint a special counsel to investigate claims of foreign interference in the 2020 election, which the Department of Justice had already determined were without foundation. The draft executive order seen by Trump was retained automatically by the White House as a presidential record. It was recently turned over to the select committee by the National Archives after the supreme court rejected Trump’s appeal to block its release. Trump was handed the document when he sat down with four informal advisers – Powell, Trump’s former national security advisor Michael Flynn, former Trump aide Emily Newman and former Overstock chief executive Patrick Byrne – who had arrived at the White House unannounced. The group had not scheduled an audience with Trump, but after Byrne messaged an acquaintance, they were cleared to enter the White House by Garrett Ziegler, a policy aide to former Trump advisor Peter Navarro, and Patrick Weaver, an aide with the National Security Council. It is understood that the four were not registered in the West Wing guest access system as meeting with the former president, which may have violated national security protocols. In a statement, Byrne said Trump had called the group into the Oval Office after he saw Flynn, his former national security adviser, with the rest of the group about 25ft from the room. Eric Herschmann, a White House senior adviser, slipped in behind them. Trump first reviewed the draft executive order and documents brought by Powell, including a physical copy of Trump’s executive order 13848 that authorized sweeping powers in the event of foreign election interference, as she ran through the supposed legality of suspending normal law. Powell and Newman told Trump that he could rely on that order and classified National Security Presidential Memoranda 13 and 21 – cyber-security memos referenced in Powell’s draft executive order – to have the national guard seize voting machines. That prompted pushback from the former White House counsel Patrick Cipollone, who had joined the meeting with former White House staff secretary, Derek Lyons, who supported Cipollone’s claim that Trump lacked the constitutional authority to take such measures. Byrne made another attempt to convince Trump to appoint Powell as special counsel and have Flynn act as “field marshal” to coordinate her efforts. The draft executive order said Flynn would be “direct liaison” to coordinate the “applicable US departments and agencies”. Byrne claimed Trump had a range of options. He could decide whether to investigate election fraud in six, 12 or 31 states; whether to “image” hard drives in voting machines or seize them; and whether to have that done by the national guard, DHS or the FBI. Trump appeared open to such advice. Late that Friday night, two of the sources said, he told Cipollone he would just make Powell special counsel. When Cipollone said Powell would need a security clearance, which he said was probably impossible, Trump said he would grant it. But after nearly all of Trump’s formal advisers shot down Powell’s suggestions, Trump did not sign the draft executive order. Instead, he instructed Powell to coordinate with his attorney, Rudy Giuliani, about seizing voting machines or appointing a special counsel. That posed a problem for Powell, who had been ejected from the Trump campaign’s legal team a few weeks beforehand at Giulaini’s behest. The group then tried again to cajole Trump into issuing some sort of executive order, since Trump still appeared intrigued. But when Trump summoned Giuliani, the former president’s attorney said the gambit would work only in the event of clear foreign interference. Powell, who had spent the previous weeks filing lawsuits alleging that Iran and China hacked into voting machines, sprang up and announced both to everyone in the room and a coterie of aides who had been dialled in on a conference call, that she had a file full of such evidence. Giuliani looked at the documents but told Trump that Powell’s evidence was worthless, accusing her of producing one witness who was willing to testify about foreign election interference and around 10 who had simply signed affidavits saying they agreed. Top advisers including Cipollone and Lyons have told associates they did not think the exchange about making Powell special counsel was serious. But Trump continued for days to mull the special counsel and voting machine ideas. A spokesperson for Trump and a spokesperson for Cipollone did not respond to requests for comment. Powell, Giuliani and Lyons did not respond either. A spokesman for the select committee declined to comment on how the meeting might feature in its investigation. Powell told associates she believed Trump made a decision to authorize her to be a special counsel of some nature. The following day, she called the White House chief of staff, Mark Meadows, saying she needed office space and a security clearance as the new special counsel. Meadows did not refute Powell’s claim but told her he was working on logistics, and then called Giuliani to tell him Powell was trying to secure another audience with Trump. Giuliani told Meadows that Trump had barred Powell from the White House. But while Meadows and other advisers had refused to grant Powell a “hard pass” that would have allowed her unfettered access to the complex, she returned to the White House on Sunday and Monday with documents on alleged Iranian threats to US election websites. Meadows had revoked Ziegler’s access to the system for permitting White House access but Powell was cleared on a temporary “appointment” pass by another aide. She was, however, blocked from meeting the former president.Whether it’s rewilding the garden or setting up a bee hotel, many of us are rethinking our relationship with the natural world and becoming more nurturing. But what of the often maligned fox? Shouldn’t we include it? I asked Trevor Williams, the founder of fox rescue charity the Fox Project, if we should feed them. Hi, Trevor! Seen any good foxes today? No, I’m too old to go out with the ambulances, though sometimes I bottle-feed the cubs. Cute! Speaking of feeding, I met someone who said they leave dog food out for the foxes claiming it was a) nice, and b) stopped them going through the bins. Is this genius or madness? Generally we suggest people don’t feed foxes, because it will undermine their territory if they can’t be bothered to go farther afield. Also, foxes don’t just take what they need – they take what’s available and bury it for later. And if it’s constantly turning up in nextdoor’s flowerpots, they may end up getting in someone to deal with the foxes lethally. Lethal? But foxes don’t count as pests, they’re wild. Wouldn’t that be illegal? Not quite. There are protections under the Wild Mammals Act, which make certain ways of killing illegal, but pest controllers use legal methods. Thankfully, most people like to see wildlife in their gardens, and feeding them can draw them in. So, if you’re doing that, feed a mixture of protein and roughage – their natural diet includes bone, fur, feather – and only a small amount, so they still need to scavenge. It’s just about compassion. Especially if there’s a hard winter. I love it when my vulpine visitors curl up on the shed in the sun, like a furry croissant. They’re keeping me up these days, though. It’s mating season. If it’s one voice, the sound is them calling to their chosen mate. Two voices means they’re meeting up, and that can be snappy. The vixen only comes into season for three days a year, so there can be a lot of attention from the male. Who hasn’t been the fox that calls too much, or the vixen snapping back, am I right, Trevor? Anyway, do people still think of foxes as dangerous? Some do, but there’s definitely been a change. In 2010, twin babies were attacked by a fox. People were phoning us saying: “Why are you defending foxes? Our children are in danger.” In 2018, a child was bitten and people called us, but they were asking for advice on deterring foxes, saying: “We know foxes don’t act like that normally.” That’s amazing progress. I’m very much here for the ever closer bond of humans and the wild. They need us, we need them … They don’t really. Wildlife can do perfectly well without us. Even in London, where people might think life is hard, there are plenty of rodents and birds. We’ve never seen an emaciated fox, unless it’s really unwell. They will always find food. OK, fine – it’s still nice to be together, though. Of course. It’s the power of seeing wildlife. You look a fox in the eye and you have a special connection. I remember an older lady telling me she lived in a dreadful concrete area in London but that she occasionally saw kestrels and foxes. And she said: “That gives me heart, because if they can make a living under the circumstances then I can, too.”Tahini is one of my most-used ingredients, especially in cakes. When paired with something sweet like honey, it really shines. I can’t get enough of that classic sweet and salty flavour combination, and this cake is all about that. The tahini brings a deeply savoury vibe, which makes it great for those who aren’t into overly sweet desserts. The sticky, buttery glaze on the sesame-studded crust is my favourite bit – I always save it until last. Salty honey and tahini loaf Prep 15 min Cook 55 min Serves 8 130g unsalted butter 200g caster sugar 70g tahini 1½ tsp vanilla bean paste 40g honey 3 large eggs 220g plain flour 1½ tsp baking powder ¼ tsp bicarbonate of soda ¼ tsp salt 50g plain yoghurt 1 tbsp sesame seeds For the glaze 40g honey 20g unsalted butter A big pinch of flaky sea salt Heat the oven to 180C (160C fan)/350F/gas 4. Grease and line a 900g loaf tin. In a large bowl, cream the butter, sugar, tahini and vanilla until pale and fluffy, then mix in the honey. Add the eggs one at a time, beating well after each addition. Sift the flour, baking powder, bicarb and salt into a separate bowl, then pour half of it into the butter mixture and stir until just combined. Stir in the yoghurt, followed by the rest of the flour mixture. Transfer the batter into the tin, smooth the surface and top with the sesame seeds. Bake for 50-55 minutes, until the top is golden and a skewer inserted into the centre comes out clean. While the cake bakes, make the glaze. Put the honey, butter and salt together into a small saucepan. Heat, stirring, until the butter has melted. When the cake comes out of the oven, pour the glaze on top and let it cool before slicing. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from OcadoThe Omicron variant is causing record numbers of new Covid infections in Russia and Ukraine, threatening to impact military calculations over Russia’s continued troop buildup. Analysts have cited various factors as possible contributors to whether and how Russia will launch an assault on Ukraine, ranging from Vladimir Putin’s psychological state to the strength of the western response and even the firmness of the ground during a mild winter in the region. Covid is emerging as another element that may complicate plans for the Russian and Ukrainian armies, as record case numbers in both societies are replicated among the troops. Gen Oleksandr Syrskyi, the commander of the Ukrainian land forces, told the Guardian that from about 150,000 soldiers in his ranks, 2,400 were infected by Covid. Testing was taking place only before special events or in the case of symptoms, he said, suggesting the real number might be much higher. Ukrainian military bases have been closed to visitors to help prevent the spread. “It’s not dramatically affecting our plans, because few people are getting seriously ill, but of course we are having to ensure isolation of cases and also to be more careful with mask-wearing and other anti-Covid measures,” he said, in an interview at the Boryspil military airfield on Thursday. Ukrainian officials believe Covid has swept through the Russian soldiers placed close to the border and participating in exercises in neighbouring Belarus. Ukraine’s ministry of health said on Friday morning that 43,778 new infections had been registered in the past day, the highest total since the pandemic began. It was an increase of more than 4,000 on the previous day, which also set a record. The Omicron variant has also hit hard in Russia, where an all-time high for new cases was also reported on Friday, with 168,201 new infections in the past 24 hours. Both the Russian and Ukrainian armies have much higher rates of vaccination than among their respective general populations, where vaccine scepticism is widespread. In both countries, less than half of the population has been fully vaccinated. The Moscow Times calculated recently that Russia has had nearly a million excess fatalities since the beginning of the pandemic. Syrskyi said 99.3% of the Ukrainian army had received two doses of a vaccine, and that booster shots were being rolled out. As of November, 95% of Russia’s army personnel has been vaccinated and 25% received boosters, according to the defence minister, Sergei Shoigu. “Lethality of Covid is 45 times lower among army personnel than in the population at large,” Shoigu claimed in a meeting with Putin. Still, the sheer number of current infections means large numbers of troops will be taken out of action for days at a time as Putin continues to keep the world guessing about his intentions. British and US officials have said a major Russian military assault may be “imminent”, and on Thursday, US intelligence claimed to have information that the Russians were preparing a staged video of an atrocity to act as a pretext to intervene. Syrskyi said Ukrainian forces were ready for anything, but echoed other Ukrainian officials in dismissing the idea that a major military assault was imminent, instead saying the Kremlin goal seemed to be to exert psychological pressure and create panic in Ukrainian society. “We see training, we see movement, but we don’t see direct attack preparations or the preparation of strike forces,” he said. He added that basic military doctrine suggested the Russians would need three times as many attack forces as Ukraine had defensive troops in order to launch an attack, and said Russia currently did not have this on any section of the Ukrainian border. “We would also expect to see logistics bases, field hospitals. This is all visible from space, we will know if and when it starts to happen,” he said.A man who exploited a modern slavery victim found living in a squalid shed has been given a suspended prison sentence. Peter Swailes Jr, 56, was sentenced to a nine-month jail term, suspended for 18 months, at Carlisle crown court on Friday. The victim, who cannot be named for legal reasons, had been “used and exploited” for 40 years by the defendant’s father, Peter Swailes Sr, the court heard. He was forced to live in a horsebox, a disused caravan and more recently in a small shed on a residential site north of Carlisle. Swailes Jr initially denied the charge but pleaded guilty last month to conspiracy to arrange or facilitate the travel of another with a view to exploitation on the basis that he was unaware of the victim’s living conditions. Peter Swailes Sr, 80, who died last year while awaiting trial, had denied the offence. Swailes Jr accepted that from “time to time” his father would contact him and arrange for the victim to undertake work with him, and that “on occasion” he paid him less than his minimum entitlement. At the sentencing hearing, Judge Richard Archer told Swailes Jr: “You may not have known the true extent of (the victim’s) living conditions, or his precise IQ, but it must have been obvious to you that he did not have any real appreciation for the potential consequences of some of the work that you required him to perform at an undervalue and with little or no regard for his personal safety.” The charges followed a three-year investigation by the Gangmasters and Labour Abuse Authority, supported by Cumbria police and the National Crime Agency, after a man was found living in a 2-metre (6ft) shed with a soiled duvet on the floor. The victim, aged 58 at the time of his rescue, now lives in supported accommodation outside Cumbria and has been helped by the charity City Hearts, which supports survivors of modern slavery. Spokesperson Diane Peters, said: “City Hearts are both disheartened and disappointed with the sentence given at Carlisle crown court today. “However it is important to recognise that a successful prosecution has been made, which is rare in modern slavery cases, and many survivors in our care do not get their horrendous ordeals heard in court. It is important for us that the client now has closure and can move on with his life.” Speaking via the charity, the victim said: “I was kept in a padlocked shed on a mattress, unable to leave unless I was told I could. I didn’t run away because I had nowhere else to go. “I now go on daily walks just because I can. I enjoy long walks to the shops, watching football, and have made new friends.” Following a childhood in the care system, the victim was 18 years old when he was approached by Swailes Sr and invited to work for him doing various jobs, the court was told. Barbara Webster, prosecuting, said the victim had a low IQ and “very little understanding of the world around him”. “He was found by the police living in a rotten shed, with water pouring through it, with a make-shift bed, and congealed vomit in the corner,” she told the court. “In stark contrast, the family dog lived in much more comfortable surroundings.” “He had few possessions to show for his 40 years’ hard work. He only had a wash bag, three second-hand coats, a few stained duvets, and CDs.” Judith McCullough, defending, said Swailes Jr was “shocked and angered to see the full picture once these proceedings were under way … he has genuine remorse for his role in this offence,” she told the court. The GLAA senior investigating officer, Martin Plimmer, said: “This has been a truly harrowing and traumatic case. I cannot remember an investigation where the exploitation of a vulnerable worker has taken place over such a long period of time.”Conservative MPs have privately been venting their anger at the appointment of a former Sky executive, who entered parliament in 2019, as the replacement for Munira Mirza as the head of No 10’s policy unit. MPs from northern “red wall” areas were particularly vehement about the promotion of Andrew Griffith, a former investment banker representing a safe Tory seat in West Sussex, to a key role in shaping new government ideas. “What does he know about real life?” asked one new northern Tory MP, who had not yet submitted a letter of no confidence in Boris Johnson but suggested Griffith’s arrival would “probably mean more letters”. Even one MP who spoke highly of Griffith said moving him to replace Mirza “shouldn’t have been done quite so quickly and brutally”. Griffith is – outwardly at least – a supporter of classic low-tax, deregulatory Conservatism whose appointment could mean a pivot away from the “culture wars” sometimes associated with Mirza. But while they acknowledge his business acumen, many of his colleagues doubt Griffith is sufficiently politically minded to do the job effectively. Griffith, who became the MP for the safe seat of Arundel and South Downs in 2019 after two failed bids in Corby, grew up in the London suburb of Bromley before studying law and becoming a chartered accountant. After a stint at Rothschild investment bank, he joined Sky in 1999 and rose to the top of the broadcaster during its Murdoch years, becoming the group’s finance chief in 2008 and later chief operating officer. He was an early supporter of the leadership ambitions of Johnson, who used Griffith’s lavish Westminster townhouse as a base for plotting out his first 100 days in office. When Mirza was appointed to head up the policy unit in 2019, Griffith was made No 10’s chief business adviser, working to mend relations for a new prime minister who reputedly said “fuck business” when confronted with companies’ concerns over Brexit. In 2021, Johnson appointed Griffith as parliamentary private secretary, a role that acts as a conduit between MPs and government. Many MPs view him as having been partially responsible for the subsequent breakdown in relations between backbenchers and No 10, with one saying there had been a “resounding call from the backbenchers” to remove him from the position. Among those welcoming Griffith’s appointment this week was David Soskin, a former special adviser to John Major, who tweeted that the MP had “enjoyed a glittering career outside the bubble” and who “understood Conservative values”. “We now need a policy reset with a particular emphasis on deregulation, economic growth and tax reduction,” Soskin added. His tweet was “liked” by Griffith’s own account.Paul Nicholls was the last British trainer to land the Irish Gold Cup, with Neptune Collonges in 2009, and his decision to send Frodon to the latest renewal at Leopardstown on Saturday adds further depth to what was already a fascinating contest. Kemboy, who always gives his best over this track and trip, leads the home defence along with Minella Indo, last year’s Cheltenham Gold Cup winner, and Asterion Forlonge, who fell at the last when booked for second in the King George on Boxing Day. Frodon (3.15) was a long way below his best in the King George but Bryony Frost’s mount was taken on for the lead there and should have an easier time in front on Saturday. This also looks like his major target for the second half of the season, and he is a decent bet at around 3-1 to extend Nicholls’s current win streak in Ireland to four. Sandown 1.15 All eight runners go to post with a chance but Rikoboy looks overpriced at around 6-1 after a promising return from a 10-month break last month. Leopardstown 1.35 Five are unbeaten in Ireland’s only Grade One juvenile hurdle before Cheltenham, while Vauban, a half-length second to Pied Piper on debut, will tie the form to the current Triumph favourite. Ben Siegel, an easy winner in a strong time in November, is overlooked in the market at around 16-1 but has significant scope for improvement and an excellent each-way alternative to the market leaders. Sandown 1.50 Goshen is very difficult to catch right but his latest run at Lingfield was his best for a while and this return to Sandown, where he won impressively as a four-year-old, should suit. Musselburgh 2.05 Cool Mix generally gives his running and has dropped back to his last winning mark so looks the obvious bet here at around 3-1. Sandown 2.20 L’Homme Presse has made rapid progress from his successful chasing debut off 122 in December and can complete his rise through the ranks with a Grade One victory here. Wetherby 2.30 The betting implies a stroll for Ahoy Senor but Saint Palais has progressed with every start over fences, put up a new career-best last time and has a better chance than odds of 3-1 might suggest. Musselburgh 2.40 Glory And Honour gets a quick chance to follow up his solid run at Cheltenham last weekend. Sandown 2.55 Born Patriot, a 9-1 shot, goes well on this ground and has more scope than most of his rivals. Sandown 3.30 One bad mistake cost Linelee King last time and he can make amends here. Musselburgh 3.45 Highland Hunter ran well into second in the Welsh National last time and gets in off the same mark here.Beijing 2022 has officially begun. The protests against it – and the People’s Republic of China – will continue, the arguments will rage on, and the sport itself is sure to be compelling. Thanks for reading today and see you soon for more. “Many people are choosing not to watch the Beijing Olympics and have made the #IWillNotWatch pledge due to severe and systematic human rights abuses committed by the Chinese Communist Party in Hong Kong, Tibet, Xinjiang (where genocide and crimes against humanity are alleged) and China proper,” writes Brian on email. “My kids and I love to watch the Olympics, so it is with sadness we made this pledge. We are from Hong Kong and managed to get out, but many of our friends and hundreds of other political prisoners are in prison there as I write. It would sicken me to enjoy watching the Olympics while they are left to rot in their cells for no other crime than advocating for their basic human rights. I hope the IOC changes its ways and no longer allows dictatorships to host the Games (this goes for FIFA too: no more Qatars!).” Links below to all our Beijing 2022 content from today, including a news piece on the meeting between Xi Jinping and Vladimir Putin: Shelley Rudman has high hopes for British success at the Beijing Winter Olympics but admits the coronavirus situation surrounding the Games makes medal predictions tricky. The sporting showpiece in China is taking place under strict protocols due to the pandemic. Great Britain have a medal target of between three and seven, having secured a record five at each of the last two editions. Rudman, who claimed skeleton silver for GB at the Turin 2006 Games, said: “I think it’s a really hard Games to put medals around people’s necks because it is such a different situation. I’m just happy they have all got out there and I think all the athletes are going ‘oh my goodness, we’ve got here, we’ve done it.’ “It [conditions at the Games] is definitely a challenge. Even just moving around the village, I think some of the athletes will be really worried about coming into contact with a Covid case, because then it means they have to quarantine, and if it’s close to their event, that’s really going to disrupt them. I think they just have to be really careful that they try to avert disaster as much as they can. So long they can avoid over-thinking about Covid, which is going to be really hard ... then we definitely could be in with a chance of medals.” (PA Media) Will you be watching Beijing 2022 from Australia? Emma Kemp is here with a handy guide for how to keep up with the action: The production values were top class. It looked stunning. The athletes all looked delighted to be there, albeit from behind their protective masks. And we had inspiring words on solidarity and inclusivity from the organisers and from the president of the IOC, Thomas Bach. What did you think? You can email or tweet me. Away from the ceremony, outside of China, there are protests against the Games in view of China’s human rights record – including in the US, India, Turkey and Japan: If you missed it earlier, here are some of the best images from the opening ceremony: And here is today’s first hit of Martin’s definitive lowdown on everything at the Games: Martin Belam’s daily briefing began today and runs until 20 Feb. Get yourself subscribed! Want to read more? Why not get the latest edition of Guardian Weekly for lots of insight and analysis into the issues surrounding Beijing 2022: “Smaller, quieter and more restrained than in 2008 ... but it had a real beauty ... and I loved the snowflake insignia,” says Clare Balding on the BBC. The Olympic flame is lit. It burns at the centre of a slowly rotating snowflake, which is comprised of the names of the competing nations, and rises to hang at the centre of the stadium. And there is another breathtaking barrage of fireworks to round off the ceremony. The financial crisis of 2008 was the moment which cemented both China’s rise and its growing confidence as the west faltered. But the Olympics held in Beijing a few months earlier was the global symbol of its ascendancy: a coming-out party which proclaimed its return to the forefront of political and economic power, greeted with genuine international enthusiasm, despite the misgivings of dissidents. China’s Xi Jinping and Vladimir Putin of Russia have signed a joint statement calling on the west to “abandon the ideologised approaches of the cold war”, as the two leaders showcased their warming relationship amid a tense standoff with the west before the Beijing Winter Olympics. The Olympic flag, and the flag of the People’s Republic of China, are now flying side-by-side in the stadium. It’s all being done with suitable pomp and ceremony and is peppered with regular fanfares of brass and rousing orchestral music. Another one for your browser bookmarks – the full schedule and live scores: The Olympic flag is carried across the floor. The audience is asked to stand for the Olympic anthem. The Olympics are not just closely followed by athletes, journalists and activists, but also academics. Some found that since the 2008 Beijing Summer Games, Chinese people’s participation in sports has been on the rise. In the last few years, new sporting venues have been built and government-backed campaigns launched to encourage Chinese citizens to exercise. I spoke to Shushu Chen, a lecturer in sport policy and management at the University of Birmingham. In the last decade, Chen and her fellow researchers have been tracking the impact of the 2008 and 2012 summer Games in Beijing and London, funded by the British Academy. “Nearly half of respondents believed that the hosting of the Olympics had inspired them to increase their sport/physical activity participation and/or to try a new sport/physical activity (46% for Beijing, 47% for London),” she said in a recent report. “we found no significant differences between men’s and women’s long-term sport participation behaviour and perspectives on inspirational effects.” Chen noted that compared to London, residents in Beijing were “ostensibly more positive about the inspirational effects of the Olympic Games, which can perhaps be explained by socio-cultural contextual differences between the two cases. ‘Sportsmanship’ and ‘Olympism’ were imprinted in Beijing residents’ minds, owing to a strong national and city-wide media campaign. Thus, the inspirational effect was arguably ‘activated’ for Beijing 2008, which has implications regarding individuals’ perceptions of the Games as a causal contributor to changes in participation behaviour,” she said. Xi Jinping declares the 2022 Beijing Winter Olympic Games officially open ... there is a huge and impressive blast of fireworks. Now a number of young people are doing a ‘walking performance’. The slogan “Together for a shared future” appears, before a cover of John Lennon’s ‘Imagine’, with a smattering of choreographed ice skating by 24 skaters. Bach continues: “It is possible to be fierce rivals while living peacefully and respectfully together ... this is the mission of the Olympic Games, bringing us together in peaceful competition, always building bridges, never erecting walls, uniting humankind in all our diversity.” Bach: “To the Chinese people: Thank you for making these Winter Games happen, and make them happen in a safe way for everyone ... to everyone who is going beyond the call of duty, thank you for your outstanding efforts, and your solidarity.” The Olympics stand for ‘ambition, courage and strength,’ says Bach. In conclusion, Cai Qi hopes for a ‘Simple, safe and splendid Games’ and then hands over to Thomas Bach, the president of the IOC. Who is Eileen Gu? The 18-year-old California-born freeskier is now the pride of China. But as the geopolitical competition between China and the US intensifies, her identity has become the subject of much media scrutiny in recent months. When she switched allegiances from America to China in 2019, she said: “The opportunity to help inspire millions of young people where my mum was born, during the 2022 Beijing Olympic Winter Games is a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to help promote the sport I love.” Since then, Gu – born to an American father and a Chinese mother – has become a “super idol among Chinese young people for representing the true spirit of sport”, according to the Global Times this week. But Gu’s new identity of representing China, which has been criticised by campaigners for human rights violations, has also angered many in the country of her birth. They say that China since 2019 has been a very different country, and Gu is complicit in not publicly criticising Beijing for its human rights abuses. “When I’m in the US, I’m American. When I’m in China, I’m Chinese,” Gu once said. But it looks increasingly impossible for her to have both. Cai Qi, the president of the organising committee, is speaking now. Behind him are dozens of people carrying flags (not athletes), who have clearly been instructed not to stop smiling under any circumstances. “[In 2008 we were] fulfilling our century-old dream of hosting an Olympic Games,” says Qi. “... today we witness here how Beijing becomes the first city ever to host both the summer and winter Olympic Games, and how China writes a new chapter in the history of the Olympic movement. “As the old Chinese saying goes: Honouring a promise carries the weight of gold.” “I think of that person, or look at photos of that person, and it feels like a lifetime ago,” Gus Kenworthy says as he remembers winning a silver medal for the United States as a freestyle skier at his first Winter Olympics in Sochi in 2014. So much has changed since then. He is now about to compete for Great Britain, the country of his birth, in his third and final Olympics in Beijing and Kenworthy will ski as a gay man, an LGBTQ+ activist and an actor. Now, following the parade, we’re back for more uplifting, orchestral music and well-choreographed dancing. A huge snowflake, rendered by lights and/or lasers (?), floats around the stadium, lands in the middle, and planet Earth appears below it. Pretty, pretty good. The director cuts to the crowd, who are looking suitably enthusiastic about the arrival of China’s team. The parade of nations has concluded. The lighting of the Olympic flame will be coming up at some point soon ... And here come China! Wow, they are mob-handed and led out by a phalanx of people in bright red, followed by a group dressed in white. Xi Jinping waves from up in his seat. It’s China’s largest-ever contingent at a Winter Olympics. Australia stride on to the scene in camouflage-style green tracksuits. Italy, the hosts of the next Games, are the penultimate team to walk out. They’re wearing capes bearing the colours of the Italian flag. Michela Moioli, a snowboarder, carries the flag. Monaco, Morocco, Australia, Italy and the People’s Republic of China are the teams still to come. Mexico are here! A team of four. Sarah Schleper, one of the flag-bearers, is competing at her sixth Winter Olympics – a record for a female alpine skier. Saba Kumaritashvili shook his head in frustration as he buckled through the finish line on Wednesday night after the second of two runs in the opening practice session at the Yanqing National Sliding Centre, the sparkling new venue nestled in the tree-lined southern foot of Xiaohaituo Mountain. Even after barreling down the sharp turns of an icy track at frightening speeds exceeding 120kph, the Georgian luger came in dead last in his group among those who completed both attempts, each time finishing more than three seconds behind the pacesetter, Wolfgang Kindl of Austria. He could not hide his disappointment as he marched past a cluster of reporters in the mixed zone, paused for a beat to consider speaking, before hurrying off toward the dressing room to look toward Saturday, when the men’s singles competition begins in earnest. Team Switzerland now enter the stadium, featuring the remarkable (and wonderfully named) alpine skier, Beat Feuz. Andres Ambuhl and Wendy Holdener carry the flag. In 2018, Feuz won silver in the Super-G and bronze in the downhill. The capacity of the Bird’s Nest is 80,000. There are plenty of people in the stadium, although it’s nowhere near full. Less than half, by the looks of it. Elsa Desmond is set to swap her hospital rounds for hurtling feet-first down the frozen track in Beijing after she was given a place in the luge competition at the Olympic Games as Ireland’s first woman in the event. It will be a dream come true for the 24-year-old who recently qualified as a doctor and works for the NHS, after first watching the sport during the 2010 Vancouver Olympics. “I saw it on TV when I was just a kid, and I thought it looked amazing, it just looked like a lot of fun,” Desmond said. “I tried for about 10 years to get into the sport, and I eventually managed to get, as a civilian, on to a British Army ice sports camp as a teenager, and it just kind of went from there. I really, really enjoyed it and stuck with it,” she said. As with all beginners, Desmond’s first trips down the ice started towards the end of the course, gingerly learning the skills needed at low speeds before progressing higher up. Nowadays, she is no stranger to World Cup races and speeds of over 130 kilometres an hour and she has provided extra work for her colleagues in the medicine business. “I’ve had a couple of small concussions, I’ve broken a foot, a couple of fingers - (injuries to) fingers and feet are very common in my sport. Other than that, just lots of bruises, but they heal quickly,” she said. (Reuters) As advertised, Ireland have entered the auditorium. They have six athletes including the luger, Elsa Desmond, who is a doctor and works at a hospital in Southend. They’re all wearing green bobble hats and waving enthusiastically. Thailand are here. And now here come the Netherlands. Trinidad and Tobago and Ireland are moments away. The USA are here! They look excited! They’re wearing a mix of white and navy blue jackets. Fittingly, the letters ‘USA’ are emblazoned on the front. North Korea did not make an appearance at this opening ceremony. Why? It was suspended by the IOC for not participating in the 2021 Tokyo Games. But the country’s leader, Kim Jong-un, this morning sent a personal message to China’s president, Xi Jinping, congratulating him on the Games as a “great victory”. “The successful opening of the Beijing Winter Olympics despite the worldwide health crisis and unprecedented severe circumstances is another great victory won by socialist China,” Kim said in the letter, according to Pyongyang’s official news agency KCNA. A message like this is not just about saying nice things about the Games, however. In the letter, Kim also expressed his wish to improve relations with its powerful neighbour. The 38-year-old ruler said that he would “steadily develop the relations between the two parties and the two countries to a new high stage.” The mighty United States women’s hockey team launched their first Olympic title defense in two decades with an air of menace on Thursday night, roaring to a 5-2 win in the opening game of pool play against a Finland team expected to contend for a medal. But the Americans’ hopes of becoming the first team to win back-to-back Olympic gold medals were dealt a devastating blow early on when assistant captain Brianna Decker suffered a leg injury that will sideline her for the duration of the tournament. The greatest show on earth? It’s a promising start: France are here. They are all dressed as French flags. They are also waving mini-French flags. Up at the front, the freestyle skier Kevin Rolland and Tessa Worley, a downhill skier, are waving the full-scale French flag. Here comes the Great Britain team: 50 athletes, with Eve Muirhead and Dave Ryding having the honour of carrying the flag. Figure skating news – hot off the press – from Bryan Armen Graham: Speaking of Team Chinese Taipei, which has four athletes competing in this month’s Beijing Games... Last week it announced it would not attend the opening ceremony, but it made a U-turn this week, citing pressure from the IOC that urged it to “fulfil obligations under the Olympic Charter”. The IOC last year also cited charter rules when deciding to suspend North Korea from the Beijing Games, because Pyongyang refused to send a team to Tokyo for the summer Olympics, citing Covid fears. A three-strong representation from Iran is soon followed by Hungary’s team, wearing fetching green beanie hats. All the while, a couple of hundred dancers in white outfits are arranged around the stadium and are continuing to do their thing. One for your browser bookmarks here – the medal table: Canada are here. Wearing red puffer jackets, waving frantically and clearly smiling broadly, albeit from behind their masks. Mohammad Arif Khan, India’s downhill skiier, carries the flag for their team. Ghana, meanwhile, have one athlete: the 43-year-old Carlos Mäder is the oldest downhill skiier at the Games. China’s Xi Jinping and Vladimir Putin of Russia have signed a joint statement calling on the west to “abandon the ideologised approaches of the cold war”, as the two leaders showcased their warming relationship amid a tense standoff with the west ahead of the Beijing Olympics. This is the opening ceremony but as per usual, the Games have already begun ... and so has Martin Belam’s daily briefing email: You can sign up here and get Beijing 2022 news to your inbox every day. All part of the service. Here comes Chinese Taipei, closely followed by Hong Kong ... Xi Jinping is pictured clapping. Hong Kong have a team of three athletes competing in Beijing. The teams are coming thick and fast now ... Eritrea are closely followed by Jamaica, who as we mentioned earlier, are sending a bobsleigh team for the first time in 24 years. Benjamin Alexander and Jazmine Fenlator-Victorian carry the flag for Jamaica ... and here come Japan, who have a team of 124 athletes here. We’ve just had a show of ice-cool blue lasers which spelt out all the previous host cities of the Winter Olympics. Highly diverting! And here come the athletes, starting with Greece, the home of the Olympic movement. The flag-bearers, Apostolos Angelis and Maria Ntanou, lead the way for the first team out of the traps. On an island not known for its snow or ice, something is stirring. Not so long ago when Team GB turned up at the Winter Games, they left with their medal cupboard looking barren or bare. Sure, there was the occasional highlight – and those of a certain age will see Robin Cousins, Torvill and Dean and Rhona Martin in their mind’s eye – but as a winter sports country, Britain carried a distinct whiff of Eddie the Eagle: harmless and a little bit hapless. Time for a trumpet solo. “My Motherland and I” is played by a boy while a Chinese flag is passed down two parallel lines of people who represent the many different ethnic groups living across the People’s Republic of China. The opening ceremony has begun. The life cycle of a dandelion – and, I think, the beginning of spring – is being represented by what looks like about 100 people waving brightly-lit strands changing in colour. It looks ... really cool. There is a blast of fireworks spelling out SPRING, a cheer from a crowd that we can’t see ... and now Xi Jinping and Thomas Bach are being introduced. This year’s Winter Olympics is also a game of competing narratives. China’s slogan is “Together for a Shared Future”, but opponents draw attention to the country’s human rights record. Last night, US Speaker Nancy Pelosi, US’s top Democrat in Congress, highlighted Beijing’s actions in its own Xinjiang region, saying the country’s treatment of its Uyghurs population is “horrible” and “diabolical”. She also called the camps - which the Chinese call vocational education and training centres - in Xinjiang “slave labour”. The US and some of its closest allies – including the UK – have staged a diplomatic boycott. Attendees to the Winter Games in Beijing tonight include Russia’s Vladimir Putin, Saudi Arabia’s Mohammed bin Salman, Kassym-Jomart Tokayev of Kazakhstan and Poland’s Andrzej Duda. Curling news: Of all the sport I watched in the 1970s nothing – not Gordon Banks’s save in Mexico, the Rumble in the Jungle or Emlyn Hughes hugging Princess Anne on a Question of Sport – made such an impression on me. Thinking about it now I realise something: I remember the whole of Franz Klammer’s run at Innsbruck in vivid colour. Odd, because I know for a fact that the television I watched it on was black and white. The opening ceremony of the Beijing Summer Olympics began at 8.08pm local time on 8 August 2008; the Chinese believe eight is an auspicious number. That evening, Chinese-American Kaiser Kuo was watching from the balcony of his apartment in eastern Beijing. “It was meant to be impressive, and watching as a Chinese person, it certainly was: all the pageantry of history, the flawless performances, the grand scale,” Kuo says. “But watching through my western eyes, this spectacular event also played into a sense of fear: the robotic juggernaut and machine-like rise. It was intimidating.” The opening ceremony will begin in a little over 10 minutes. Here’s our armchair guide to the Winter Games: The opening of the Games featured prominently on national broadcaster CCTV’s main evening news bulletin. Tonight, the programme began with a long segment on the Xi-Putin meeting, which was held this afternoon, and ended with a bird’s-eye view of the Birds Nest, where the ceremony is about to be held. Over the 17 days of the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing, more than 70% of the American population tuned in to watch on NBC, which has owned the exclusive US broadcast rights since 1988. The official audience figure of 215m domestic viewers far exceeded guarantees to advertisers and represented the apotheosis of the network’s star-driven storytelling ethos under longtime NBC Sports chairman Dick Ebersol, one of the last high-profile sports TV impresarios. But as the Olympics return to the Chinese capital less than 14 years on, the awareness and general buzz around the Games stateside, while impossible to quantify with any precision, has never felt lower. The BBC’s opening montage, naturally, includes a shot of Lindsay Jacobellis’s infamous fall in the snowboard cross in Turin in 2006. Personally I can’t wait for that event. Always a thrilling business. The BBC’s coverage begins with Clare Balding promising more than 300 hours or coverage in the coming days. There are 3,000 athletes taking part across 109 events. “I can promise you this, it’s going to be epic,” says Balding. The Games will open in a country that hopes sport will be the talking point. But political twists or a resurgent virus could leave the event skating on thin ice. By Emma Graham-Harrison and Vincent Ni: Jamaica return to the bobsleigh after 24 years, Haiti and Saudi Arabia make debuts, while GB aim for curling glory ... here are 10 things to look out for in Beijing – By Sean Ingle and Bryan Armen Graham: From the forthcoming 2022 World Cup in Qatar to Novak Djokovic’s failed attempt to play at last month’s Australian Open, it seems every major modern sporting event comes loaded with geo-political tension and ethical controversy. No sporting occasion on the planet carries more political significance than the Olympics and the US’s diplomatic boycott of this event due to China’s ‘ongoing genocide and crimes against humanity’ shows that, politically speaking at least, these Winter Games began a long time ago. When the actors take the stage, however, most sports fans are willing to enjoy the show, and the Winter Olympics is a uniquely beautiful and compelling event. That’s the idea of sportwashing, of course, but whether these Games will be a political triumph for China remains to be seen. Beijing becomes the first city to host a summer and winter Games – memories of the opening ceremony for the summer edition in 2008 remain vivid – so expectations are high for something similarly jaw-dropping over the next couple of hours. More pre-ceremony reading is coming right up, with it due to begin at around 12pm GMT, 8pm local time, 7am in New York, 4am on the west coast and 11pm in Sydney.Beijing again hosted an opening ceremony for the Olympics and, like that for the Summer Games in 2008, it was directed by Zhang Yimou. The event was on a much smaller and more muted scale than that memorable occasion – with 3,000 people taking part as opposed to 15,000. The motto, in a Games inevitably affected by the Covid pandemic and mired with political controversy, was to be simple, safe and splendid. 1) The rites of spring Rather than having specifically recorded music for the athletes’ parade, it was accompanied by a selection of 19 well-known classical music excerpts which wouldn’t be out of place on Now That’s What I Call Classical Music. Organisers said it was to show the respect of the Chinese people to culture from around the world. Stravinsky’s The Rite of Spring would have been appropriate, as the season featured heavily as the opening theme. The lifecycle of the dandelion was represented by dancers carrying improbably tall and flexible glowing green stalks, which eventually turned white and were seen on video screen to be floating up into the sky as the seeds dispersed. Fireworks then wrote the word “spring” in the sky above Beijing’s Bird’s Nest stadium. 2) A nod to the past – on a giant ice cube Those of a certain vintage would have been reminded of the old Fox’s Glacier Mint adverts as a giant ice cube rose from the floor. This was the ceremony’s moment to acknowledge the Games that had come before, as lasers appeared to etch on its surface the names and dates of the 23 cities to previously host the Winter Games, going right back to Chamonix in 1924. 3) Illusions perfectly made for television Olympic opening and closing ceremonies have, over the years, become a theatrical genre in their own right. They need to be designed to work for both the audience in the stadium and on television screens across the globe. One sequence featured children dancing and singing across the arena, while the LED screens beneath them automatically tracked their footsteps, making stars appear at their feet as they performed and moved around. 4) Protests around the globe as the Games open The lead-up to these Games have been marked with political protests over the International Olympic Committee’s decision to award the hosting rights to China. In London, as the ceremony took place, there was a demonstration outside the Chinese embassy. There were also protests against the Games in Istanbul, Berlin and New Delhi – the Olympics uniting people in a way that the organisers had not wanted. 5) First appearances for Haiti and Saudi Arabia Haiti and Saudi Arabia are making their Winter Olympics debut – both of them sending one man to compete in the Alpine skiing; 19-year-old Richardson Viano carried the Caribbean nation’s flag, while 24-year-old Fayik Abdi is representing the Middle Eastern kingdom. 6) A politically fraught appearance for Taiwan The delegation from Taiwan had initially indicated they would not attend the ceremony. The IOC insisted they must. Due to China’s long-standing objection to the country using the name Taiwan at the Games, their athletes had to march under a banner saying Chinese Taipei and a neutral flag. Ho Ping-jui and Huang Yu-ting genuinely did not look thrilled to be there. 7) Those chunky-knit flag-heavy GB outfits Designed by Ben Sherman and modelled below by the flag-bearer and curling medal hope Eve Muirhead, the main feature of the Team GB uniform for the opening ceremony appeared to be a nice chunky-knit jumper that would keep you warm on a fishing trip. No word as to whether Team GB’s most famous knitter – diving gold medallist Tom Daley – was involved in the choice. 8. Kazakhstan win the costume competition Speed skater Yekaterina Aidova of Kazakhstan put most countries’ costume efforts to shame. The Kazakhstan team had also arranged a synchronised move to take off their scarves and wave them in unison. 9) Ireland’s luge doctor carries the flag Elsa Desmond was carrying Ireland’s flag. Incredibly she had to set up the Irish Luge Federation from scratch herself in order to be able to compete. As well as working to qualify for the Winter Olympics, during the pandemic she also qualified as a doctor, and as soon as the Games finish she will be back to where she works in a hospital in Southend, Essex. The freestyle skier Brendan Newby joined her in carrying the flag. 10) A message about prejudice from the IOC’s chairman Treading a delicate line – Chinese authorities have cracked down on political dissent before the Games and the Beijing Winter Olympics Athletes’ Commission has warned athletes against speaking out – the IOC president, Thomas Bach, gave a short speech where he praised the diversity of the Games and explicitly spoke out against discrimination. There was a message, too, for world leaders, with a call for the observation of the Olympic truce Bach told them to “give peace a chance”. A different John Lennon song – Imagine – also got another opening ceremony outing, as it had at Tokyo last year. 11) A unique and spectacular lighting of the flame The cutest sequence was without doubt a video insert of children on ice and snow learning to take part in winter sports. Like something out of You’ve Been Framed, you can’t go wrong with children falling over in the snow. That led up to the lighting of the Olympic flame. Ceremonies have begun competing to have different iconic lightings of the flame. We had been promised something never seen before. The giant snowflake that had been a feature of the ceremony had been made by interlocking the signs that had been held up in front of each team as they entered the arena. The Olympic torch was placed in the middle of it, hoisted into the sky and the show was over, leaving the sporting action to begin.Aaron Bell has become the latest Conservative MP to announce publicly that he has submitted a letter of no confidence in Boris Johnson. More than a dozen MPs have called openly for the prime minister to resign, including the former defence secretary Tobias Ellwood and the backbenchers Peter Aldous and Anthony Mangnall. More are believed to have submitted letters privately. “The breach of trust that the events in Downing Street represent, and the manner in which they have been handled, makes [Johnson’s] position untenable,” Bell said in a statement on Friday. If 54 letters are sent to the chair of the backbench 1922 Committee, Sir Graham Brady, a vote of no confidence would be called – and if Johnson lost it, his premiership would be over. Some senior Tory MPs believe the total number of letters may be close to 40, though it is never made public until the threshold is breached. Bell, the MP for Newcastle-under-Lyme, was widely believed to have submitted a letter, after he challenged the prime minister in the House of Commons on Monday. In the noisy debate after the publication of Sue Gray’s report on Downing Street parties, Bell gave an emotional speech saying he had followed the lockdown rules meticulously, driving three hours each way to his grandmother’s funeral without hugging his family or stopping for a cup of tea. “Does the prime minister think I’m a fool?” he asked pointedly. In his statement on Friday, Bell confirmed that he had sent his letter to Brady after that clash, and had made it public only after discussions with his local party. “As someone who backed Brexit and backed Boris Johnson for the leadership in 2019, I am profoundly disappointed that it has come to this,” he said. “I believe it is in the country’s best interests that this matter is resolved as soon as possible.” It comes as a fresh blow to Johnson after the departure of five senior No 10 aides in less than 24 hours. Johnson has been under intense pressure since Gray’s report identified failures of leadership in Downing Street, and revealed that as many as a dozen parties were under investigation by the Metropolitan police. He has been accused of misleading parliament after initially insisting that all Covid guidance was followed in Downing Street – a claim that appears inconsistent with the evidence uncovered by Gray.More than one in eight primary schoolchildren in England were infected with Covid during the last week of January, the highest prevalence for any age group at any stage during the pandemic. Figures released on Friday by the Office for National Statistics (ONS) suggest that infections have now peaked among primary schoolchildren, but the surge is continuing to cause significant disruption with large numbers of children absent from school due to positive tests. The peak in infections comes as the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI) is expected to make a recommendation as to whether Covid vaccination should be extended to all children aged five or over. This week, the NHS began to roll out vaccines to children aged between five and 11 in the clinically vulnerable category after the JCVI approved the move in December. Paul Whiteman, the general secretary of the National Association of Head Teachers, which represents many primary school leaders, said: “The very high rates of infection amongst primary pupils means that the pandemic certainly isn’t over for schools – our members are telling us that disruption due to Covid is as bad as it’s ever been. “There’s a strange disconnect between the lack of mitigations and restrictions, and the lived experiences of families and schools right now,” he added. “Covid is still having a significant impact on education.” Prevalence remains high among secondary pupils, with an infection rate of 7.6% – one in 15 – for those in the school years 7 to 11, the ONS figures showed. This compares with one in 20 people infected in England overall with an estimated 2.6 million infections. Similar rates were seen in Wales, while Scotland recorded Covid-19 infections in one in 30 people and Northern Ireland said one in 15 people were infected. The lowest rates of infections were seen among the over-70s with a rate of just under 2%, the ONS reported. Hospital admissions and the numbers of patients in ICUs with Covid are also falling, government figures show. The ONS latest figures suggest that rates in primary schoolchildren in England have peaked and are beginning to fall. Prof Kevin McConway, an emeritus professor of applied statistics at the Open University, said: “There’s a small bit of good news about that age group in the daily modelled figures, published today – they show the estimated rate beginning to fall between 26 January and the end of that week on the 29th, though it’s a small fall and that trend is too short-term to be much of a comfort yet.” Speaking to the pandemic response and recovery all-party parliamentary group of MPs earlier this week, Prof Allyson Pollock, of Newcastle University, raised concerns about the continued testing and isolation of schoolchildren. “Healthy children are being tested and isolated unnecessarily,” she said. “Children are at extremely low risk of severe disease and many of them will be asymptomatic or only have mild symptoms.” Others have emphasised arguments for extending vaccinations to younger age groups, as many other countries have already done, and for more focus to be placed on mitigation, including improving ventilation in classrooms. An analysis released on Friday as part of evidence used by the Sage advisory group suggested that Omicron was no more likely to lead to hospital admissions for infants than the Delta variant. Previously, there had been some concern about the apparent increase in the proportion of infants in hospital with Covid-19. However, the latest analysis by the Medical Research Council and the UK Health Security Agency found this could be explained by cases in general being skewed towards younger ages for the Omicron wave. Once this was taken into account, there was found to be no difference in risk of hospital admission between the two variants.Mandy Allwood, who made headlines in 1996 after losing all eight of her babies after a rare octuplets pregnancy, has died of cancer. She was 56. When Allwood was 31 she lost six boys and two girls, sparking an outpouring of grief and emotion from around the world. Allwood’s loss led to her appearing on Oprah Winfrey’s chatshow and she also met the Princess of Wales for lunch. “She had been struggling with cancer for a while and had an operation before Christmas but told us recently that it had come back,” her friend Mark Beard told the Sun. Beard, a pub landlord in Stratford-upon-Avon, said he and friends intended to raise a glass to in tribute to her. In 1996, Allwood gave birth at 24 weeks – 16 weeks early – over three days and nights, but none of the babies survived. “I cradled each of them for two-and-a-half hours as they died in my arms. It was horrible. Truly horrible,” Allwood said. “When I felt the last one coming, I said: ‘Please, God, let at least one of them live.’” Allwood named her children Kypros, Adam, Martyn, Cassius, Nelson, Donald, Kitali and Layne. At the funeral, pallbearers carried eight small, green-and-white coffins adorned with flowers in a procession through West Norwood cemetery in south London. In 2018, Allwood said she and Princess Diana “talked about her depression and my panic attacks and told me that she had been there too”, she told SWNS. “We spoke about her family and she talked a lot about Charles and Camilla. She had a lovely life.” Allwood went on to have three more children. In 2007, she was charged with drink driving and lost custody, later becoming estranged from her family.Einstein once observed that “a scientist is a mimosa when he himself has made a mistake, and a roaring lion when he discovers a mistake of others”. Aside from the “he”, the statement accurately sums up the tone of some of the current scientific discourse on Covid-19. Views on lockdowns, vaccinating children and mask mandates have become increasingly polarised, and social media is unforgiving towards those who voice a change of heart. Yet being proved wrong lies at the heart of scientific progress. In science, an unwillingness to revise your position is normally viewed as an intellectual weakness rather than a sign of moral strength. With this in mind, we asked leading scientists what they got wrong during the pandemic. Prof Peter Openshaw, theme lead for infection at Imperial College London, did not expect vaccines to be successful As a scientist you relish having your view changed by the facts. That’s different from politics where you’ve occupied a citadel, where it’s viewed as a failure if you concede ground. I honestly didn’t think vaccines were going to work. There had been no example of a vaccine for a human coronavirus and the vaccines for animal coronavirus were not that good. We mentioned vaccines in our first report on Covid from Academy of Medical Sciences and said it was unlikely that anything would be available in the near future. So I was completely bowled over when those first trials came through in the run-up to Christmas 2020 and we got this wonderful gift. They were so much more effective than I’d hoped. As a person who has been studying immunity to viruses for 30 years, I should have been able to predict that, if anyone could. Hats off the to the Oxford team, they’re fantastic people and came up trumps. Prof Allyson Pollock, professor of public health at Newcastle University, regrets not speaking out against school closures We knew almost right away, when the blanket lockdown was introduced in March 2020, that children were the least at-risk group, and their education should have been preserved. I wish I’d voiced this more strongly. There were some areas of the country that had almost no cases, and it should have been possible to put in place a cordon sanitaire around remote and rural areas such as the Orkney islands. On schools, closures should have been no more than a few weeks. I was dismayed at the position adopted by the teaching unions. There was a lot of fear and emotion, but they weren’t looking at the evidence or the circumstances that some of these kids were living in, for whom school is a place of safety as well as education. The government could have put in place systems for alternate school days or expanding classroom facilities and recruitment of volunteer staff, but they should have done everything to keep schools open for children. The second round of school closures was a disaster for children. I did speak out early in the first lockdown against banning relatives from nursing homes and the need to redeploy staff to homes, in an editorial in the BMJ. It was really difficult to speak out because it was too politicised. That politicisation was totally wrong in my mind. Dr Kit Yates, director of the centre for mathematical biology at the University of Bath, made a U-turn on the role of scientists in the pandemic I initially saw my role, in TV and radio interviews, as explaining the possibilities and limitations of mathematical modelling and key ideas such as exponential growth and the reproduction number. I had vehement arguments on Twitter, defending the role of the scientists who stood beside ministers at press conferences seeming to legitimise the government’s approach. Although I didn’t agree with some of the policies, I didn’t feel it was the place of those scientists to speak out against them. In hindsight, this was naive. Slowly the questions I was being asked in interviews began to change. After an initial look at the data, questions such as “So what should we be doing differently?” or “Have the government got it wrong on this?” were being fired at me. I realised that I had to come off the fence and give answers. I also joined the Independent Sage group of scientists, a cross-disciplinary group of experts, who provide independent policy advice. The experience has radically changed my view on the role of scientists speaking out and advocating for policy. It is not always enough to let the data speak for themselves. Prof Susan Michie, director of the centre for behaviour change at University College London, changed her mind on the usefulness of masks Early on, my reading was that the evidence on the effectiveness of face masks in community settings was equivocal. The emphasis on droplet transmission raised a concern that infected people may touch their face masks and then touch surfaces, thus providing a transmission route. The possibility of people behaving less cautiously as result of wearing face masks was also raised. Two things changed. When evidence showed that the major route for transmission was via aerosol rather than droplet, the case for masks became hugely stronger. There was also persuasive evidence from real-world studies, including one from German towns and one on cruise ships. This changed my mind from sitting on the fence to being strongly in favour of masks. I was asked on a TV programme how long we’ll be wearing masks. I said “for ever, to some extent”, and was cut off before I could elaborate that this would depend on the context and risk of infection. I had months of being trolled and attacked for saying this. But science continues to generate good evidence that masks reduce infection for Covid-19, an airborne virus. Prof Devi Sridhar, chair of global public health at the University of Edinburgh, thought British society would accept more intrusive surveillance I think I underplayed the societal differences between South Korea and the UK, including the willingness of publics to be under different levels of surveillance and scrutiny. South Koreans exchanged their privacy, through intense contact tracing with credit cards and phone GPS details, for the ability to continue to move about and continue with daily life, largely. I thought British people would prefer that to full lockdown at home. But I think that such privacy “intrusions” wouldn’t be seen as acceptable to the public here, after observing the pandemic now for two years. Prof Neil Ferguson, epidemiologist at Imperial College London, highlights three things he called wrong First, we all underestimated what proportion of Covid infections being imported into the country were being missed by testing of travellers back in February/March 2020. We estimated it was around 70%, while retrospective analysis indicates that over 90% were missed. So it was only when systematic testing in hospitals started from 10 March that we realised quite how far the epidemic had got. Second, while I was expecting the virus to evolve, the extent of evolution seen when Alpha first arose, together with how much the transmissibility (and, to a lesser extent, severity) increased was a surprise. Last, as immunity has grown in the population (due to infection and vaccination) in the last year, social distancing measures have been relaxed and new variants have emerged, predicting the future course of the epidemic, even in the short-term, has become even more difficult than I expected it would be. Partly because of the unpredictability of human behaviour, such as the “Euros” effect in June 2021. But also because, while we can generate fairly good estimates of vaccine effectiveness, transmissibility and severity for new variants within a few weeks of their emergence, each of these has associated uncertainties, which combine multiplicatively when making projections of possible future trends. Prof Sir Andrew Pollard, director of the Oxford Vaccine Group, has not changed his mind on boosters – but says this has been misunderstood Several commentators have suggested recently that I am against boosters or that I have changed my mind on boosters. Actually, I haven’t. I have consistently been of the view that first and second doses everywhere should be prioritised over third-dose (or fourth) boosters when there is limited supply. Many more lives would have been saved in 2021 if the available vaccine doses had been distributed more fairly around the world. With limited resources, the scientific case for saving many lives trumps the more marginal gains of improving protection with a booster for those who already have a wall of defence against Covid-19. That doesn’t mean that I am against boosters, just that I am pro-equity.Two of the most emblematic figures of Nicaragua’s beleaguered opposition are facing years behind bars after being convicted of alleged acts of political conspiracy in trials campaigners and members of the international community called a sham. Dora María Téllez, a legendary guerrilla leader during the Sandinista revolution, was found guilty during a closed-door trial at the notorious El Chipote political prison in Nicaragua’s capital Managua on Thursday. Téllez, 66, helped liberate the city of León during the final push against the Somoza dictatorship in 1979 and commanded the legendary storming of Nicaragua’s national palace the previous year. “[She was] a very beautiful girl, timid and withdrawn, with the kind of intelligence and good sense that would have ensured her great success in anything she turned her hand to,” the Colombian writer Gabriel García Márquez wrote of the 22-year-old student turned rebel in his account of the audacious 1978 assault. Lesther Alemán, a former student leader who became an overnight celebrity for berating Nicaragua’s authoritarian president, Daniel Ortega, during a failed 2018 uprising, was also convicted of “conspiracy to damage national integrity”. “I’m innocent,” the 24-year-old shouted after his verdict was delivered in El Chipote, according to the opposition newspaper La Prensa. Speaking to the Guardian at a Managua safehouse during the 2018 rebellion, Alemán said he sought political freedom, not fame, joking: “The cameras intimidate me more than Daniel Ortega.” Prosecutors reportedly sought jail terms of up to 15 years for Alemán and Téllez, who was Nicaragua’s health minister during the first post-revolution Sandinista government but later turned on Ortega and became a fierce critic. Thursday’s judgments – part of a wave of political trials playing out in Nicaragua – drew criticism from across the region, including from the left. “Shameful,” Chile’s president-elect, Gabriel Boric, tweeted after Téllez’s conviction was reported. In a recent interview Zoilamérica Ortega Murillo, the estranged daughter of Ortega and his vice-president and wife Rosario Murillo, voiced fear for the future of activists such as Alemán. “His bravery made me very afraid for him,” she said of his decision to publicly harangue Ortega in 2018. “I know this was an unforgivable challenge and that is why he is one of the political prisoners who I most have in my heart,” Ortega Murillo said. Nicaragua has been the stage for a relentless political crackdown since last May, when Ortega and Murillo launched an offensive against their rivals ahead of last November’s presidential election. Having obliterated Nicaragua’s opposition by jailing dozens of challengers and forcing others into exile, Ortega secured another five-year term. The 76-year-old could now remain in power into his eighties, having governed continuously since he was elected in 2006.The unexpected triumph of António Costa’s Socialist party in Portugal’s elections this week continues a cautious comeback by Europe’s centre-left – and, analysts say, may hold some lessons in what remains a mixed picture for the continent’s social democrats. After wins last autumn by Germany’s SPD and Norway’s Labour party, the Portuguese prime minister’s unexpected victory – with 41.7% of the vote, five points up on 2019 – was further good news for a movement that five years ago looked in terminal decline. In some countries, it still does. The French Socialist party was all but obliterated in the 2017 elections and polls predict its candidate in this year’s presidential race, Anne Hidalgo, the Paris mayor, will do well to capture more than 3% in the first round, a barely imaginable score for a party once led by François Mitterrand and which, only a decade ago, controlled the Élysée, senate, parliament and most of France’s regions. The Dutch Labour party (PvdA) likewise collapsed to a record low in 2017, winning less than 6% of the vote and losing almost three-quarters of its MPs, and in parliamentary elections last year it failed dismally to improve on its score. And while the context in central and eastern Europe is different, the Czech Social Democrats (CSSD), who had won four of the six polls held since the country’s formation in 1993 and come second twice, lost so heavily in October that they are no longer even in parliament. Elsewhere, things are rosier: all five Nordic countries are led by centre-left governments; Italy’s Democratic party is a member of its ruling coalition; Pedro Sánchez’s PSOE heads a progressive alliance in Spain; and a social democrat chancellor, Olaf Scholz, leads a three-party left-liberal coalition in Germany. Political scientists point to multiple reasons for the decline of Europe’s centre-left over the past decade, and explanations for its cautious recent revival appear just as varied. “We should be very careful about generalising too much,” said Gérard Grunberg, an emeritus professor of European politics at Sciences Po in Paris. Social democratic parties with their roots in 19th-century labour movements could for decades count for their core vote on traditional, especially manual, workers – an electorate that has shrunk by as much as 50% in some countries. The 2008 financial crash and its economic fallout added anger over high unemployment and falling living standards to mounting alarm among many of those traditional voters at broader trends – globalisation, automation and immigration. Far-right parties played on those fears while, at the other end of the political spectrum, anti-capitalist, anti-globalisation, anti-establishment far-left parties proved equally attractive to another part of the centre-left voter pool: middle-class, often public sector, teachers, healthcare workers. The result was that as the mainstream parties of government grew smaller and insurgent parties got bigger, the centre-left found itself fatally squeezed. In some cases a revival has been almost automatic. “Sometimes it’s just been the pendulum of politics,” said Simon Hix, a comparative politics professor at the European University Institute in Florence. “People had simply had enough of the centre-right.” After 16 years of conservative-led government in Germany and eight in Norway, that may have been the case, but in Portugal it was not: Costa had been prime minister, at the head of unlikely leftwing alliances, since 2015. Some see his resounding win as at least partly reflecting local factors. “People argue Portugal still has a rather different occupational and class structure,” said Tarik Abou-Chadi, an associate professor of European politics at Oxford. “The knowledge economy, the people more likely to vote green or progressive left, haven’t quite reached it yet.” Production workers still make up a disproportionately high share of Portugal’s voters, even by southern European standards, and only about 55% of the country’s workforce have completed at least a secondary school education. But beyond possible structural factors, analysts see some broader trends – and even lessons – in this cautious social democratic comeback. Hix argues Europe’s conservative parties have drifted right to compete with the far right, “and that’s made liberal voters uncomfortable”. Public sector workers and young professionals “want grownups to run the country”. For Abou-Chadi, recent elections “have shown that if the left can coordinate, it can win”. But for social democrats to profit, they need to be “the main challenger on the left. And that’s not currently the case in, for example, France and the Netherlands.” According to Grunberg, the social democratic parties that have survived as main challengers and are now winning elections (albeit with scores often half what they once were) are those that adapted to the new political landscape. “Some have cooperated with parties to their right, others to their left,” he said. “There is a social democratic electorate: sharing humanist values, open to some degree of economic liberalism. But social democratic parties’ absolute priority must be to govern. And they need strong leaders.” Catherine de Vries, a Dutch political scientist at Bocconi University in Milan, put it slightly differently. Where social democrat parties had been successful – in the Nordics, Spain, Germany, Portugal – they had “repurposed”, she said. Between the third way’s love of economic liberalism and the radical left of the likes of Jean-Luc Mélenchon in France, she said, there was “a middle ground that says: the state can do things, it can protect, be a social elevator, and we are the party of the state – but we really can run it. We are a true party of government. We can do this.” A focus on “quite traditional, solid, straightforward social democratic ideas – better housing, improving low pay – but with the competence to deliver” had proved key, she said, but it required a strong, popular leader and the courage to take on “difficult issues like immigration: the culture war stuff”. All agreed that Costa exemplified that “safe pair of hands”: warm and charismatic but capable of delivering on wages and pensions while still promoting economic growth and maintaining fiscal discipline. “A voice of clear, steady reason in a changing and uncertain environment,” said de Vries. “That’s what the centre-left needs to be.”Nowhere to be seen are her company Goop’s own vagina candles, psychic vampire repeller sprays and toothpaste squeezers, and yet Gwyneth Paltrow’s home in Montecito, California is still causing gasps across the internet. As she showed off her palatial house in the March issue of Architectural Digest, many rolled their eyes online at designer Robin Standefer’s claim that it “takes its cues from Gwyneth’s height [and] beauty”. Others were taken aback that her Ruth Asawa sculpture was actually a fake (“surely she could afford the real thing?”), by her grand hallway fireplace, which, Paltrow explained, was “something you see a lot in Europe in an entryway”, and by her super-luxurious double hammock in the living room that retails at $62,700. Could this maybe become the next must-have piece of homeware for the uber-rich? “I wouldn’t be surprised if this starts a whole new trend,” says Los Angeles estate agent Kirk Hawkins. “I think living room swings and indoor hammocks will always be perfect for a specific buyer: why not enjoy the whimsical experience of being a kid in an indoor space?” Others remain unconvinced. “I don’t think there will be anything other than a flash-in-the-pan demand for living room swings,” says Lucy Searle, the editor-in-chief of Homes &amp; Gardens magazine. “It’s a lovely, appealing, though space-hungry, idea, but anyone with children will appreciate that it will either be a dangerous addition to a living room or one that will be gleefully misused.” The most surprising feature of the California house, however, is a fully fledged plant-filled, tiled spa, featuring hot tub, cold tub, sauna and steam room, resembling an “ancient bathhouse”, says Paltrow. “Just like Peloton took off, this is becoming more of a trend for high net worth individuals who want to bring the spa home with them,” says Hawkins. “They are growing in popularity,” agrees Searle. “Many renovators are asking interior designers and bathroom companies to find space for everything from home saunas and steam rooms to double showers and shower bench seats.” There were about 44,000 internet searches for “home spas” last year, according to the bathroom retailer AQVA. Paltrow worked with interior designers Robin Standefer and Stephen Alesch of Roman and Williams to create a home with the conceptual feel of a “Parisian apartment set within an old European barn”. Other notable features in the wannabe barn include a surreal “Star-Trek-like” chandelier, 3D handpainted wallpaper and almost enough casserole dishes to feed the whole of California. “There’s a lot of Pinterest-bait in it,” says the architecture journalist Lucy Watson. “Sometimes it’s hard to tell with other super-prime homes which is the CGI render and which is the real thing.” That said, Paltrow has hit upon some very 2022 luxury homeware trends. “Wallpaper generally is so popular now,” says interior designer Lucy Gleeson. “We are moving towards being more hands-on with wall decor.” Searle says handpainted wallpaper is one of Homes &amp; Gardens’ top design trend predictions for 2022, and Watson says: “I am seeing people at home being a bit more adventurous with textures, panelling and painting shapes straight on the walls – which will set you back as much as a tin of paint and a roll of masking tape instead of a couple of grand per panel.” “Gwyneth will gain some extra design fans after they see her new home,” says Gleeson. Watson thinks the house almost humanises the often-derided Paltrow. “It’s a slightly cluttered house where you can actually imagine somebody living and cooking and acquiring normal people things. Given how alien Gwyneth’s lifestyle is to most people, perhaps that was a bit of a shock,” she says. And yet, Watson says she’s “not sure anything can erase the vagina egg from public memory”.Pep Guardiola has admitted to struggling in his relationship with João Cancelo early on before eventually coming to understand the defender. Cancelo signed a contract extension on Wednesday that ties him to Manchester City until 2027. The Portuguese is considered one the world’s finest full-backs, but after arriving at City in 2019 there was initially friction between him and Guardiola. “Everyone knows how important he is and what he’s done,” said the manager. “We have struggled when he arrived – we did not agree on many things, partly because of my mistakes but now I am delighted. He’s fully happy and can play here for the next [few] seasons. João can play in many positions, can play every day due to his physicality, and he’s so funny and loved in the locker room.” Guardiola was asked what caused the friction. “Normally he’s playing every time now, that’s the main reason,” he said. “He wanted to play every time and when he didn’t wasn’t happy – he struggled with how we played, what we wanted to do, and that was the reason why but he was always a nice guy. Now he understands [and] we know each other better. But to be really clear: no arguments. João is fully happy, he wants to play every game and that’s all. “Every player has to be treated differently. He’s an incredible person with a big heart but sensitive. I needed time to understand him, now I understand him and he’s important for us. Every player has a world and you have to understand it. He’s one of the few we have who would play morning, afternoon, night. He needs the adrenaline from playing, like Phil Foden – football is the most important thing in his life.” Cancelo’s fresh deal follows those of Kevin De Bruyne, Ederson, John Stones, Rúben Dias, Cole Palmer and James McAtee. “This is so important,” said Guardiola. “The players know the club and we are a young team, we cannot forget that. We know them mentally – all of them love to play. Every season is different – we don’t know what will happen but the soul and the heart of the team is still young – and that’s important.” City signed River Plate’s Julián Álvarez for an initial £14m last month before loaning the forward back to the Argentinian club for the rest of the season. Guardiola said of the 22-year-old: “He will play up front in the middle – between in the pockets and as a striker. He is a guy who is so dynamic, the goal is there always in his mind, he has the desire to score and is so young that you see he is hungry, starving [for success].”Many writers have dreamed since childhood of being published. Not Hannah Lowe, who has just won the Costa book of the year award for her poetry collection The Kids. It was only when she was teaching English literature to sixth-formers that her interest in writing poetry was piqued. “I started writing quite late,” says the 45-year-old poet, speaking from her kitchen in north London after a late night celebrating her win. “I was trying to enthuse my students with an anthology of 1,000 years of English poetry, and that, along with an anthology of contemporary poetry my mum bought me, Bloodaxe’s Staying Alive, just spoke to me. I started writing in secret.” It took her a couple of years before she enrolled at a poetry workshop; her first collection, Chick, explores the world of her father, a Jamaican-Chinese migrant. The Kids, her third collection, is “a book to fall in love with”, according to the judges, who chose it as winner of the prestigious £30,000 Costa book of the year award on Tuesday. “It’s joyous, it’s warm and it’s completely universal,” they said. Lowe began writing the book of sonnets in 2016, four years after she left a 12-year teaching career, “because I was just really aware of how profoundly those years shaped my thinking”. “I was trying to destabilise that relationship between the teacher and student – the idea of the teacher being the figure with knowledge to impart, and the student as the passive receptacle. It was never like that in the classroom for me,” she says. “And also, I didn’t have any knowledge to impart, I had a degree in American literature and I’d done a completely radical curriculum. So when I was having to teach things like the Restoration, I was learning them the week before, sometimes the night before I was teaching them.” Lowe writes sonnets about students – “Monique – / kiss-curls and diamanté nails, Queen Bee / who fixed me with a fuck you stare”; and Janine, who “was a Monday-morning-queasy-feeling” until “somebody / said the thing – and finally bought ease: / my dad was half Jamaican, half Chinese”. In Boy, Lowe ventures into even more delicate territory, writing of a fictionalised pupil, “half-boy, / half-man”. “He’d catch my eye across the packed canteen / and hold me there – half-bold, half-clandestine” she writes. “Or else I’d watch him from the mezzanine – / he’d raise a hand and wave a little joy / into my day, ignite a little flame … I didn’t even know his name.” The poem is paired with another about the film Notes on a Scandal, which she took her class to see – without quite realising it included a teacher-pupil relationship. “My boys careen / around me, play confused. Why that film, Miss? / They’re cocky, amused. But, Miss, do you want us?” “I suppose I was trying to capture a very singular experience, it certainly wasn’t commonplace in my career. I was very young when I started teaching and my students were young, too – you put a load of people in a building together, you might find rare moments of attraction,” Lowe explains. “But,” she adds, “No lines were crossed, no code broken. Work asks us to conform, in all of our professions, to certain rules and regulations. But that doesn’t mean that private thoughts don’t bubble to the surface.” She adds that, as in her other sonnets, the scenario is a piece of fiction. “So much of it is made up. That boy never waved at me: it’s fiction. The only thing that is true is there was a very beautiful boy at the sixth form, who I noticed, and I saw him seven years later, and out of that I’ve spun a poem.” As another poet and teacher, Kate Clanchy, faces widespread criticism for her depictions of former students in her memoir Some Kids I Taught and What They Taught Me, Lowe is clear that her sonnets feature “fictionalised portraits, and conflations of students into one”. “There’s loads of anonymising, obviously, of names, and there’s also fictionalising going on,” she says. “And poetry doesn’t have the same autobiographical pact that memoir does, this agreement between the writer and the reader that what you’re saying is true, as far as you can remember it. Poetry is very much more in the territory of fiction, even though readers might be invested in the book as being true.” Having written a memoir about her father and about the Chinese-Caribbean community, she has “a solid grounding in some of the ethical concerns that exist in creative writing”, she adds. “This book, it does inevitably invoke a power dynamic, right? Because I’m a teacher writing about students. To me, the question is not about whether you should or you shouldn’t; I think that’s too categorical,” she says. “It’s about how you do it. And I try to be respectful and compassionate towards those students, which is just a reflection of how I felt about them.” The Kids moves from tackling the syllabus – “all summer term reading poems – / down in the mud / of words, wanting / the kids to hear what I heard – / breaking the poems apart, slapping / their parts to the board” – to her mispronunciation of Pepys, when teaching Restoration comedies. “though / I’d seen his name, I’d never heard it – Peppies, / I said it, Peppies, over and over, until / one girl spoke up: Do you mean Pepys? she said, / her voice pulled taut as a noose, as if I were the girl / and she the teacher.” The collection also tackles motherhood – she has a young son, Rory – and her own days as an A-level student at Barking college in east London, “because I had such brilliant teaching myself at that age”. Lowe has now returned to teaching, but this time in further education, as a lecturer in creative writing at Brunel University, London. “Poetry has a reputation for difficulty, and for elitism, and perhaps it’s about the ways in which poems have to be taught in school. It’s not teachers doing a bad job, it’s often slightly ‘poems by numbers’, or decoding the poems,” she says. She wrote The Kids – which Costa judges said was “so direct that actually you feel that you’re being talked to by somebody” – for “all learners, all students, all the kids. I wanted to write poems that reach out a friendly hand, that say, come with me. Let’s go. Let’s see what’s here.”With reinfections now included in the daily Covid case numbers for most countries in the UK, we take a look at why the shift matters. How are reinfections counted? Covid reinfections can involve either the same or a different variant. Since 31 January reinfections have been included in the daily reported case numbers for England and Northern Ireland. Reinfections are expected to be included for Scotland in weeks, and were already included in figures for Wales. While the definition of a reinfection for England and Northern Ireland is a positive specimen at least 90 days after the last one, for Wales that gap is at present defined as at least 42 days. The UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) says a gap of at least 90 days captures the majority of reinfections, while excluding those for whom fragments of the virus are detected for a long period of time. The agency says the interval will be standardised across UK countries in the coming weeks. How many reinfections have there been? According to UKHSA data for England, at present, possible reinfections account for about 10% of new cases reported each week. An estimated 532,570 reinfection episodes have been identified in England between the beginning of the pandemic and 23 January this year. This is a small figure compared with the 14.2m cases believed to be first infections. However, these figures are based on people who have come forward for a Covid test. Not all those with a Covid infection do so – while during the first wave, access to tests was very limited, meaning both cases and reinfections were underestimated. Are some people more likely to be reinfected than others? According to data from the Office for National Statistics (ONS) – which uses an episode interval of 120 days, or four consecutive negative tests, in its definition of a reinfection – unvaccinated people are about twice as likely to have a reinfection as those who had their second Covid jab between 14 and 89 days ago. Reinfection also appears to be more likely among people whose previous infection involved a lower quantity of the virus, and among those who had their Covid jabs more than 90 days ago. But other factors are also at play. “Reinfection is a result of a combination of exposure and risk once exposed,” said Prof Rowland Kao, an epidemiologist at the University of Edinburgh and member of the modelling group Spi-M, adding that the risk once exposed can be affected by elements such as the time since last infection, as well as past health. “It seems that a lot of those factors do come together to potentially increase observed reinfection rates – so many of the people who are in high-exposure jobs also are more likely to have health issues because the factors allied to deprivation are related to both,” he said. Has Omicron had an effect on reinfections? Yes. According to ONS data, the risk of reinfection was 16 times higher when Omicron became dominant in the UKcompared with the period when Delta dominated. That is not surprising: the variant has been found to be able to dodge the body’s immune responses to a significant degree. However, many of the new reinfections would have been among people who had Delta, or another variant, previously, given that the first Omicron cases were only picked up in the UK in late November. The question remains how well those who have had Omicron are protected against a second Omicron infection, or infections with new variants.Mock “appeals for information” posters highlighting misogynistic, racist and homophobic comments made by police officers in Charing Cross police station have been erected in London to increase pressure on the government to launch an inquiry into misogyny within the police. A-board signs were put up on Friday mimicking those used by police after a serious incident, which protesters led by the Women’s Equality party said was an exchange that took place between officers, in which one said: “Knock a bird about and she will love you. Human nature. They are biologically programmed to like that s***.” Earlier this week, the police watchdog revealed details of officers sharing messages about hitting and raping women, as well as the deaths of black babies and the Holocaust. The Independent Office for Police Conduct (IOPC) says the hateful and offensive remarks were part of a Met culture that needed to be rooted out. The Guardian revealed that one of the officers, who was disciplined after an inquiry into the messages, has since been promoted. “We are tired of being told it’s a few bad apples. How much more evidence does the home secretary need that misogyny is baked into our police forces?” said Mandu Reid, the leader of the Women’s Equality party. “Unless there is a proper inquiry, with statutory powers, the culture in our police forces will never change.” After the murder of Sarah Everard by the serving police officer Wayne Couzens last year, the home secretary, Priti Patel, announced a public inquiry, as the case exposed “unimaginable failures in policing”. But the non-statutory inquiry will examine only whether chances were missed to identify Couzens as a danger to women before he attacked Everard in March 2021 and will not look at wider misogyny in the force. The Centre for Women’s Justice, which was not involved in the protest, said the narrow focus of the inquiry missed a “once in a lifetime opportunity to look into and learn from many other cases of police perpetrated violence against women”. It has launched a fundraiser to challenge the decision, with lawyers to argue the inquiry is unlawful because it will fail to meet its stated aims. Harriet Wistrich, the director of the Centre for Women’s Justice, said she was “surprised but pleased” to hear about the action. “It demonstrates the strength of feeling from women across the country. We have similar concerns. If an inquiry has any chance of rooting out abusers and regaining women’s trust it needs proper powers and public scrutiny, which is a central plank of our case,” she said. A number of public figures, including the actors Olivia Colman, Sanjeev Bhaskar and Bronagh Waughs, called on the government to add misogyny to existing hate crime laws. The video was launched by the domestic abuse charity Refuge, which is backing proposals led by MPs including Stella Creasy and peers including Baroness Newlove to include misogyny as a hate crime in an amendment to the police, crime, sentencing and courts bill. Ruth Davison, Refuge’s CEO, said the amendment would give women and girls the same protections as other protected groups, help identify trends, enable tougher sentences and help women feel more confident coming forward. “Acceptance of systemic misogyny is why ‘locker-room banter’ that tries to make jokes about domestic abuse has been tolerated for years within the Met police force and in society more generally,” she said. “It is why crimes against women are not treated as the serious crimes that they are – as reflected in woefully low prosecution rates and weak sentencing.”Once again Northern Ireland is in the headlines. Stormont is on the brink of collapse and the febrile politics of orange, green and everything in between is exposed to all who do not live there. An election for the Stormont assembly looms in May and on Friday the Democratic Unionist party raised the stakes again. If the withdrawal of the first minister and an order to halt Brexit food checks mandated under the Northern Ireland protocol was not enough to convince voters it was serious in its battle against the EU and its “cheerleaders” on local territory, it also made veiled threats about its ability to return to power-sharing after the polls if the Brexit issues it is fighting are not resolved. But behind all of the melodrama lie several basic issues: the DUP is battling to recover support in the polls and Boris Johnson’s promises to address the party’s concerns over the checks are stalling. The DUP’s leader, Jeffrey Donaldson, revealed on Friday that the prime minister had told him it would take just three weeks to get a new deal on the protocol last October. More than three months later, Johnson is still arguing the case but is not cancelling the protocol. Yes Johnson has shown he likes to keep the Brexit pot boiling, recently accusing Brussels of implementing the Northern Ireland protocol in an “insane and pettifogging way”. The PM also told Donaldson last week that there was only a 20-30% chance of a new Brexit deal in the next few weeks, so the party may have been wise not to heed his earlier promises. By walking out of Stormont’s first minister’s office, the DUP is signalling that it wants the protocol to be centre stage for the approaching election. It may not be a winning argument as Lord Frost and others, before and after his resignation as Brexit minister, have never agreed that the protocol will be scrapped. For this reason the Ulster Unionist party (UUP) leader, Doug Beattie, described the DUP drama this week as “crazy”, futile, “as the protocol will still be there” after the election. Gavin Barwell, Theresa May’s former chief of staff, was equally blunt. “It should now be clear to the DUP that supporting Brexit was a huge strategic error for them and unionism in NI. It’s reduced support for the Union. It’s led to a border in the Irish Sea (because the ERG prefer that to the alternative – customs union + regulatory alignment),” he tweeted this week. The stakes for the DUP in that post-Brexit world could not be higher. Sinn Féin remains on course to overtake the DUP as the largest single party in Northern Ireland for the first time, with the UUP snapping at the DUP’s heels. Recent polls give Sinn Féin 25% of the vote, eight points ahead of the DUP and on course to take the first minister’s position. This is a nightmare scenario for the DUP which has over recent months refused to confirm whether it would participate in a coalition with a Sinn Féin first minister or take up the role of deputy first minister if returned as the second biggest party. On the unionist front it is fighting a re-energised UUP which was placed in joint-third place with the Alliance party in the most recent opinion poll in January. While the UUP may have taken a knock from the recent row over the historic tweets of its leader, Beattie, he is still in place and fighting to convince voters the party offers a more socially liberal outlook than the DUP. Polls south of the border have also seen an extraordinary rise in the popularity of Sinn Féin. Although the next general election in Ireland is three years away, the party is in contention to be part of a government in Dublin and the spectre of a border poll on a united Ireland haunts unionists. It is on this wider canvas that the events of this week have played out in Belfast.Boris Johnson quoted from the Lion King to No 10 staff on Friday morning, telling them “change is good” amid mass resignations. The prime minister channelled the sage figure of Rafiki the mandrill as he attempted to boost morale, his spokesperson confirmed. “As Rafiki in The Lion King says, change is good, and change is necessary even though it’s tough,” Johnson said.. It comes amid a wholesale clearout of Downing Street, sparked by the resignation on Thursday of policy chief Munira Mirza – an ally of 14 years – who criticised Johnson for his “scurrilous” Jimmy Savile attacks on the Labour leader, Keir Starmer. After Mirza’s departure, resignations of four aides followed: Dan Rosenfield, chief of staff, Martin Reynolds, Johnson’s principal private secretary, Jack Doyle, director of communications, and Elena Narozanski, a No 10 policy unit member. The Lion King comments mark another children’s story reference entering Johnson’s oeuvre of bizarre quotations, from Peppa Pig to James Bond to Kermit the Frog. Peppa Pig During a speech widely criticised as “rambling” and lacking seriousness, Johnson stunned the British business community by expounding the benefits of Peppa Pig World – and its mass transport system. “Yesterday I went, as we all must, to Peppa Pig World. Hands up if you’ve been to Peppa Pig World,” Johnson asked the Confederation of British Industry in November. “I loved it. Peppa Pig World is very much my kind of place,” he went on. “It has very safe streets, discipline in schools, heavy emphasis on new mass transit systems. Even if they’re a bit stereotypical about Daddy Pig.” Kermit the Frog Ahead of the UN Cop26 summit in Glasgow in November, Johnson was called a “clown” after referencing Kermit the Frog when making the case for going green. “When Kermit the Frog sang It’s Not Easy Bein’ Green I want you to know he was wrong,” Johnson said. “It’s not only easy, it’s lucrative and it’s right to be green – and he was also unnecessarily rude to Miss Piggy, I thought.” Rudyard Kipling The prime minister was criticised for “incredible insensitivity” after reciting a poem by Rudyard Kipling, author of pro-empire work such as The White Man’s Burden, during a trip to Myanmar in 2017. Johnson, then foreign secretary, recited the opening verse to The Road to Mandalay, including the line: “The temple bells they say / Come you back you English soldier.” The British Empire ruled Myanmar – then called Burma – from 1824 to 1948. The UK ambassador to Myanmar, Andrew Patrick, intervened, telling Johnson: “No. Not appropriate.” James Bond At Cop26, Johnson used James Bond to welcome world leaders to the UK. “Welcome to Glasgow, and to Scotland, whose most globally famous fictional son is almost certainly a man called James Bond – who generally comes to the climax of his highly lucrative films strapped to a doomsday device desperately trying to work out which coloured wire to pull to turn it off,” he said. “A red digital clock ticks down remorselessly to a detonation that will end human life as we know it, and we are in roughly the same position, my fellow global leaders, as James Bond today. “Except that the tragedy is this is not a movie, and the doomsday device is real.” Johnson seemed to flout climate activist Greta Thunberg’s advice during Cop26: “No more blah blah blah.”The UK film and TV industry has bounced back spectacularly from the pandemic with a record £5.6bn spent making blockbusters such as Mission: Impossible 7 and big-budget dramas including Bridgerton in the UK last year. It was double the level of investment in 2020, when the spread of coronavirus shut down the production industry for months on end. The production industry moved into overdrive last year as broadcasters, streaming platforms and Hollywood studios worked to replenish their depleted content libraries for the small and big screen, with spending up almost £1.3bn on the previous record set in pre-pandemic 2019. “The demand for content has never been greater,” said Adrian Wootton, chief executive of the British Film Commission. “The UK is enjoying a once in a generation growth in production.” The annual figures compiled by the British Film Institute highlight the battle for viewers being waged between streaming companies such as Netflix and Disney, and traditional broadcasters such as Sky, the BBC and ITV. A record £4.1bn was spent making 211 high-end TV shows costing at least £1m an episode, such as new series of Bridgerton, The Crown and The Bay, almost three-quarters of the total spent on all film and TV production last year. The figure includes £737m spent on films made specifically for release on streaming platforms, such as Pinocchio, which the BFI classifies as TV spend. The overall amount spent on making premium shows last year is almost £2bn up on 2019. More than 200 films were shot in the UK last year with £1.55bn spent on production, up 13% on 2020 but down on the £1.95bn in 2019. However, just nine Hollywood blockbusters, including The Batman, Aquaman 2 and The Marvels, accounted for £1bn of that spend. “The record-breaking level of film and TV production in the UK revealed today is good news for our industry and the UK economy and demonstrates the speed of the sector’s recovery,” said Ben Roberts, the chief executive of the BFI. While the UK has for many years proved extremely popular as a base – thanks to a combination of generous tax relief, a highly skilled workforce and talent base – the speed with which production was able to restart has given the country a competitive edge as a location of choice. Initiatives include the £500m government-backed insurance scheme, which has so far enabled more than 1,000 productions with budgets worth £2.6bn to be made, plus the quick introduction of Covid health and safety protocols and quarantine exemptions for essential crew and talent to fly to the UK. “We have supported the industry through the pandemic and these brilliant figures highlight the importance of the sector to our economy,” said the culture secretary, Nadine Dorries. In August, Amazon made the surprise decision to move its $1bn-plus Lord of the Rings production to the UK, having filmed one series in New Zealand. “That was an Amazon choice, not ours,” said Roberts. In November, Netflix struck a deal to double the size of its base at Shepperton Studios, where it has made productions including the TV series Enola Holmes and the Charlize Theron film The Old Guard, and spent about $1bn this year making 60 TV shows and films in the UK. Disney has a similar large-scale deal at Pinewood Studios, where Star Wars and Marvel films are based, and Apple has secured facilities in Aylesbury, Buckinghamshire. The streaming wars have sparked a response from traditional broadcasters with Sky, which is building a new large-scale complex at Elstree in Hertfordshire, with Comcast-owned stablemate Universal Studios, unveiling its biggest-ever slate of original content investing in 125 TV series and films this year. “The groundwork for further growth is under way with expansion of studio spaces and production hot spots across our nations and regions,” said Roberts. “And we are working with industry to build up the skilled workforce that we need to meet demand and stay on top of our game.”This year just happens to be the 1,900th anniversary of the building of Hadrian’s Wall and it feels almost as long since English rugby fans headed north with so much apprehension. While the Calcutta Cup dates back “only” to 1879, Scotland have rarely been as fancied to retain the venerable trophy or inflict successive Six Nations defeats on their neighbours for the first time in 38 years. The weather is slightly ominous, too. While Met Office forecasts have improved since AD122, when the emperor Hadrian sought to protect the Roman empire by constructing a 73-mile barrier between the Tyne and the Solway Firth, some things never change. Let’s just say few would choose to be erecting much, or catching rugby balls, in the heavy rain and gusty winds reportedly heading Murrayfield’s way. Foul conditions are not exactly alien to this fixture and England did just about manage to see off Storm Ciara and Scotland at Murrayfield two years ago. This time it could be that the worst of the tempest will have passed through by kick-off but a settled, ambitious Scotland side, having triumphed at Twickenham 12 months ago, have it in them to unleash a devastating storm of their own making. If the burden of favouritism has never sat comfortably on dark blue shoulders, there are good reasons why Gregor Townsend’s side should not be taken lightly. They have a generous sprinkling of Lions, increasing depth and, in Finn Russell, a potential matchwinner in any company. England, by contrast, lack some totemic figures, with more than half their reshuffled starting XV about to play their first Tests in Scotland. Two years ago young Freddie Steward featured in the Under-20s fixture at a chilly Myreside but a packed, hostile Murrayfield will be a wholly different proposition. The ghosts of wet, windy Calcutta Cups past will also be roaming the Edinburgh gloaming. No Scot will easily forget Duncan Hodge’s slithering try in 2000 – as well as the famous “Battlers 19 Bottlers 13” headline the next day – nor the two similarly damp ambushes in 2006 and 2008 at the expense of English teams guided by Andy Robinson and Brian Ashton respectively. Nowadays, though, Scotland have the ability to impose themselves regardless of the elements. England were a touch fortunate to sneak home two years ago and were well beaten in 2018 when, with Russell whirling his baton, the hosts won 25-13. What a stark – and welcome – contrast it was to the 2014 post-match mood when the fixture had become so one-sided – and the Murrayfield pitch so parasite-infected – that the case for promotion to the Six Nations felt stronger than ever. The Anglo-Scottish wheel has now turned full circle. England have failed to win three of the last four Calcutta Cup fixtures and will need to dig deep if the Duchess of Cambridge, the Rugby Football Union’s newly minted patron, is to get one over the Princess Royal, her opposite number at the Scottish Rugby Union. The tactical jousting between the coaches will also be fascinating, with Townsend certain to urge his forwards to complicate the life of Ben Youngs, winning his 113th England cap, and his red rose half-back partner Marcus Smith. England were way too slow and ill-disciplined at Twickenham 12 months ago but, perversely, it may have done them a favour in retrospect. Eddie Jones, having opted to ditch the stifling, risk-averse rugby he had previously advocated, has now chosen the most mobile side at his disposal, supported by some heavy-duty “finishers” on the bench, and has given the visitors a puncher’s chance as a result. As it happens the head coach is friendly with the Celtic manager, Ange Postecoglou, and would settle for a similar outcome to Wednesday night’s Old Firm derby. The only snag is that Scotland have also picked a canny-looking XV and know precisely what they are looking to do. Stay disciplined, build momentum, make England fretful, take their chances and, most crucially of all, keep playing for the full 80 minutes. Last time out against South Africa in the autumn the Scottish thistle wilted disappointingly after the visitors had been 10-8 down at the interval. England, by contrast, held on to defeat the Springboks 27-26 at Twickenham the following Saturday and will cling to the belief that, coming down the stretch, they can conjure up something similarly satisfying. If anyone is going to be in the mood for some conjuring, though, it is Russell and it was no surprise to hear Anthony Seibold, England’s gravel-voiced Australian defence coach, acknowledging his new side cannot give the home fly-half the luxury of time or space. In that regard the most pivotal English players could be Sam Simmonds and Elliot Daly, both of whom have had to bide their time prior to their starting recalls this week. Simmonds will be expected to carry plenty of ball and pierce the Scottish advantage line and also make his presence felt at the breakdown. Daly, finally back in his preferred 13 jersey, will also need to be at his defensive best against Chris Harris, Stuart Hogg and Duhan van der Merwe, all fellow Lions tourists last summer. Without Owen Farrell, Courtney Lawes and assorted others it promises to be a test of English resilience all round. The ‘r’ word has been frequently heard in their camp this week but, ultimately, there is no particular need for England’s new captain Tom Curry, his country’s youngest skipper since 1988, to deliver a lengthy speech for his troops. The potential implications of this contest should already be obvious enough, with the tournament prospects of both squads inextricably linked to the outcome. Send the English home empty-handed and Townsend’s army, with France also due to travel to Murrayfield, can cautiously begin to dream about a potentially epic campaign. Should England, alternatively, somehow overcome all the hassles of recent weeks they will head to Rome next week suddenly free of self-doubt and believing that anything is possible. It should be a belting game either way. Is it ever so slightly telling that England have declined to allow cameras into their dressing room while Scotland have had no such qualms? It threatens to be a day of drenched coats, sodden kilts and dripping sporrans but clear eyes and full hearts will also be required on the field. There have been reports this week of unusually high numbers of trees and plants blooming early because of global warming. The Flower of Scotland could soon be among them.WAR IS NOT OVER In the lead-up to Thursday night’s Afcon semi-final between Cameroon and Egypt, a minor exchange of views broke out between Samuel Eto’o and Carlos Queiroz. Eto’o, formerly Cameroon’s star striker and now president of their federation, referred to the upcoming match as a “war”, causing Egypt coach Queiroz to respond philosophically. “Football is not about war,” he insisted. “Football is about celebration, it’s about joy, it’s about happiness.” And so the moment those words left his lips, it instantly became inevitable that Queiroz would spend the duration of the game on a rolling boil, a bain-marie of belligerence whose bellicosity would make Vladimir Putin sound like a member of the Beatles in 1967. Queiroz was on one from the get-go, theatrically falling to his knees on the touchline after a full 12 minutes of action, in protest at the award of a garden-variety free-kick in midfield. Referee Bakary Gassama came across to give him the what-for, but not a word of the lecture sunk in, and the Egypt coach kept at it for the next 75 minutes, missing not a beat until he was yellow-carded for flapping his neck once too often. Then, a full three minutes after that, Gassama showed him a red for demanding action over some minor squabble or other. Cue jets of steam from the Queirozian lugs, and a chest-out march towards the official that for a split second looked like the precursor to the throwing of hands. Come along now, Carlos, remember your special words: celebration, joy, happiness. Fortunately for Queiroz, he was pulled away mid-fume by his assistant Wael Gomaa and dispatched down the tunnel, where the words eff and jeff could be heard pinging off the walls. Gomaa was later shown a yellow card himself, his second of the tournament, which means both Egypt coaches will miss the final, a match their players will contest alone on Sunday thanks to Cameroon not bothering to practise penalties. Queiroz had barely calmed down by the time of his post-match presser, in which he accused Gassama of “wanting to put on a show” and coming into Egypt’s dressing room before the game “to intimidate our staff”. Egypt also furiously called on the CAF to push the final back to Monday, on account of their being a bit knackered, and Senegal having one extra day to prepare. In effect, it was a declaration of war on officialdom, made when they should have been joyfully celebrating a happy result. Oh Carlos! Remember your special words! LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE! Join Scott Murray for hot FA Cup fourth round MBM coverage of Manchester United 0-0 Middlesbrough (aet;4-2 on pens) from 8pm GMT. QUOTE OF THE DAY “I was apparently dancing around with a mop at midnight” – Kidderminster chairman Richard Lane on their FA Cup third-round upset against Reading and the proper old-school cup fever gripping the town before their last-32 date with West Ham. FIVER LETTERS “Even if I have no understanding of the competition, have no dog in the race, don’t know who the players are or have no financial interest, I still get incredibly nervous at a penalty shootout. I get no sense of victory or satisfaction, nor do I experience disappointment. Is this normal? Is there a cure? Is there a helpline?” – Michael Lloyd. “Afcon Not 2021 sees referees with their names emblazoned on their jerseys. Can we expect this to become de rigueur in the Premier League, and with the penchant for first names and sobriquets in said league, perhaps we will see Mike Dean officiating with ‘Deano’ or ‘Miko’ printed across his shoulders?” – Kevin Worley. “I was interested to read in yesterday’s Fiver the USA! USA!! USA!!! coach complain about ‘those countries’ that resorted to using heat and humidity to disadvantage visiting teams. In 1986, the Socceroos lost 2-0 at Hampden to Scotland. Instead of playing the return leg in Cairns, Townsville or Darwin in the middle of the day in December, it was played in Melbourne at night under lights. The 0-0 result meant Scotland qualified for Mexico, where they picked up one point and finished bottom of the group (roughly what Australia would have achieved). I am sure that faced with the same decision 40 years later, the FFA would make the same flamin’ mistake” – Drew Wagner. “Your mention of the Snow Clásico took me back. As one of those who attended, I remember the excited crowd, the shirtless lunatics, and the snow sliding off the stadium roof on to unsuspecting supporters below. My proudest memory, however, was that I put some effort into remembering exactly where I’d parked my car – good thing since it was barely recognisable under several inches of snow by the end of the match” – Sarah Rothwell. “For anyone who grew up in the Medway Delta or watched ice hockey games from the mid-1980s to the mid-2000s, there is another Ice Bowl that evokes a certain ‘notoriety’, namely Gillingham’s premier ice sports facility. When I read about USA! USA!! USA!!! trying to recreate it, I assumed they meant that the lights would randomly change if someone hit the boards too hard, that the broken PA system would resist any and all attempts to be repaired, that a significant number of seats would be in disrepair, that the floors would be so dirty you’d think twice about retrieving a dropped £1 coin, and that there would never quite be enough hot water in the away dressing room for every player to have a warm shower” – Ed Taylor. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’ the day is … Michael Lloyd. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS Concacaf has expressed its “extreme surprise and concern” that the St Kitts and Nevis FA again claimed it consulted them over the appointment of a coach accused of sexually abusing and harassing female players in Barbados. Steve Bruce is back, baby, and reckons the challenge of making West Brom boing back into the Premier League was too good to turn down. “If I didn’t think [they] could get [there], I wouldn’t be sat here,” he blabbed. “Is it a drug? Is it something inside you? It’s what you do. You go to work. I’m a spring chicken compared to [Mr] Roy.” Pep Guardiola has admitted his relationship with João Cancelo was a bit like Weird Uncle Fiver’s with his parrot, Judy, before they really hit it off. “We struggled together in the first part where he arrived – we did not agree on many things, partly because of my mistakes,” parped Pep. “Now he is an incredible person and I’m so delighted that he’s happy.” And Boreham Wood boss Luke Garrard is aiming to reward chairman Danny Hunter when the National League side head to Bournemouth on Sunday. “We are getting an opportunity to repay the chairman for what he did in the pandemic, paying us all 100%, paying for my food shopping, who does that, what chairman does that?” posed Garrard. “So if we can repay him with one small moment on Sunday, I will make a fat man very happy – and those are his words, not mine so I am not being disrespectful in any way, shape or form.” STILL WANT MORE? Ten things to look out for from the 16 FA Cup ties this weekend have been flagged up for your attention. Plymouth Argyle midfielder Jordan Houghton gets his chat on with Ben Fisher before returning to former club Chelsea on Saturday. Meanwhile, Karen Carney on the perils of being the giant in cup ties. “The board should resign: they came up with this”: Libby Brooks catches up with Raith Rovers fans after a shameful week for much of their club’s hierarchy. And if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! ‘FAR FROM MY HOMETOWN’A new side of Charlotte Brontë, showing the author of Jane Eyre’s unexpected penchant for colourful, fashionable, even “sensual” clothing, is revealed in a new exhibition at the Brontë Parsonage Museum. Displaying everything from Charlotte’s bright pink wrapper, which she would have worn around the house, to the extraordinary item known as an “ugly bonnet” which was the height of fashion at the time and which she sported to protect herself from the Yorkshire weather, the exhibition opened this week at the Brontës’ home in Haworth, West Yorkshire. “My personal favourite is her pink wrapper, which is a really, really strange garment,” said Dr Eleanor Houghton, a historian, writer and illustrator who has co-curated the exhibition. “It was a sort of house coat with a matching cape. It’s hideous, pink, with little flowers on it, very bold, very bright and huge – very voluminous. It’s absolutely the opposite of anything you would ever associate with Charlotte Brontë.” This item of clothing would have been part of Charlotte’s wedding trousseau when she married Arthur Bell Nicholls in 1854. “It’s a sensual garment, it’s something that she would have been seen in in the house, and with Nicholls. So while it’s not exactly a negligee, it’s sort of a Victorian equivalent. It’s an intimate garment,” said Houghton. Dresses of red and orange, and paisley patterned materials, are also shown in the Defying Expectations exhibition – along with the ugly bonnet, a fashion item Charlotte would have bought on a trip to London, and was likely to be the first person in Haworth to own. “It’s a really fascinating item: it was a sort of hands-free parasol,” said Houghton. “It was worn around the front of the bonnet rim to help protect the wearer’s face from the sun. It pulls down, a bit like a pram hood. I have to say I can’t imagine it catching on again, but it’s great seeing her within the context of these slightly mad innovations – we just don’t associate Charlotte with that at all.” The exhibition also features a striped evening dress, which was found hidden away during previous renovations of the Brontë Parsonage Museum and which Houghton’s research has confirmed for the first time as being owned by Charlotte. And it includes a pair of beaded moccasins believed to have been a gift from her publishers in New York. “Those moccasins may well have influenced her writing of Shirley – there’s lots of references to Mohawks, and that is exactly where her moccasins come from,” said Houghton. The academic has also done experiments on the fabric of the striped dress, working with the University of Southampton to discover that it is partly made from alpaca fibres – a cutting-edge material at the time, likely to have been manufactured nearby. “All these things really connect her to the place in which she was living but also to this much more globalised world. It helps to release her from the myth that she was holed up in Haworth separate from everyone else, because it’s simply not true. There were many more forces at play, and I think that it shows a much more vital and relevant person,” said Houghton. “The items that have been placed on display wonderfully and tangibly demonstrate that the prevailing preconception that Brontë remained entirely unaffected by the fast-changing world of which she was part is untrue. Moreover, these garments prove that Charlotte and her most famous protagonist were not, in sartorial terms at least, interchangeable.” The exhibition is the first time Brontë has been “celebrated through her clothes”, said the museum, which will run the display of more than 20 pieces of her clothing and accessories until 1 January 2023. “When I first started working here, we couldn’t display some of the items included in this exhibition as people simply wouldn’t have believed that they belonged to the family – they were so outlandish,” said principal curator Ann Dinsdale. “Seeing the personal items these young women wore brings out an emotional response from audiences; it reminds us that these globally significant writers were also human. I think this exhibition, showing Charlotte’s sense of style and her interest in contemporary patterns and materials, will surprise visitors.” The author was around 4ft 10in, and the museum said visitors were always surprised by her size.From Ozark to Returnal, Euphoria to Uncut Gems, it increasingly feels like modern entertainment exists solely to stress audiences out. While it’s undeniably brilliant that modern television offers viewers less Xena: Warrior Princess and more Succession, if I’m honest, sometimes all I really want from my flickering screen is something calming. Thank God then, for OlliOlli World. Draped in an Adventure Time-esque art style and accompanied by a soundtrack so soothing it would make Anderson .Paak blush, this colourful skater is refreshingly vibey. Packed full of popping pastel colours and littered with a string of self-aware dad jokes, it’s a world away from the grungey skateboarding of the 90s. It’s indicative, really, of where 2022 youth culture is at. Where Tony Hawk’s Pro Skater opted for sweat-inducing trick challenges and blasted punk rock ragers, OlliOlli World leans astutely into the meditative. In other words, this pixelated playground is a weirdly namaste take on the skateboarder – a virtual trickathon for the yoga bros and bliss-seeking baddies of TikTok. Fittingly then, OlliOlli World isn’t a game about exploration or story but one built around achieving that hypnotic state of “flow”. Combining the automated movement of endless runners such as Temple Run with simple controls and clever checkpointing, it tasks players solely with focusing on the timing of their jumps and nailing tricks. It’s easy to suddenly find yourself lost in a zen-like trance, joyfully hopping and tricking across Radlandia’s fictional locales while enjoying your favourite podcast. It helps that OlliOlli World drip-feeds each new mechanic to the player with the patience of a saint-like primary school teacher. Grabs are pulled off using the right analogue stick, and only properly introduced at the end of the second world – a third of the way through the game. This tactile take on the tutorial is a masterclass in layering game mechanics, waiting until you just begin to feel like a boarding badass before serving up new tricks to master. While there are a lot of things to love about this delightfully vibrant adventure, its characters aren’t among them. As you pelt your way through each course, you find yourself cheered on by a menagerie of mediocre misfits. Churning out skating puns at a wince-inducing rate, sadly OlliOlli World’s wink-wink nudge-nudge dialogue is never quite as witty as it thinks it is. Still, despite the very “how do you do fellow kids” feel, the so-so script does enough to keep the good times rolling along with your avatar. While these cringey cheerleaders will have you hammering the skip button, the intricate stage backgrounds make this fantastical world come alive. Looking like a playable version of a kitschy kawaii fashion blog, this kingdom of eye-popping pinks, giant donuts and hipster animals blends together to create something wonderfully warm and relaxing. Heck, even the way Roll7 approaches challenges and high scores is disarmingly laid-back. Where Hawk’s branded skating sim demands players complete certain objectives in order to proceed, here, simply reaching the end of each pastel playground is enough. Are there additional challenges begging to be bested? Absolutely, but you can tackle those trickier tasks whenever you feel ready, leaving players to ollie and manual across Radlandia at whatever pace they please. In almost every facet of its design, OlliOlli World wants players to feel at home – and that even extends to your customisable, air-grabbing avatar. While the endless slew of unlockable T-shirts, decks and hats eventually lose their charm, I took unusually great pride in making sure that my cartoony creation matched the vision of the hipster skater I dreamed up. As a 30-year-old who started saying the word “rad” ironically and now can’t stop, OlliOlli World feels laser targeted at people like me. From its free-spirited counterculture flavour to its flamboyant aesthetic, this is the gaming equivalent of a weekend trip to Brighton: an interactive experience for those who can’t actually skateboard but religiously buy a new pair of Vans anyway. If you’re feeling understandably worn down by the monotony of the daily grind, OlliOlli World is the charming virtual alternative. • OlliOlli World is released on 8 February, £20.On 27 September 1955, James Wharram set sail from Falmouth in a 23½ft flat-bottomed double canoe (now called a catamaran) that he had built himself at a cost of £200, with no engine, and none of the electronic navigation equipment today’s sailors take for granted. His quest was to cross the Atlantic, in order to prove that such a vessel, the ancient craft of the Polynesians, was an oceanworthy one. The boat was called Tangaroa, after the Polynesian god of the sea. With Wharram, who has died aged 93, were two German women, Jutta Schultze-Rhonhof and Ruth Merseburger, both of whom he was romantically involved with. “They were very happy to share ‘their man’,” he wrote. “There was no jealousy.” Wharram’s book about this and subsequent voyages was titled Two Girls, Two Catamarans (1969) and it seemed like the ultimate hippy adventure, before hippies had even been invented. But the trip was far from plain sailing. There were storms in the Bay of Biscay; in Spain Franco’s Guardia Civil thought the travellers were spies; in Gran Canaria they encountered former SS officers escaping to South America; they nearly capsized twice crossing the Atlantic. Wharram and Shultze-Rhonhof were terribly seasick; she found out she was pregnant; and meanwhile Tangaroa’s wooden hulls were being eaten by shipworms. Somehow, after a gruelling five-week crossing, they reached Trinidad. If anything, though, it was more like a beginning than an end. Schultze-Rhonhof gave birth to a son, Hannes. Wharram built a new, bigger catamaran, named Rongo, that they sailed to New York, arriving in 1959. There he found himself alongside Sir Edmund Hillary on a TV quiz show called To Tell the Truth; the audience had to guess which of the three contestants posing as the mountaineer was the real one. Hillary helped Wharram win, and with the prize money he was able to buy a radio for his next voyage, another Atlantic crossing, back to Britain later that year. Wharram was well on his way to a life of seafaring, boat design and boatbuilding. He was born in Manchester, the only child of James, a builder, and his wife, Blanche (nee Cook). As a teenager Wharram enjoyed climbing and roaming the moors. And he read, spending hours in the city’s central library reading about boats, particularly about the ancient Polynesian boats. The Voyage of the Kaimiloa by Éric de Bisschop (1939), about sailing from Hawaii to France, became a lifelong love and inspiration. He also read George Bernard Shaw, HG Wells, Bertrand Russell, William Morris, Adam Smith, Karl Marx and John Maynard Keynes; he became chairman of a Labour party youth group, but was saved from politics by his wanderlust. Wharram left technical college to travel and work around Europe, where he discovered a new love: for women. Traudl, an Austrian psychologist, introduced him to Freud and Jung. Pat, an American 10 years his senior, gave him a book called Boat Building in Your Own Back Yard. Back in the UK, he worked as a labourer, on a trawler, in a boat yard. Walking in the Lake District, he met Merseburger, who would accompany him on that first transatlantic voyage on Tangaroa with Schultze-Rhonhof, whom he met at a swimming pool. Wharram married Schultze-Rhonhof in 1959, but she had a breakdown, and died falling from a tower in Spain. Five years later, Wharram married Merseburger. They remained together until her death in 2013, joined in the late 60s by Hanneke Boon, who met Wharram when her family, holidaying in Wales, had helped him on another boat-building project. He and Hanneke had a son, Jamie. There were other women coming and going, further catamarans, and further adventurous trips, then a business the three of them ran together from Cornwall, where they settled. Wharram designed catamarans based on Polynesian principles, and they sold the designs. These are not boats for millionaire yachties, but for enthusiasts to make themselves and get to sea cheaply. And Wharram was not your typical yachtsman; it is perhaps not surprising the sailing establishment has sometimes viewed him with some suspicion. He was impossible to ignore, though, and slowly they came round to him. “Who is James Wharram?” asked the yachting writer Tom Cunliffe in Sail magazine in 2007. “Is he a philosopher, or a crackpot? A lifestyle guru or a libertine? Could he be a madman or might he be perhaps, unsettlingly sane? One thing is for sure: he is one of 20th-century seafaring’s most iconic figures.” In 2018 he won a lifetime achievement award from Classic Boat magazine. In his last years Wharram lived with Alzheimer’s disease. “He struggled with his diminished existence,” wrote Boon, whom he married in 2018. “He could not face the prospect of further disintegration and made the very hard call to end it himself.” Wharram took his own life. He is survived by Hanneke, Hannes (now known as Jonathan) and Jamie. • James Wharram, sailor and boat designer, born 15 May 1928; died 14 December 2021Jimmy Kimmel On Thursday night, late-night hosts tore into Fox, the network which airs the reality show The Masked Singer, after the former Trump lawyer Rudy Giuliani was unmasked during a recent taping. “The guy who’s trying to destroy our country? He’s singing on a show!” mocked Jimmy Kimmel. “How does this even happen?” he wondered. “I mean, a lot of people at Fox had to sign off on this – not one of them was like, ‘Hey maybe we shouldn’t have the guy who’s under investigation for helping to plot an insurrection singing on our show?’” “Why would Rudy even agree to do this? Was he thinking he was going to the Masked Singer Landscaping Company?” Kimmel continued, referencing Giuliani’s infamous appearance at Four Seasons Total Landscaping in November 2020. “Only Rudy Giuliani would try to overthrow the government, break wind loudly in court, sweat hair dye all over one press conference, have another one next to a dildo store, and then try to rehabilitate his image by singing Shake Your Groove Thing dressed as a pineapple,” he added. As for the network that cast Giuliani for the show – “Fox Network really should be ashamed of themselves,” said Kimmel. “They should have another show after The Masked Singer that night called The Masked Executives – all the Fox executives come out in costumes. The one who greenlit this idea takes off the mask and gets voted off television forever.” Stephen Colbert “No headline has captured the national zeitgeist of existential dread combined with ridicu-stupo-lousiness better than this,” said Stephen Colbert of Giuliani’s Masked Singer appearance. “That’s right – the criminal goon that we know for a fact is being investigated for trying to overthrow our democracy for his idiot emperor was yuckin’ it up on a reality show!” Fox has not revealed what Giuliani sang for his “swan song” or what his costume was, “but it’s safe to assume he was a jackass”, Colbert quipped. A lot of people were upset by the reveal, “but it may not be the producers’ fault”, he joked. “It’s possible that Rudy got drunk and wandered on to the Fox lot and passed out in a costume.” Even people on the show disagreed with the decision to cast Giuliani; upon Giuliani’s reveal, according to Deadline, judges Ken Jeong and Robin Thicke left the stage in protest. “Or they left in terror,” mused Colbert. “I mean, one of the most chilling phrases in the English language is ‘surprise, it’s Rudy Giuliani!’” Trevor Noah And on the Daily Show, Trevor Noah discussed a new lawsuit against the NFL alleging racial discrimination in its hiring of head coaches. The former Miami Dolphins head coach Brian Flores is suing three teams and the league itself, which he claims “is racially segregated and is managed much like a plantation”. Flores, who is Black, was fired by the Dolphins last month despite leading the team to its first back-to-back winning seasons since 2003. The lawsuit, filed in Manhattan federal court on Tuesday, alleges poor treatment by the Dolphins organization and that the New York Giants interviewed him for a head coaching position after it had already decided on a white coach. The superfluous interview would have fulfilled the NFL’s Rooney rule, which requires teams to interview at least one minority candidate for head coaching positions. “Which is cool, but now Brian Flores is saying these interviews he’s getting? They’re not real,” said Noah. “These teams are just going through the motions to satisfy the Rooney rule. “Think of it this way: it’s almost like when your mom emails you that her friend from church, her son is moving to your city, and she wants you to be friends with him,” he continued. “And yeah, you go get a beer with him, just to make your mom happy, but you know for a fact you’re never gonna hire him for your friend.” In his lawsuit, Flores highlights a glaring lack of diversity in the NFL’s coaching ranks. More than two-thirds of the league’s players are Black, but there is only one black head coach for 32 teams – two fewer than when the rule was instituted in 2003. “So the Rooney rule is basically as useless as the five-second rule,” said Noah. On top of that, Black coaches in general advance slower and have shorter tenures than white coaches. “Now, is the NFL doing this on purpose to Black coaches? Nobody knows,” Noah mused. “I mean, maybe. Or maybe it’s an unconscious bias. And that’s what makes racism so hard to prove these days. Because back in the day, when someone was being racist to you, you knew. Because they’d be upfront. They’d be like, ‘oh you? You want the head coaching job? You’re one funny Negro!’ “But that’s why proving racism for Black people in 2022 can be so frustrating,” he concluded. “Sometimes it feels like you’re the only person in a horror movie who actually knows what’s going on.”A farmer who used his forklift tractor to flip and push a Vauxhall Corsa car off his land after a row with the driver over blocking access has been cleared by a jury of dangerous driving and criminal damage after going through “months of hell”. Robert Hooper, 57, a fourth-generation hill farmer, used a telehandler with forks to lift the car from a lane outside his farm in Newbiggin-in-Teesdale, County Durham, flip it and push it on its side on to the road outside, mobile phone footage played to Durham crown court showed. Hooper argued that an “Englishman’s home is his castle”, and claimed he had been punched by Charlie Burns, 21, a passenger in the car, when he first politely asked him and the driver to leave as they were blocking access on a busy day on the farm. Burns, who had been visiting the area on that day last June and had drunk up to seven bottles of lager, was knocked to the ground by the vehicle’s lifting forks, the jury heard. Hooper, who has no previous convictions, claimed the younger man punched him twice in the farm buggy he was driving, splitting his lip. He said he told the driver, Elliott Johnson, and Burns: “If you don’t move it, I will.” Hooper said: “I thought, ‘We have a bit of a problem here, there’s two of them, half my age.’ I didn’t know what they had in terms of weapons, or what they were capable of doing. I thought if the car was off the property, that would be them off the property, out of the way.” He told the court he was aware of an “influx” of youths visiting the area that summer, some of whom were engaging in antisocial behaviour. He added: “I felt threatened, and an Englishman’s home is his castle, and my castle starts at that front gate.” In his closing speech to the jury, Michael Rawlinson, defending, gave the origin of the saying, referring to comments made by judge Sir Edward Coke, which set legal precedents in 1604. Referring to arguments about how Hooper could have acted differently that day, Rawlinson also quoted the boxer Mike Tyson, saying: “Everyone has a plan until they get punched in the mouth.” In a statement after Hooper’s acquittal, his partner, Kate Henderson, said: “The overwhelming support of the local community and people from afar have kept him going these last eight months of hell.” Burns had been drinking with friends at Low Force waterfall and was intending to walk 52 miles back to South Tyneside when he spotted his friend, Johnson, whose Corsa had suffered a double puncture, which was why they parked in the farmer’s lane, the jury heard. In his closing remarks, David Ward, prosecuting, told the jury the crown was not saying that Hooper was a “thug”, but that his actions were “utterly irrational” that day. Teesdale farmers who were there to support Hooper, welcomed the verdicts after a four-day trial. William Wearmouth told reporters: “He is absolutely first class. He is a hard-working man. He will help anyone with anything. It’s great to see that the jury has realised this.” John Dickinson said: “It’s a really good result for the local area. Robert is a very decent, upstanding man who shouldn’t have to have gone through all this.”* clues involving Shakespeare characters Across 1* Shylock SH  LOCK Merchant of Venice 5 produce PRO/DUCE 10 trap PART (rev) 11 at a tangent A  GENT 12 stream ST  EAM 13* diagonal IAGO in LAND (rev) Othello 14* consortia CONS + (p)ORTIA Merchant of Venice 16* Flute/flute double def Midsummer Night’s Dream 17* Viola/viola double def Twelfth Night 19 chargrill CHAR/G&lt;(skewe)R&gt;ILL 23 São Paulo S(ex)A(ppeal) + 0  0 24* bottom/Bottom double def Midsummer Night’s Dream 26* Fortinbras for tin bras (hom) 27* Puck/puck double def Midsummer Night’s Dream 28 integer GREETIN(g) (anag) 29 ascribe A/S  (pac)E Down 2* Horatio HO(use)/RATIO Hamlet 3 lapse laps (hom) 4* Cranmer publiC RAN ME Ragged (hidden) Henry VIII 6* Reagan RE 
<a>GAN King Lear 7 dog collar D  OLLAR [Rev Spooner] 8 contact CONT(r)ACT [R = Republican] 9 sandwich board SANDWICH + BOARD 15 saltpetre LATEST REP(ort) (anag) 18 Idahoan AD (rev) in HANOI (anag) 20 rebuses RE BUSES 21 lion cub B  OIL (rev) 22* quince/Quince double def [Midsummer Night’s Dream] 25 toper RE/POT (rev)  </a>There is one no-no in an Alexander Zeldin rehearsal, and that’s being theatrical. As the cast of his first French play, A Death in the Family, rehearses carefully choreographed entrances set in a care home, the British playwright and director keeps returning to the theme. “Factual, simple. No theatre here,” he tells one actor. “You’re wonderful as you are,” he says to another. “If you do more, it becomes theatre.” It’s a delightful paradox for someone who is singularly obsessed with theatre, as I realise when I meet him close to his Paris flat. The 36-year-old, who found international success with an arresting trilogy, The Inequalities (Beyond Caring, Love, and Faith, Hope and Charity) that laid bare the human cost of austerity in Britain, moved here temporarily last September. He was worried, he tells me, that Covid restrictions would make travel difficult for his rehearsals. Still, when I ask him what daily life has been like in the French capital, he is stumped. “Well, I’m working all the time,” he says, stressing “all”. Putting on a new show with a majority of actors over the age of 85 certainly proved an all-consuming endeavour in a pandemic. Any Covid case triggered stringent protocols; as a result, the premiere was pushed back three times. “It’s an incredibly difficult project,” Zeldin admits. Yet he had wanted to work with elderly people for a long time, and the past two years – “when there were so many numbers on screen of deaths happening” – only reinforced that. When Zeldin was 15, the loss of his own father had ripple effects. A Russian-Jewish refugee who came to Britain and worked in Oxford as a lecturer in education, his father developed progressive supranuclear palsy and died after years of illness. One of his father’s last projects was to write a novel, and Zeldin shared the first pages he wrote as a teenager with him. Zeldin had long been a student at the multilingual Europa School UK, formerly accredited as the UK’s only “European School,” a utopian intergovernmental venture supported by the European Union. (It lost that status last year due to Brexit.) He learned his fluent French there, but “kind of got thrown out” around the time of his father’s death: “I was smoking a lot of weed and being a bit …” he trails off. He threw himself into theatre instead. By 17, he was at the Edinburgh fringe with a play inspired by Marguerite Duras. Glimpses of the Dying Process had the dubious honour of being voted the worst play at the fringe that year by one critic. When he got into Oxford University – “I went because I thought my father would have wanted me to go, if I’m honest” – he set up his own theatre group outside the university, working “for six or seven hours a day, six days a week.” What about his French degree? “I didn’t go to any lectures. I just read the books.” Zeldin’s restless appetite for all forms of performances then led him abroad. He went to Egypt, where he rehearsed one play for a full year; to South Korea, Georgia and Russia, where he dated an opera singer and decided to stay to explore his roots. Since his father never spoke Russian at home, he had to start from scratch in St Petersburg, scraping by with translation and teaching work. Eventually, the prestigious Mariinsky theatre asked him to direct several opera productions. “I did it very badly, probably,” Zeldin now demurs, but his Russian years – when he would go to ballet, opera or drama performances nearly every night – shaped his understanding of theatre. “I learned how to direct by doing opera. You’ve got three bars where there’s thinking music, or longing, and each bit is a space for something to happen. When I direct people now, I’m imagining what the music would be.” Back in the UK, however, Zeldin’s peripatetic CV didn’t help much. “The only place I could get work was at drama schools,” he says. A job at East 15 Acting School allowed him to develop plays with students; Beyond Caring, his first major hit, featured several of them. Inspired by people on zero-hours contracts, it was picked up by the National Theatre, which then produced Zeldin’s Love – this time focused on families living in temporary accommodation. Zeldin’s ability to create characters who speak to a social malaise, yet never feel preachy or impersonal, has earned him comparisons to Ken Loach – which he refutes. “That’s simplistic, because those plays are not just about social issues. They’re about human beings that are living stories of our time, because the defining idea of the UK in the last 15 years has been austerity.” While touring has grown more difficult for his UK-based company since Brexit, he is proud to be working between the UK (he is an associate director of the National Theatre) and Europe: “I just feel enriched from working in French and English. It makes my English work better and my French work better.” For A Death in the Family, which is set to be performed later in the UK, Zeldin looked back on his experience with his father – and his grandmother, who died shortly afterwards. “We went to visit her in a care home, and I remember that time as being one where we were sort of exhausted from one death, having to confront another,” he says. “Something about that moment – the care home as a setting – felt to me like it had the ingredients for a dramatic situation.” In rehearsal, Zeldin watches for details with rare intensity, stopping a scene every time it starts to feel artificial. He learned a lot, he said, from assisting Peter Brook and his co-director Marie-Hélène Estienne on their 2010 production of A Magic Flute. One of his tasks was to write a page about the show every single night. “You don’t know what to write, so you have to keep looking and looking and looking, until you see something else,” Zeldin says. A Death in the Family features both experienced professional actors and amateurs – although “they’re all professionals to me,” he says. “They’re all paid.” How does it feel to act with the likes of the 77-year-old Marie-Christine Barrault, a 1975 Oscar nominee who worked with Éric Rohmer and Annie Mercier, a legend of the French stage? Their new colleagues looked unfazed in December, and the seasoned pros love it, Zeldin tells me. “Annie says: ‘I feel like I can’t cheat in front of these people.’” Like the Inequalities trilogy, A Death in the Family forces the audience to confront a quasi-taboo – here, the reality of old age and the end of life. “I think the theatre has crippled itself by being a simulacrum of reality. That’s a mistake, in my opinion, about what theatre is,” Zeldin says. “Theatre has always been a way of getting us closer to the force of life,” says Zeldin, before catching himself: “I’m getting a bit philosophical now, but fuck it. I mean, I care about this shit. I think we need that in our society: we need to find a way to talk about things that we don’t want to see.” A Death in the Family is at the Odéon – Théâtre de l’Europe, Paris, until 20 February.In British politics, and nowhere more so than in Downing Street, trust between political advisers and their principals is at a premium. Once advisers have hitched themselves to a star, they tend to stay hitched. The sense of being bound by a common cause, jointly confronting an unsympathetic media, unresponsive institutions, a cynical party and unforgiving events is a powerful glue. There is no substitute for being up close and personal when a prime minister faces agonising choices for which there is no easy answer. Sometimes it creates an unshakeable bond for life. Alastair Campbell, press secretary to Tony Blair, knows Blair’s faults and his own, but they remain close. Similarly, Andrew Adonis, head of policy in Downing Street under Blair, still regards the former prime minister as a totally exceptional politician, and makes a sometimes lonely case for him to return to frontline British politics. Gavin Barwell, chief of staff to Theresa May, often makes a persuasive case for how she was undone by a parliamentary party that could not compromise over Brexit. Even her two joint chiefs of staff, Nick Timothy and Fiona Cunningham, with whom she dispensed after the 2017 general election debacle, did not turn on her. They would probably admit that pressures led them to become embroiled in furious rows that in retrospect seem trivial. Gordon Brown, flawed as a prime minister and as a consequence sometimes unable to control his temper, still retained the loyalty of the advisers he berated, as the sad photos of his final hours in Downing Street illustrate. They believed in what he was trying to do. Stretching further back, Wilson had his famously loyal kitchen cabinet. Bernard Donoghue, in his memoir the Heat of the Kitchen, revealed the sheer pressure of life in No 10 during the winter of discontent. Thatcher relied heavily on Bernard Ingham, her press secretary, throughout her period in office. He adored her ability to confront “defeatist inertia”, even if he also recognised her as “absolutely tactless”. Lord Powell, her suave private secretary for seven years from 1983, remained a firm admirer of her ability to make waves on the international scene. She returned the compliment once, saying: “Where can I find ministers who are half as good?” Her official biographer, Charles Moore, argued: “The people who worked for her in No 10 almost all liked her very much, and the ministers who worked with her as cabinet ministers usually found her unbearable.” Indeed it was her faith in her Downing Street advisers which was part of her undoing. Her willingness to expose her support for her economics adviser Sir Alan Walters over the exchange rate policy paralysed her government. Lawson resigned on 26 October 1989 and Walters stood down an hour later. David Cameron overall ran a happy ship. He had to dispense with his image guru Steve Hilton once his blue sky thinking came up against the greyer skies of the Whitehall policy machine. But there was no immediate denunciatory resignation letter from Hilton, just a sense that his campaign talents did not transfer to government. The conflict between the two came later. So the endless infighting and high turn-over of staff that has afflicted Boris Johnson’s premiership is an exception. New Labour’s divisions were institutionalised between the Treasury and Downing Street. Some suffered badly such as Brown’s press secretary, Charlie Whelan, was forced to resign by Blair’s team – a loss Brown resented. Others, such as Ed Balls, managed to remake themselves. Johnson by contrast seems to lose advisers at an alarming speed. Some claim it reveals the lack of basic ideology in his thinking. Others suggest it is the casual way in which he uses others to take the blame, refusing to take personal responsibility, which has led to a lack of loyalty. “He blames Carrie to his advisers, and to Carrie he blames his advisers. It is not sustainable”, says one former minister. In the latest cull, the loss of Munira Mirza will hurt and possibly confuse him most. In eight years of working for him, she has seen all his flaws, including his willingness to play fast and loose with the facts. Indeed he is the architect of many of the divisive culture wars. That makes it hard to fathom why she saw Johnson’s personal attack on Keir Starmer as so out of character that it warranted her resignation. Perhaps she simply sensed the prime minister was finished and it was time to detach herself for her own future career. The next few months will tell, but what will be striking is how many advisers, sensing they are on a sinking ship, elect to stay on board with their captain, and leave the rats to it.We’ve been here before, haven’t we? A year out from a World Cup and on the eve of a Six Nations Championship, Ireland look capable of beating any side they face. Andy Farrell’s relentless commitment to keeping the ball in play saw them average more passes - 187.4 - and more rucks in possession – 113.1 – per game than any other team competing in the Six Nations or Rugby Championship last year. Commanding wins against England and New Zealand proved they can marry flair with fortitude. The 29-20 triumph over the All Blacks was particularly impressive, likely the best performance from Ireland under Farrell. By committing two men to every breakdown they risk losing the ball on the ground but they keep 11 players on their feet and free to attack. The image of New Zealand’s Codie Taylor and Dalton Papalii looking shattered before the half-time break in the autumn told a story. This is the result of Ireland’s frenetic philosophy. Wales aren’t too dissimilar in their approach. Both teams utilise a 1-3-2-2 formation, staggering pods of forwards across the width of the pitch. But Ireland are more consistent, more devoted to the ideology and rarely stray too far from it. This has a lot to do with the man standing at first receiver. Johnny Sexton, captaining the team in his 102nd appearance for his country at 36, is as solid as any fly-half in the world and is metronomic in his delivery. Though he can straighten the line and is dangerous when deploying a give-and-go with a midfielder in what has been dubbed the “Sexton loop”, his game is defined by reliability and consistency. In many ways he encapsulates all that is good about this Irish unit. He is also one of 11 Leinster representatives in the starting 15. His partner at scrum-half, Jamison Gibson-Park, is also his club teammate; as are seven of the starting forwards that have gelled into one of the most cohesive packs in the game with a powerful scrum and maul game at their disposal. By contrast all four Welsh clubs are represented in the Welsh pack. That is the least of Wayne Pivac’s concerns as he has made the trip to Dublin without Alun Wyn Jones, Josh Navidi, Justin Tipuric, Ken Owens, Leigh Halfpenny, George North and Taulupe Faletau. Winger Josh Adams is starting at outside centre for the first time at this level and eight of their 12 match-day forwards have less than 30 Test caps. Pivac has conceded that his team are underdogs as memories of the 54-10 hammering at Lansdowne Road in 2002 have come into focus. Back then another Kiwi coach lost his job as Graham Henry was sacked after the record defeat. Dan Biggar, however, isn’t bothered by what others are saying. The Northampton Saints fly-half will captain Wales for the first time and pointed out that being written off before a ball has been kicked is a familiar feeling. “We always start as fourth or fifth favourites every year we come into the Six Nations Behind the big three [England, Ireland and France],” Biggar pointed out. “I think Scotland are ahead of us in the bookies this week. It’s been the same for the last ten years. But people forget that we’ve been the most successful team for the last 10 years, winning it four times. For us it’s no different coming into the tournament as underdogs. Whether we’ve won it the year before or we have a full strength team, half a team missing, whatever it is, it’s the same. We’re just looking forward to the challenge and getting into a real arm wrestle with Ireland.” Rain and wind has been forecast which means an arm wrestle is likely. Sexton and Biggar will likely go to the boot and test which back-three can gain control. Louis Rees-Zammit boasted that he is getting faster but this will be the first time the 21-year-old is playing in front of a packed partisan crowd in the Six Nations and will doubtless be a target. The same will be true for Ireland’s Mack Hansen making his debut on the opposite wing. The Australian-born 23-year-old has only played nine games for Connacht since joining from the Brumbies last month though his selection barely caused a stir. This has something to do with six tries in that time but mostly because Farrell has earned the trust of his players and those who support them. Something special is brewing. The next 18 months could be the most significant in Ireland’s history. “We’d all love a trophy,” Farrell said before stressing that silverware would “look after themselves” if the team stuck to their principles and processes. Perhaps so. But after ending 2021 on a high, and stealing the breath from defenders and fans alike, a trophy must now be considered a non-negotiable. A Six Nations crown would be nice. A World Cup would be better. First they have to put Wales away.Right, I’m going to head off now but I will leave you to enjoy The Fiver, by Scott Murray, on Carlos Queiroz going all Scrappy-Doo in the Afcon semi-final against Cameroon. Thanks for reading. Bye! Spare a thought for Hartlepool captain Nicky Featherstone, who will miss the FA Cup clash at Crystal Palace after being sent off in the League Two game against Exeter last weekend. Here’s the stand-in Pools captain Gary Liddle. “We’re gutted for Feaths,” Liddle told the Hartlepool Mail. “He’s a good friend of mine at the football club and is someone I speak to quite often. Originally he was disappointed he got sent off with half an hour to go at the weekend and I think once the dust had settled with that he soon realised he was going to miss this game.” Palace, who have helped subsidise Hartlepool fans’ coach travel down to London, will be without Wilfried Zaha, who is back in training but being given time to recuperate after his efforts for Ivory Coast at Afcon. Just a reminder that Chris Wilder won’t be letting any of his Middlesbrough players swap shirt with their Manchester United counterparts on the Old Trafford pitch tonight. But what if Cristiano Ronaldo really wants Duncan Watmore’s shirt? That’ll be a bit awkward for the Boro winger won’t it? It is not sight-seeing for our players. It is not a shirt-swapping situation. I don’t want people going to Old Trafford to enjoy the visit. If they want a shirt, do it in the changing rooms after. We don’t want to be looking at them all fuzzy-eyed. They are up against a competitor. West Ham winger Andriy Yarmolenko has been charged by the FA with alleged misconduct in relation to an appearance in a betting advert in his home country of Ukraine. Yarmolenko has until 18 February 18 to respond to the charge. Some bad news for Chelsea after Reece James was ruled out of the Club World Cup campaign due to his continued hamstring troubles. Chelsea had hoped to see James back in team training this week but the England wing-back had experienced several small setbacks, including suffering coming down with flu. Reece is not in team training yet, so he’s not available this weekend. And he will not travel with us to Abu Dhabi because he’s not back in team training. I’m too long as a manager to have big feelings for injuries, and not to get overexcited by pure dates that are maybe out there when a player can come back. I know you can have setbacks and it can take a long time sometimes, it depends, and the injury was a big injury and I felt it straight away. The diagnosis was straight away that it’s a big injury, and from there we need to be patient. It’s a hamstring, it’s always tricky and he’s a very physical player.” Chelsea play in the semi-final of the Club World Cup on Wednesday 9 February and, should they make the final, will compete for the Club World Cup trophy on Saturday 12 February. Let’s put the focus back on Sunday’s Africa Cup of Nations final again. Having played three consecutive matches of 120 minutes – the last coming a day later than Senegal’s semi-final – surely Egypt will struggle on Sunday against Senegal, who have looked livelier in their attacking play. Mind you if Egypt do win, it will be some feat. They will be without both manager Carlos Queiroz and his assistant Roger de Sa, both of whom are banned. Egypt’s other assistant, Diaa El-Sayed, made a request for the final to be put back a day but that isn’t going to happen. We are the only team that played 120 minutes in three consecutive games. The players are fully focused, they have a good base to build on, and we thank their clubs for that. [Mohamed] Salah being the group leader gives the players a lot of positive energy as well. We also have a great head coach that has a lot of experience dealing with players. I believe Queiroz’s send-off was undeserved, I’d like to dedicate the win to both him and his assistant Roger de Sa. Here’s the story on those relationship issues that Pep Guardiola and João Cancelo have finally worked their way through: The option to make five substitutions in a match is set to be made permanent by the game’s lawmakers next month, reports PA. The International Football Association Board’s annual general meeting will take place on 3 March and it is expected that the temporary dispensation to Law 3 to allow up to five changes in a game – introduced to help clubs manage congestion related to the Covid-19 pandemic – will be made a permanent option for competitions worldwide. It doesn’t mean the Premier League has to adopt it, however, though many other leagues already have and will likely continue to do so. The wording of the offside law will also be discussed at the meeting, though it is understood it is very unlikely any changes to it will be ratified. Chelsea appear to have brought Inter to Lukaku with this ‘Pride of London’ kit they have released today. Extraordinary. Some live pics coming in from West Ham’s training session before they travel to Kidderminster and all I can think of when I see this image of Declan Rice is Bryan Adams. Marie Meyer asks: “Is there a point to the Ashley Cole appointment other than Frank the Londoner feeling uncomfortable in Liverpool?” Everyone needs a sidekick, don’t they Marie? Big Sam had Little Sammy, Clough had Taylor, Mourinho and Clarke was a good double-act and Wenger and Rice weren’t too shabby were they? But more likely is that Lampard just needs a body between himself and Big Dunc. Some good news for Leicester manager Brendan Rodgers, who has had a catalogue of injuries to contend with in his squad this season. Wesley Fofana, who suffered a broken leg and ankle ligament damage before the season started, could make his long-awaited return. The French centre-half’s rehabilitation is nearing its end following his operation almost six months ago and the aim is for the 21-year-old to begin training with the rest of the Foxes squad in 10 days’ time. Here’s Rodgers: He’s doing terrific and he will look to join the squad the week beginning February 14, which is great news for us. He has worked ever so hard for six months – almost to the day since his operation – and he’s recovered and for a young player I have been really, really impressed by his mentality and his attitude to his recovery. He has been super professional and worked very hard and we just can’t wait to have him back with the team again. I think you can see his importance, you’ve seen what we’ve missed throughout the season. Along with Fofana, Jamie Vardy, Jonny Evans, Timothy Castagne and Ricardo Pereira remain out injured for Leicester’s FA Cup fourth-round clash against midlands rivals Nottingham Forest on Sunday. Steve Bruce is speaking at West Brom. Why get back into football after what happened at Newcastle, where he received vile abuse? Is it a drug? Is it something inside you? It’s what you do. You go to work. I’m a spring chicken compared to Roy [Hodgson]. I hope he doesn’t mind me saying that. If I didn’t think West Brom could get into the Premier League, I wouldn’t be sat here. I thought ‘did I have the enthusiasm for it?’ The answer was yes. The only way I could [get over the abuse at Newcastle] was to get back on the horse. Newcastle’s gone. It’s a chapter of my football life. I want the club to do well. It was a difficult time for me but maybe in a few years people will think finishing 12th and 13th was not so bad. I think [they will escape relegation]. I wish them the best of luck, I really do. Bruce says he turned down a few offers before taking the West Brom job. What was the appeal? I think this is a wonderful opportunity for me to go and enjoy management again. When Ron [Gourlay, West Brom chief executive] told me the vision for the club I saw the attraction. I would love to make it five [personal promotions from the Championship]. This club is a Premier League-size club. It has spent 13 of 20 seasons in the Premier League. Manchester City’s Alex Greenwood has been talking to Louise Taylor about the club’s topsy-turvy season and and England’s prospects at the Euros. City face champions Chelsea on Sunday with an outside chance of getting back into the title race after recovering from an awful start to the season. Boreham Wood’s manager, Luke Garrard, wants to repay chairman Danny Hunter by causing an upset at Bournemouth because Hunter went so far as to pay for his big shop for him during the pandemic! “Paying us all 100%, paying for my food shopping, who does that, what chairman does that,” asked Garrard. “This is the best group I have ever worked with and we get the fruits of our labour. If we can repay [Hunter] with one small moment on Sunday, I will make a fat man very happy – and those are his words, not mine so I am not being disrespectful in any way, shape or form.” Boreham Wood beat AFC Wimbledon last time out to seal their first-ever appearance at this stage of the competition and were rewarded with a trip to the Vitality Stadium to take on Scott Parker’s side on Sunday night. Wolves beat Manchester United and Brentford away, and Southampton at home in January. And what a sound man Lage appears to be. Here he is getting all of the behind-the-scenes staff together to share the award with them, from his backroom coaches to those who work in the canteen. When I knew we won the award I said to everyone to come, the players don’t need to come because it’s not just for me and it’s not just for my staff, but I think the work we do everyday, I think we should be proud. The boys have everything to just play football. Nice one, Bruno! Wolves host Norwich in the FA Cup on Saturday. A bit more from Pep Guardiola, who also spoke about Joao Cancelo, who signed a contract extension to 2027 this week. Guardiola looked a little miffed when he was asked why Cancelo is so good now having struggled to make an impact since joining in 2019. But, it’s a fair question. Everybody knows how important Joao is for us, especially what we have done in the last two seasons. We struggled together in the first part when he arrived. We didn’t agree on many things but it was partly my mistakes. Now he’s incredible and I’m so delighted he’s fully happy here. Now he’s playing every day. There are players who accept playing, others are not happy and have to understand. We know each other much better, every player must be treated differently. I got more time to know him, how sensitive he is, [he has] a big heart. Let’s have a little look at what’s going on at the top of La Liga, where Sevilla have emerged as title contenders. They travel to mid-table Osasuna tomorrow with the aim of moving to within a point of leaders Real Madrid, who face Granada on Sunday. Julen Lopetegui has now got a shiny new forward available to him in Anthony Martial too, but is trying to keep a lid on any title talk. Our battle is against Osasuna, nothing more or we would be seriously mistaken. We have more players available. The boys from Africa, Argentina and Jesús that has just come back. Martial will travel and is available. He has to get up to speed which we hope will be as soon as possible to help us in such an important part of the season. We need to focus ourselves on what we are able to do. I expect that they are going to be aggressive. Whoever plays, they’re decisive and show quality in the last moments of the game with a good attack and goal threat. If there’s any stadium that puts you under pressure, it’s El Sadar. Lopetegui has done very well to rebuild his career after the disastrous decision to quit Spain for Madrid, where he lasted about 12 seconds before being sacked. Celtic manager Ange Postecoglou does not “do breaks”. Having not had playmaker Tom Rogic available for the 3-0 win over Rangers due his international commitments, Postecoglu has no sympathy for anyone feeling fatigue. We don’t do breaks during the year, he will get a break at the end of the year like everyone else. He’s back and ready to play. It sounds more like a threat than a statement but maybe that’s just because Postecoglou always talks in a low growl. The former Australia boss revealed no casualties from the game against Rangers with striker Daizen Maeda, who was on the bench and came on as a second-half substitute after returning from international duty with Japan, ready to start if required. Postecoglou said: “Everyone is fine, no issues. We had a couple of little niggles going into it with the boys who were starting but they all got through it okay. We will obviously get back Nir Bitton who was suspended and Tommy Rogic is obviously available and Daizen Maeda is fully available, they are the main changes.” Plymouth’s Jordan Houghton will face his former club Chelsea when he travels there for the FA Cup tie tomorrow. He has fond memories of playing at Stamford Bridge, where he scored as Chelsea won the 2014 FA Youth Cup in a two-legged final against Fulham. I’ve got my medal and shirt signed by all the lads framed, but also the pair of boots I wore in the game framed because it is a special memory. You can read Ben Fisher’s interview with the midfielder here: Manchester City v Fulham. There could be goals at the Etihad, folks. Pep Guardiola is speaking before the leaders of the Premier League face Marco Silva’s free-scoring leaders of the Championship. Guardiola was more than happy to heap praise on Silva now that he is looking more like Magic Marco again: I’m very pleased with what he’s doing. I’ve been really impressed, for a long time. I’m not surprised they’re top of the Championship. It’s not just the goals, way they play, positionally, is exceptional. Everyone moves for his teammate. I’m happy for him. I know him a little, good relationship at Everton and Watford. Now I see his team play much better. He’s there because they play really well. Going back to the Premier League for Fulham is so important. It’s no secret, it will be a good test after a game off. The best opponent we can face, they have a lot of qualities, they have a lot of alternatives. Many players have a lot of quality. One of those players is Aleksandar Mitrovic, who has scored 28 of Fulham’s seventy-four goals in 28 league games this season. Perhaps even more remarkable is the fact that Mitrovic is still only 27! Thanks Dave. So what about the FA Cup’s lowest-ranked club, Kidderminster Harriers? They host West Ham on Saturday lunchtime at Aggborough, where the manager Russell Penn was seen dancing with a mop at midnight after the third-round win over Reading. Here’s Ben Fisher with a lovely piece in which he reveals that Cup fever has very much taken hold of the Harriers. And on the back of Conte’s inward inferno, I’ll hand you back to Gregg Bakowski. Antonio Conte has been having his say on the somewhat strange goings on at Tottenham. By strange, I mean the series of events that led to them sending three players bought for a combined £122million out on loan. That included their two most expensive players: £55m Tanguy Ndombele returning to Lyon and £42m Giovani Lo Celso heading to Villarreal for the rest of the season. Just for shits and giggles, £25m summer signing Bryan Gil was loaned to Valencia. What do you make of all that then Antonio? For sure it was strange because it means something wrong has happened in the past. It means that maybe in the past you have to see what you did and maybe to understand that there were some mistakes in the past. Usually you buy players to reinforce your team but if you send away on loan after two or three years it is strange. We have to pay more attention in the future when we go into the market. Spurs did bring in Dejan Kulusevski and Rodrigo Bentancur from Juventus and Conte said both will be in the squad to face Brighton in Saturday’s FA Cup fourth round. Kulusevski and Bentancur are fit and for this reason they are available for sure. To start the game is not right because they need to work with the team for a period. These two players can help us a lot. Manchester United v Middlesbrough gets the fourth round FA Cup action underway tonight. Check out these fun stats from Opta. Scott McTominay getting the only goal in a 1-0 home win then. Since a 4-1 defeat at the Riverside Stadium in October 2005, Manchester United have remained unbeaten in their last 13 matches with Middlesbrough across all competitions (W8 D5), with their last meeting coming in March 2017. Middlesbrough have been drawn with Manchester United for the 11th time in the FA Cup, more often than any other opponent. They’ve progressed from three of the other 10 ties, most recently in 2001-02 during their run to the semi-finals. Manchester United have won 28 of their last 31 home FA Cup matches against sides from a lower division (D2 L1), including each of their last eight without conceding a goal. Middlesbrough have progressed from only one of their last 10 FA Cup ties against Premier League opposition, though that one instance did come in Manchester in 2014-15, beating Man City 2-0 at the Etihad. Scott McTominay has scored three of Manchester United’s last seven FA Cup goals, all of which have come in 1-0 victories at Old Trafford – v Watford (Jan 2021), West Ham (Feb 2021) and Aston Villa in round three this season. Southampton reached the FA Cup semi-finals last year, their dreams of glory being ended after a 1-0 defeat to eventual winners Leicester. With Southampton safely tucked away in 12th place in the Premier League, boss Ralph Hasenhüttl fancies another morale-boosting cup run. The Austrian calls it an “epic chance” as they prepare to host Coventry (10th in the Championship) on Saturday afternoon. We have shown last season that there is always a chance to come very far – we have been in the semi-finals and it was absolutely enjoyable. Even more interesting is that (this season) it will be in a moment when you know all the supporters can come to watch it at Wembley, so this is the target to do even better than last season. Last season we had been very clear in our message that we take it (FA Cup) very seriously because we have been (in a) very good position in the table. This season it is similar, but we have also a bigger squad and this makes it easier for me than last season when we took the risk and then had a lot of injuries. I remember the Arsenal game (in the fourth round) where we lost three players afterwards (to injury) which hurt us a lot, but in the end, we have to take it very seriously – and we will definitely because it is an epic chance, our supporters love it. We also love it to be in the next round of the FA Cup and to be part of this competition as long as possible. It’s Mo Salah (Egypt) v Sadio Mane in the Africa Cup of Nations final on Sunday and the PA has been comparing the two Liverpool strikers. An amalgamation of the two would be some player and also sound better too - Mo Mane or Sadio Salah. From the PA: Given their status as two of the Premier League’s most feared forwards, it is little surprise that Mane and Salah are the headline acts in their national teams. Mane has had the most impressive tournament of the two, bagging three goals and an assist in his six games so far. He even climbed off his hospital bed after a head injury to lead Senegal to a second successive AFCON final. Salah, who has been touted as the best player in the world this season, has been a little more muted, but has still bagged two goals and claimed an assist. The Egyptian has looked leggy as all three of his country’s knockout games went to extra-time. But the 29-year-old has a better international pedigree than his Liverpool team-mate, scoring 45 goals in 78 games, while Mane has bagged 26 in 80 caps. Form in 2021/22 Both men have enjoyed fruitful seasons for Liverpool as they challenge on four fronts this season, but Salah is having a standout year. He equalled Jamie Vardy’s record of scoring or creating a goal in 15 successive Premier League games amid a run of scoring in 10 consecutive games. He is the Premier League top scorer with 16 in 20 games, with nine assists, and bagged another seven in the Champions League group stage. Unsurprisingly, it has been difficult for Mane to compete with that, but the Senegalese has had a solid campaign in his own right. He has scored 10 goals in all competitions, nine of them coming in the Premier League, and is still very much a key part of one of the most exciting front lines in Europe. Record for Liverpool When the dust settles on their time at Anfield in years to come, both men will be remembered among the greats of the club, having already joined the century club. Salah is the most prolific of the two, scoring 148 goals in 229 games, with 56 assists. That sees him sitting 10th in the all-time list of Liverpool scorers and his form suggests he will overtake Harry Chambers (151) and Michael Owen (158) before the season is out. Mane has scored 107 goals in 244 games, while also making 44. Differences in style Playing in a front three, primarily with Roberto Firmino or Diogo Jota in recent years, the pair have contrasting styles that give defenders different kinds of nightmares. Mane has power and physicality and his combination with Andrew Robertson on the left is a formidable pairing. He is strong in the air and has the knack of being in the right place at the right time. Salah is a more skilful player, capable of weaving his way through the tightest spots. He also has the pace to live on the shoulder of the last man and makes a living out of cutting inside and letting his left foot do the damage. He is also highly efficient from the penalty spot. While I’m down a rabbit hole and we’re discussing Everton’s new manager, it seems an ideal time to dig out Frank Lampard Snr’s corner flag dance in the 1980 FA Cup semi-final for West Ham against... erm, Everton! Thanks Gregg. You’ve caught me on YouTube looking back at a penalty shootout from the 1992 Africa Cup of Nations. Mo Salah wasn’t even required to take a spot-kick in Egypt’s semi-final shootout win last night after three Cameroon players made a right old horlicks of it from the spot. Very different to this one when even the goalkeepers were forced into action. Here’s a view on Lampard’s opening run of games as Everton manager. I’m going to hand over to Dave Tindall now while I grab some lunch. Back in a bit. Inter coach Simone Inzaghi leads his team in the Milan derby on Saturday night but he has been tying to play down the importance of it, saying that the result won’t be decisive. He’s right about that but they could take a big step towards the Scudetto given they have a game in hand over Napoli and Milan. I don’t think it’s decisive because there are many games remaining. We saw what happened in the first [Milan derby], we were seven points behind Milan, but we picked up a draw and then we’ve filled the gap. It’s a very important match, we know what it means for our fans. I know Stefano Pioli well. Milan are well organised and have put in excellent performances since the match against Empoli. The title race is still open, the table is telling the truth. Aside from Milan and Napoli, Atalanta and Juventus are also very strong. Juventus were my favourite in the summer, and have improved over the last two months. Here’s a bit more from Jürgen Klopp on why Liverpool are still interested in Fulham teenager Fabio Carvalho. The fact Klopp is still very much focused on renewing his Liverpool squad will be music to the ears of some Reds fans, who always seem to be in fear of Klopp putting a date on when he will leave: Our strategy is to sign the right players at the right moment. We recognise issues like a position or contracts. We are long together with this team, it’s a fantastic team, one of the most successful in the history of this club but we will never miss having a look ahead and that’s exactly what we are doing. We are Liverpool so we cannot only work with talents and say: ‘Let’s have a look in two or three years and they will be ready’. There must always be a mix-up. We have a lot of incredible talent already, in the first-team squad and around the first-team squad and we are 100% sure they will definitely be Liverpool players, but not now. That’s what we do: building a team for now and tomorrow. We are happy. This is the way the club is doing it, pretty much before I even arrived and I am absolutely used to it but that’s the way it is. Richard Harris writes: “I disagree about the upcoming fixtures for Everton. The first four are eminently winnable and even City are beatable if you play without fear and take your chances. I think Frank Lampard’s Everton will be climbing the table and well clear of the relegation scrap by the time they play City. Also think Frank will get them to the Cup final.” It will be like 1995 all over again. Here’s a reminder of that from the Goodison Park corridors. The new man at Watford, Roy Hodgson, has been getting his chat on with BBC Radio 4 and has admitted that Saturday afternoons without live football were horrible. Being the nice man that he is, he didn’t want to go round harassing people to cadge tickets, either. Saturday afternoon has always been the worst time because that’s the time when you feel you should be involved in football, and I’ve not wanted to ring around people asking for tickets because that didn’t seem right either. I thought that when I left Crystal Palace that that was the right time to to retire gracefully [but] of course I did say at the time, ‘I’m never going to say never, I’m not going to say something won’t come along that I want to do’. But I suppose I could be accused of not retiring gracefully. I can only hope that the job I’ve been brought in to do, by the people who believe I can do it, will be the right one. It’s interesting that Frank Lampard spoke so honestly about what will be expected of him at Everton. “I will be as good as the team’s short-term results … one bad month and you’re out,” he said. It’s a bit of a departure from what an older manager might say. With Lampard having played and managed Chelsea he knows better than many how cut-throat Premier League management is. The problem is, that by being so honest, he could very easily have those words thrown back at him if Everton don’t hit the ground running. How do you think he will do? Here are his first five fixtures (Premier League, unless stated): Brentford (h) FA Cup Newcastle (a) Leeds (h) Southampton (a) Man City (h) They don’t look so easy to me. This is a very nice interview with Sven, who enjoyed his time in Serie A more than any other. He took the Roma job in 1984! And he’s still one year younger than Roy Hodgson. David Moyes has been previewing the tie with Kidderminster but first he was asked about West Ham’s failure to land a signing, despite having chased Raphinha, Kalvin Phillips, Leandro Trossard, Patrik Schick, Darwin Nunez, Jesse Lingard, Roy Race and Sport Billy during the January window. Here’s what he had to say: We were always trying to add to what we thought we could do. It would be hard to get better than Jarrod Bowen if we’re talking about another striker. I didn’t just want back-up, I wanted real competition. I could have easily gone out and bought back-up. Easily. I wanted people who were actually going to take other people’s jerseys and challenge them. And on the challenge of facing Kidderminster, Jarrod Bowen said: Of course people want giant killing in the FA Cup. So as a group of players the challenge we’ve got is going to be difficult, no doubt about it. We want to qualify for the next round and that’s our focus. They will be right up for it, for sure, so we want to go there, no hiccups, win the game and get through to the next round. To win a trophy would mean everything. I mean we’ve got a couple of competitions that we have a good chance in. For me as a player I would love to achieve that. Burnley will have new signing and Dutch man-mountain Wout Weghorst available when they host Watford in the Premier League survival scrap on Saturday night. Clarets captain Ben Mee has obviously had an up close and personal view of him in training this week. He looks a handful! He is a good quality player who comes with a lot of experience as well, hopefully we can bed him in early and he hits the ground running. There is more to his game than just his 6ft 6in frame and hopefully we can utilise that as well as getting the ball into the box to him. It may not come as a surprise to know that he can head the ball with the force of a dozen rhinos. Cameroon added their name to an increasingly long list of hosts who have not been able to win the Africa Cup of Nations on home soil. They were knocked out by Egypt after some hard-to-watch penalties on Thursday night. Not since 2006, when Egypt were hosts, has the home team been able to win the tournament. Egypt beat them 3-1 on spot-kicks and there was some finger-pointing from Cameroon captain Vincent Aboubakar in the aftermath, accusing some of his teammates of being selfish. “It’s a big disappointment, in football, you reap what you sow. We have a big team and every time we play as a team, we win,” Aboubakar said. “In this game, everyone wanted to show what he was capable of and here is the pay off. Whenever we are collectively strong, we win but the moment everyone tries to do what they want, we miss out.” The bigger picture is that the tournament has been overshadowed by the death of eight people and serious injuries to seven after the crush at the Olembé Stadium. Both Everton and Brentford brought in new signings in January but only the Bees’ goalkeeper Jonas Lössl, brought in from Midtjylland, will be available for the fourth-round tie at Goodison. For Everton, Frank Lampard will not have Dominic Calvert-Lewin available. The striker is still out with a knock sustained in the loss to Aston Villa a fortnight ago while new signings Dele Alli and Donny Van de Beek are both cup-tied. Abdoulaye Doucoure (groin), Fabian Delph (thigh) and Tom Davies (hamstring) are also out. Brentford could welcome back first-choice goalkeeper David Raya but also have Lössl as an option. Deadline day signing Christian Eriksen is not in contention and will only train with his new teammates for the first time on Monday. Julian Jeanvier (knee), Mathias Jorgensen (thigh) and Tariq Fosu (hamstring) are still absent. Bees manager Thomas Frank has been talking about Eriksen and how the Danish connection clearly helped him to attract the playmaker: I think because of the circumstances and what happened, naturally some of the bigger clubs maybe weren’t that interested to take that risk or chance. If some of them had really called and told him ‘we want to play you’ then maybe he would have considered that more, maybe? I don’t know but I also think with this crazy experience he wants to do something he knows. Premier League, London, a club where he knows some of his teammates already, has a relationship or Danish connection to me, so I think that definitely helped in his choice. I didn’t feel that I have to persuade him or seduce him like I normally do with other players. Jürgen Klopp has been up bright and early to preview Liverpool’s FA Cup tie against Cardiff on Sunday. He spoke on a number of topics. He was asked whether new signing Luis Díaz would feature though, given the player has yet to train at Liverpool after being away on international duty with Colombia, that would appear doubtful. I’ve not even seen him yet. He hasn’t been to the training ground yet … we like pretty much everything about him. I’ve followed him for a while. [He has an] exceptional skillset and character. Really happy we could get him in now. His story so far is a special one. I like that. Now he’s one of us. We can’t wait to welcome him here. Klopp also spoke about Harvey Elliott, who may make a remarkably speedy return for Liverpool on Sunday after recovering from an horrific ankle fracture and dislocation in September. Klopp said: “Harvey did everything we told him without question. He’s in a good place. Full team training. We will see what’s right for him – he will be in the squad for the Cardiff game.” And has Klopp been watching Afcon and what doe he make of the meeting of Sadio Mané and Mo Salah in Sunday’s final? We’ve followed it pretty closely. What a great achievement. Naby played an exceptional tournament as well. It will be exciting on Sunday. One will be really happy after, the other much less so. They both have the chance to achieve something big. I think they will be available for (the Leicester match on) Thursday. Whichever one wins will probably fly back to their home country [for a parade]. Whoever wins will be back here Tuesday or Wednesday. It’s been a tough week for Manchester United’s manager, Ralf Rangnick, after the arrest of Mason Greenwood and though the German said his players have trained well before the FA Cup tie against Middlesbrough this evening, it appears he has a difference of opinion with Jesse Lingard to deal with. The Manchester United midfielder has disputed Rangnick’s claims that Lingard asked for a few days off to clear his head after a January move failed to materialise. For further reading around this weekend’s FA Cup fourth-round ties, have a little look at this: There is a full slate of fixtures in the Women’s Super League this weekend, too. The standout match is Arsenal v Manchester United, with the league leaders hosting their third-placed rivals, who trail by five points. The manager of reigning champions Chelsea, Emma Hayes, will watch that one closely before they host Manchester City in another big match on Sunday. The Blues have a game in hand on the Gunners and will look to capitalise on any dropped points. Good morning! There is plenty of football going on this weekend to keep you entertained. In England it’s the fourth round of the FA Cup, with the standout match being non-league Kidderminster’s home tie against West Ham at at Aggborough, where they knocked out Reading in the third round. There is also Frank Lampard’s debut as Everton manager. The Toffees have a tough tie against Premier League Brentford at Goodison. After their heroics in seeing off Newcastle in the last round, Cambridge United might fancy their chances of making the fifth round as they host Championship Luton at the Abbey Stadium. League One Plymouth travel to the capital hoping to give Chelsea a bloody nose and then, on Sunday, there’s a tasty east midlands derby between Nottingham Forest and Leicester before non-league Boreham Wood travel to Bournemouth hoping to cause an upset. Before all of that, Manchester United host resurgent Championship side Middlesbrough at 8pm GMT this evening (Friday). You can view all of the FA Cup fourth round fixtures here. There is one Premier League match this weekend, the rearranged relegation six-pointer between Burnley and Watford, whose latest manager is Roy Hodgson. That one kicks off at Turf Moor at 6pm on Saturday. The touchpaper appears to have been lit on the Scottish Premiership title race in the past fortnight and, after Celtic’s Old Firm victory on Wednesday, they now lead Rangers by a point. Both sides are in action on Sunday, with Celtic travelling to Motherwell before Rangers host Hearts. There’s the small matter of a Milan derby on Saturday too, with top-of-the-table Inter the home side at San Siro as they face third placed Milan, who trail them by four points. And I will also bring you any updates before the Africa Cup of Nations final between Egypt and Senegal on Sunday evening, in which Sadio Mané and Mo Salah will lead their forward lines for their respective nations. You get the sense that whoever wins may never receive a pass off their Liverpool teammate ever again. It’s on!Ever since it was insisted that Netflix had single-handledly resurrected the romantic comedy despite the general hideousness of the romcoms they were releasing, streamers have churned them out by the dozen, quality be damned. As Valentine’s Day looms, with Netflix still basking in the success of last month’s The Royal Treatment, the next week will see the teen sequel Tall Girl 2 and Turkish offering Love Tactics also added to its catalogue. At the same time, Amazon will launch the Jenny Slate-Charlie Day comedy I Want You Back and Universal will give Marry Me, J-Lo’s glossy return to the genre, a hybrid cinema-Peacock launch. It’s a theoretical feast for fans, but here’s naively hoping that they’re a damn sight better than this week’s misfiring trifle Book of Love (dropping on Amazon in the US and on Sky in the UK), a colourless background watch that never once attempts to make itself worthy of more focused attention. It’s a shame, as there’s a decent enough set-up. Henry (Sam Claflin) is an uptight British writer whose latest book, The Sensible Heart – a sexless and meek romance novel appealing to precisely no one – has flopped in his homeland. But he’s encouraged to hear from his agent (Lucy Punch, bizarrely sporting an American accent) that it’s been a hit in Mexico and so he’s sent on a book tour, partnered with Maria (Verónica Echegui), the woman who translated his work. It soon transpires though that Maria did more than just translate – she virtually rewrote it, adding the heat and eroticism his original failed to include. The two then go from sparring partners to lovers but without the necessary legwork to make us believe a lick of it. Hailing from BuzzFeed studios (which means that the site already features an article declaring it “one of the best romcoms” based solely on the trailer) but co-scripted by novelist and Veep writer David Quantick, Book of Love arrives with a strange mismatched pedigree. But the end result features none of the poppy vim of the former or the sharp wit of the latter. It is a flatly directed and utterly, aggressively un-engaging piece of fluff that only serves to remind us of other, better and more picturesque examples of the travelogue romantic comedy (save yourself and rewatch Only You, French Kiss or Two for the Road instead). There’s certainly nothing wrong with sticking to the familiar genre beats we all know so well, but there needs to be a light-footed charm ushering us from one to the next, and director Analeine Cal y Mayor fails to muster up even a shred of it. While Claflin sticks to a lazily traced-over impression of the buttoned-up romcom Englishman archetype, there is at least some energy from the other side as Echegui tries hard to make her single mother turned wannabe novelist into a real human being. She’s easily the best thing here and one wonders what a film centered around her slightly more textured character might have been, unshackled from the rote machinations that push her into a hard-to-stomach romance with a mostly unlikable lead. The script forces them together far too fast, all tension melting despite a stark dearth of chemistry, and clumsy last-act attempts at conflict feel minor and haphazard. Romantic comedies are expected to be contrived and far-fetched – it’s a genre that allows for a lot of exceptions – but they really shouldn’t be this dull. Book of Love is now available in the US on Amazon Prime and will be released on Sky Cinema on 12 FebruaryThat sound you can hear is the whirr of 650 adding machines. At Westminster, MPs are totting up the costs, tallying the benefits and working out the balance of their own interests. On the Tory benches, they know a moment of decision is coming but they can’t be sure that moment is now. Does the resignation in disgust by one of Boris Johnson’s most loyal lieutenants signal the end times, or was Munira Mirza a backroom aide no voter had ever heard of? What if both things are true? They think, chiefly, about their own seats. Their inboxes are bulging with constituents’ fury, but they hesitate before casting aside the winner of their biggest election victory for more than 30 years. Some long for the dilemma to be resolved for them, perhaps by a development so dramatic – police action or the emergence of a damning photograph, or if an unexpurgated Sue Gray report turns out to be full of what one ex-minister calls “tawdry detail” – that a consensus will rapidly form that the Johnson show is over. The bandwagon will start rolling and they’ll be able to jump on it safely. But what if there is no such moment of clarity? The minds of those at the top click and whirr with their own reckonings. The two current frontrunners have different views of time. It would suit Rishi Sunak for things to come to a head soon: he needs a leadership contest to happen before his brand is permanently tainted by the cost-of-living crisis, surging energy bills, painful tax rises and increased interest rates. Witness the front pages of the Telegraph and the Sun putting Sunak’s face alongside the words “The big squeeze” and “OUCH!” Liz Truss is happy for things to drag on for the very same reason. Labour is hardly a disinterested observer. It, too, is consulting its electoral calculator, looking at polls that show Keir Starmer ahead of Johnson, with the outlook less certain if the Tories pull off their old trick of picking a new boss and claiming to be a new government. Talk to Westminster folk and you will pick up all these noises. But all too few MPs, certainly on the Conservative benches, realise that they’re listening to the wrong part of their brains. For this stopped being a matter of calculation weeks ago. It should instead be a matter of conscience. That was true as soon as it became obvious that Johnson broke the very lockdown rules he had imposed on everyone else. But one incident this week made it clearer still. The clarity came from a single remark thrown across the dispatch box by Johnson as he sought to deflect attention from the Sue Gray “update” that, even in its gagged form, confirmed “failures of leadership” at No 10. In that remark, Johnson revealed that he is a man who will do or say anything to cling to power, no matter the cost. There is no depth to which he will not sink. The words were directed at Starmer, whom Johnson accused of “failing to prosecute Jimmy Savile”. As Mirza wrote, this was a “scurrilous accusation”, as well as “an inappropriate and partisan reference to a horrendous case of child sex abuse”. It was also demonstrably false. Nazir Afzal, a former colleague at the Crown Prosecution Service, which Starmer led between 2008 and 2013, has said that the key decision on the Savile case was taken by others before Starmer ever got there. Johnson knew that. That’s why Mirza and others had begged him not to make such an accusation. But Johnson did it anyway. No one can pretend to be surprised. This has been part of the Johnson modus operandi for years. He didn’t need Lynton Crosby to teach him about dead cats. He himself spoke openly about his technique: when besieged by scandal, the best defence is more scandal. Keep throwing out “chaff”, make ever more outrageous statements, which the press will dutifully report and, before you know it, everyone will have forgotten your original misdemeanour. Those Tory MPs deluding themselves that Johnson will change, that he now “gets it”, need to face the reality that Johnson will keep doing this – not least because it works. For much of the last week, we were indeed talking not about parties and cake, but Starmer and Savile – those two words unwarrantedly and falsely linked in the same sentence, repeated on news bulletins and phone-in shows, sneaking past the unwary listener and settling in a part of the collective brain where the specifics and the truth soon become hazy. It was the same with £350m and the EU, the very falsity of the proposition ensuring its repetition and amplification. The effect is poison. For the Savile-Starmer lie has long been a meme on the wilder shores of the conspiracy-theorist far right, where it echoes the QAnon lunacy with its suggestion of a governing elite secretly protecting the abusers of children. Johnson was giving a validating wink to that hate-filled fringe, just as Donald Trump gave a friendly nod to QAnon or the Proud Boys. Johnson’s Savile move was classic Trump. For once a lie is out of the mouth of a national leader, it will be repeated by those whose salaries depend on his favour. Note the dispiriting interview with the culture secretary, Nadine Dorries, in which she refused to acknowledge the truth on Savile and Starmer, telling her interviewer “I only have your word for it”, as if provable facts were merely subjective opinions. Dorries was doing for Johnson what Kellyanne Conway did for Trump, creating a realm of “alternative facts”. This is the damage Johnson does. He did it a second time on Monday, randomly and without evidence suggesting that drug-taking was rife on the Labour frontbench. On Thursday, the UK Statistics Authority had to rebuke Johnson for falsely claiming crime was down when it is in fact up. The Savile smear was a demonstration of how low Johnson is prepared to go. He did not care that his remark would fuel ever greater distrust not merely in Starmer or Labour, but in the public sphere. Nor did he fear the corrosion that comes when a society cannot agree on a shared basis of evidence and truth, the slow death that is inflicted on democracy when each warring political tribe has its own “facts”. He did not and does not care about any of that. If he is to be driven from the temple, he will bring down the temple. He will scorch the earth. Conservative MPs now owe it to the country they claim to love to put aside their electoral calculations and remove this man, before he brings yet more ruin. Jonathan Freedland is a Guardian columnistMy friend Richard Wheeler, who has died aged 77, was an Anglican priest and social reformer who believed the church had a duty to support and represent disadvantaged people. He worked in Brixton in south London in the 1970s, in the midst of tensions between black young people and the police, and became a race adviser to the British Council of Churches. Richard was born and brought up in Eltham, south London, the son of Charles Wheeler, chauffeur to the chief executive of London Underground, and his wife, Emily (nee Strawson), a homemaker. He attended Haberdashers’ Aske’s grammar school, New Cross, and trained for the priesthood at King’s College London, graduating with a BD in 1972. His first post was as curate at St Matthew’s, Brixton. He stayed at the church for nearly a decade, and managed a space in the church called the Meeting Place, where community activities were held. He found himself at the centre of mounting conflict between the black community and the police over the frequent stopping and arrest of black youths under stop and search powers, known as the Sus laws. This tension culminated in the Brixton riots of 1981. Richard believed the Church of England had a responsibility to support disadvantaged people and those who had suffered injustice – this drove his work. He was an adviser on race relations to the British Council of Churches from 1980 to 1983. In 1983 Richard moved with his young family to Southampton to work as part of a team ministry in the city centre. One of the things he did there was to open up church buildings for wider community use. He was elected to the C of E’s ruling body, the General Synod, from 1985 to 1990, and spoke in favour of the ordination of women. Two women were appointed to the clergy at his church. Richard’s final move was to St Albans Cathedral in 1998 as a canon. One of his roles there was to help set up the East of England Churches Network, a project sharing ideas between faith communities on how they can contribute to civil society. He retired in 2009 and moved back to Eltham, where he enjoyed gardening and reading fiction, philosophy and politics. He studied for an MA in theology at Heythrop College, University of London, and was a member of the Forum for Discussion of Israel and Palestine. He visited Palestine in 2013 and he was a supporter of the Medical Aid for Palestinians charity. He was at heart a reformer but also valued the Anglo Catholic traditions of prayer and contemplation. He had great humanity, borne out especially in his own struggles with depression. He was an empathic pastoral priest and a loyal friend. Richard is survived by his wife, Frances (nee Blake), whom he married in 1975, and their sons, Patrick and James, by a son, Stephen, from an earlier marriage that ended in divorce, by three grandchildren and his siblings, David and Janet.Police in Canada have promised tougher action against the “unlawful and unacceptably dangerous” protests paralyzing the nation’s capital, but admitted the situation was increasingly out of their control. With 400 more trucks and 2,000 protesters expected to arrive in the city this weekend, Ottawa police on Friday announced that 150 additional officers will be deployed and concrete barricades set up to prevent more vehicles from reaching the city’s downtown core. Illegally parked vehicles will be towed and highways and bridges could be closed. “The surge [of officers] will deliver a clear message to the demonstrators: the lawlessness must end,” said Peter Sloly, the Ottawa police chief. Police have asked counter-protesters not to come to the city, amid fears of violence. Hundreds of trucks have remained outside parliament for nearly a week in protest against public health measures. Sloly said that the police force took “no solace” in the fact that the current police strategy has so far prevented “riots, injuries and death”. “The demonstrators in this red zone area remain highly organized, well-funded and extremely committed to resisting efforts to end the demonstration safely,” he said, adding that the situation remained “very volatile” amid reports that a number of protesters are believed have firearms. Sloly said he and other officials had received death threats and likened the protest to the US Capitol attack when thousands of supporters of former president Donald Trump attempted to overturn Joe Biden’s election victory. Trump said in a statement that the truckers were “peacefully protesting the harsh policies of far left lunatic Justin Trudeau who has destroyed Canada with insane Covid mandates”. Organizers of the “Freedom Convoy” said at a press conference that their occupation of the city would continue until all levels of government eliminated Covid-19 restrictions and vaccine mandates – a demand widely seen as unrealistic. On Thursday, protesters were seen building a wooden structure and stockpiling fuel. The city’s police force has faced mounting criticism over its “measured” approach to the protest, which has frustrated and terrorized residents. Senior officers admitted they were surprised by the size and scale of the protest. “If we knew it would seep into the neighbourhoods we would have deployed more resources into those communities,” said Steve Bell, the deputy police chief. Catherine McKenney, a city councillor for Ottawa’s Centretown neighbourhood, accused police of abandoning residents, and described receiving daily reports of residents being yelled at, followed, intimidated and assaulted by protesters. “What we have here is a federal government, a provincial government, a city and a local police force unable, or unwilling, to defend and to protect one residential neighbourhood in this entire country today. They either can’t or they won’t,” McKenney said. The city of Ottawa confirmed Thursday it had requested aid from the Royal Canadian Mounted police and Canada’s public safety minister confirmed resources from the federal police force would be sent to the nation’s capital. With the protests attracting significant attention and funding from the US, police say they are working with the FBI and US Department of Homeland Security to investigate online threats originating south of the border.England will be greeted by improved safety measures on their return to Murrayfield on Saturday as Eddie Jones’s side make their first appearance at Scotland’s stadium since a disputed incident involving a beer bottle in 2020, the Guardian understands. Jones was left furious when one of his senior backroom staff members, Neil Craig, was struck on the head by a beer bottle as England made their way from the team bus to the stadium before their 13-6 win two years ago. Jones appeared to suggest that the bottle had been thrown in England’s direction by a supporter and the Scottish Rugby Union issued a swift apology before Six Nations organisers confirmed they were launching an investigation. A subsequent video emerged, however, appearing to show the bottle blowing off the concourse, with Storm Ciara in its early stages, and in the direction of the England party rather than being thrown. Jones and England opted against making an official complaint, the SRU pointed to what the video seemed to show and that appeared to be the end of the matter. High winds are again forecast for Saturday’s match, however, and it is understood that netting will be put up to offer both sets of players and the match officials protection when they arrive. England’s arrival at Murrayfield has long since been a sideshow of Calcutta Cup matches in Edinburgh with slow-marching bagpipers traditionally part of the spectacle. More than half of England’s starting XV on Saturday have never played a Six Nations match at Murrayfield but Kyle Sinckler, who was part of the side two years ago, recently recalled his experience of arriving at the ground. “I remember coming off the bus once or twice and the fans are giving it to you straight away and chucking certain things,” he said. “Emotions from the fans overboil sometimes but for me it just shows how much it means to people and the power of sport. It was just Scottish fans I guess, just boozed up. It was quite funny actually with all the abuse, it was good fun.” The SRU has stressed that the netting is a safety measure, in line with protocols amid the expected poor conditions, rather than a beefing up of security. Jones revealed last week he was already bracing himself for abuse on Saturday. In 2018, the day after Scotland’s 25-13 triumph, Jones was subjected to torrid abuse from drunken Scotland fans at a Manchester train station as he made his way home via a planned trip to Old Trafford. Two years ago, as well as venting his anger at the beer bottle incident, Jones criticised Scotland supporters for booing Owen Farrell while he was kicking at goal. “I’m not very popular,” Jones said last week. “So I’m sure I’m going to get plenty of abuse and I’m happy to take that.” Sam Simmonds, who is among the England players who have not played at Murrayfield, revealed the hostility they are expecting to face has been a hot topic of conversation this week. “We’ve just talked about the hostile environment and how we can use that and come together as a 15 and a 23, and also the boys who aren’t playing as well,” Simmonds said. “We’ve talked about results in the past and maybe we haven’t played to our full potential. This week we’ve trained well, mentally and physically we’re in a very good place.” Meanwhile, Scotland’s fly-half Finn Russell is equally occupying England minds. The defence coach, Anthony Seibold, who gets his first taste of the Six Nations, acknowledged the need to blunt the threat posed by the mercurial No 10. “He’s a super-talented player,” Seibold said. “You just have to watch his club form over there in Paris and he has been outstanding and he brings that to the Scotland team. How do you take away his weapons? Finn Russell wants time and space so he can ball play and use his really effective kicking game, both short and long. So you need to take away time and space from Finn. That’s easier said than done, of course. “I think it is a case of making sure we go after Finn Russell. Not outside our defensive system but making sure we put some pressure on him. You need to win the collisions, the ruck and the ruck speed to do that.”My wife, Gill Clisham, who has died aged 59 of heart failure, was the secretary of the National Institute of Economic and Social Research (NIESR) from 2001 to 2014. Though not an economist, she worked tirelessly throughout her career to ensure a wider understanding of the discipline and was instrumental in the inception and development of many successful initiatives, most notably the Westminster Economics Forum, a series of conferences she developed in partnership with the ESRC (Economic and Social Research Council). Gill was born in Wigan, the daughter of Marjorie (nee Barton), a health visitor, and Arthur McCaffery, a post office engineer. She arrived in the world following her mother’s previous eight miscarriages, and was valued by her parents as an only child. This prompted Gill to embrace life to the full. Gill studied government at the University of Essex, where she and I met as students. We married in 1983 and in 1987 settled in London, where she started working for NIESR. She then spent the next 27 years as a vital part of the NIESR team, first as PA to the economist Brian Henry, then very soon joining the publications team before becoming external relations manager. It was in this role that she started winning praise from all quarters for her warm personality and positive attitude, as well as her skilful organisation and calm approachability. Gill’s commitment to the world of socio-economic research was demonstrated when she became the secretary of ARCISS (the Association of Research Centres in the Social Sciences), with her work being further recognised when she was invited to become a fellow of the Royal Society of Arts. Coming from Wigan, Gill was an avid supporter of Wigan rugby league, a passion she acquired from her father. As well as attending numerous Challenge Cup finals, she could often be found on ice-covered terraces on either side of the Pennines attempting to extricate fizzy pop from a frozen can while warming the other hand on a rapidly cooling pie. She also loved music, and though her tastes were eclectic, Gill had what some might call an unhealthy obsession with Sting; attending numerous concerts both with him as a solo artist and as “the bass player” (as Stuart Copeland called him) with the Police. But more than the other passions, Gill’s biggest passion was for travel; she thought that life was for living and experiencing. She visited Brazil, South Africa and Malaysia, and had numerous trips to the Caribbean and the US, with one of her favourite places being Las Vegas. This was not necessarily for the gambling, which she did enjoy, but for the mixing pot it was for diverse experiences. This was most noticeable in her visits to a range of Michelin-starred restaurants, as well as experiencing more prosaic establishments. In 2014 Gill and I decided to dedicate our time to making the most of life and we retired to Greece. Having visited around 20 of its islands and many places on the mainland, we had bought a converted olive press on the island of Corfu a few years earlier. We both decided we could not wait any longer to make our frequent visits permanent. Gill was a true Grecophile, and many said, when we moved there, that she had achieved her dream. Gill is survived by me.Thank you for the list of podcasts for those of us who “need to make sense of life” (1 February). Could you also recommend one that tells us how to cope with living in an economic system that is largely dictated by the needs of a globalised deregulated economy, founded on the principle that the polluter never pays, and profit is all? Harold Forbes Wareham, Dorset • The good news for Boris Johnson (Four Johnson aides quit in fallout from Downing Street parties, 3 February) is that soon there won’t be enough staff left in No 10 to hold a party. Paul Collins Sale, Cheshire • If the prime minister’s position is “un10able” (Letters, 2 February), hopefully we can expect to see his 10ancy in No 10 end quite soon. Dr Mark Wilcox Holmfirth, West Yorkshire • I was pleased to read that Dillon Helbig’s handwritten tale has been accepted and listed at his local library (Book a prize: Idaho library has wait list for story eight-year-old hid on a shelf, 2 February). In response to a recent offer of books to my local library, they were declined because the library had “too many books”. Annette Ray Tunbridge Wells, Kent • After the banking crisis, bankers got richer and the people got poorer. Now welcome to the energy crisis (Report, 3 February). Melvyn Rust St Albans, Hertfordshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Your article (‘We need to celebrate it’: Newcastle seeks its place on Hadrian’s Wall trail, 29 January) does not make any reference – either in the text or in the maps – to Milecastle 4, which is beneath Newcastle Arts Centre on Westgate Road. This was discovered by my partner, David Fry, in 1985 and was reported formally by the then county archaeologist, Barbara Harbottle. David was the resident potter at the arts centre, leading a team to make floor tiles for the whole complex when he noticed Roman pots being thrown into a skip during the renovation of the medieval buildings. David’s excavations revealed the route of the wall in the city centre, and the location of the milecastle, which had been puzzling people. So we agree that the route of the trail going along the riverside instead of through the west end and city centre is a missed opportunity to show people the real route of the wall and the exciting finds made. Sheila Spencer Benton, Tyne and Wear • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Jonathan Jones’s choice of Max Beckmann’s painting Die Nacht to illustrate “Weimar excess” was unfortunate (Bootleggers, bondage and law-breaking bashes! The scandalous history of the wild party, 31 January). Far from showing a “party from hell, with bondage, in a room that’s drunkenly shrinking”, it is in fact an allegorical depiction of the tragedy of war and revolution. The viewer is forced to witness the murderous assault on a family hiding in an attic. The fact that the artist depicts his own family renders the tragedy even more poignant: the man with a bandaged head is clearly Beckmann himself; the child abducted by a revolutionary was modelled on his son, Peter; the woman tied and with splayed legs after rape is his wife, Minna. Suffused with Christian imagery, the theme is martyrdom: the strangled man with upturned soles and signs of stigmata recalls Christ’s crucifixion on altar paintings of the old masters Beckmann so much admired. Any number of examples or satirical portrayals of Weimar excess by George Grosz or Otto Dix et al might have been suitable for Jones’s argument, but Die Nacht definitely is not. Cornelie Usborne Professor emerita of history, Roehampton University • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Somebody at the Guardian seemed surprised that occasionally novelists and science fiction writers get the future right (Editorial, 30 January). Those of us who have loved, read, or even written science fiction can only chuckle quietly at their surprise. It is the nature of future-thinking authors to take an idea, even in embryo, and run with it. Sometimes, examples such as HG Wells actually predicting a city-destroying bomb and calling it an “atom-bomb” in 1913 can be a bit breathtaking. I’m still impressed with Ray Bradbury’s 1953 short story The Murderer, which predicts the mobile phone and house-computer, and Henry Kuttner’s Year Day (circa 1953) which predicts mass advertising and virtual reality. To me, a recent article about a visit to Donbas perfectly matched Orwell’s Airstrip One in 1984, even down to the ruined buildings, torture centre and bad coffee. Belonging to a generation who hoped, by AD 2000, we would have proper self-drive flying cars, video phones, computers that follow complex voice commands and tourist trips to the Moon (Frank Hampson, drawing Dan Dare in 1950, promised much of that, and more), I find our 21st century to be something of a disappointment. Since 2016, I think we have all finished up living a badly written 1970s dystopian novel instead. Garth Groombridge Southampton • On novelists predicting the future, for “partygate” read The Masque of the Red Death by Edgar Allan Poe – or see the wonderfully over-the-top film starring Vincent Price. Frances Starbuck Lepton, West Yorkshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.I was amused to read your editorial (2 February) about the internet game Wordle, created by Josh Wardle for his partner and subsequently sold to the New York Times. I used to play this game on paper in the 1990s with my wife at the time and have included a brief discussion of it in my book Sociology as Method. I describe the game as a recontextualisation of a board game called Mastermind, which was played with coloured pegs rather than words. One player placed an arrangement of pegs hidden at one end of the board, and the other had to try to deduce the arrangement before the board was filled with their incorrect attempts. Some readers may remember this game; there was also an online version of it. Prof Paul Dowling Department of Culture, Communication and Media, UCL Institute of Education • Re the coverage of the purchase of Wordle, the game has been around since 1975, albeit in analogue form. My set of Word Mastermind in its battered box has players inserting letter tiles in four, rather than five, holes as they try to guess the word. Different coloured pegs indicate a correct letter in the right or wrong place. It allows up to 10 tries a game. You can play for free as many times a day as you like, too. But the main advantage is that it has to be played from a static position, so there is no chance of colliding with someone playing it on their phone while walking along. Janet Fraser Twickenham, London • The invention of the extremely popular Wordle is not a new creation except as an online app-based version. My friends and I played the same game on paper or in our heads and called it Five-letter Word Mastermind. We would play several words at the same time and have as many guesses as needed, with the winner having the fewest tries. I remember it helped keep us awake on long night shifts at Frenchay hospital 50 years ago. Rob Doran Canon Pyon, Herefordshire • Around 55 years ago we were playing a very similar game in pairs against each other during a craze in our office. It has only been turned into an online competition. Ian Elliott Hathersage, Derbyshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.When Bradford community radio profiled my friend Colin Lloyd in 2016, the interviewer listed his occupations thus: “Teacher, printmaker, artist, drummer, musician, actor, performer, gay activist and cultural observer of Bradford, the city he grew up in and loved”. Colin, who has died aged 64 of pancreatic cancer, was a hugely creative and compassionate man. He was born in Bradford, one of seven children of Florence (nee Whittaker), a care worker, and Vincent Lloyd, then working in the city’s textile industry. Colin went to Buttershaw comprehensive school, then notable for a drama department run by Janet Beard, who encouraged him to act and helped him improve his reading skills via Shakespeare. Besides producing successful actors, Beard created the Barnstormers touring theatre company, and living and working with this troupe as a teenager, Colin was in a creative milieu that encouraged his talents and accepted his sexuality without stigma. He became involved with the Gay Liberation Front, beginning his lifelong passionate and articulate political engagement. Aged 20 and working at the Alhambra theatre in Bradford, Colin met Alan Richardson, an artist, and they became life partners (and in 2006 civil partners). They both then went to work at Yorkshire Television, Colin in the costume department, which brought stability and a house in Bradford. Ten years later, Colin opted for his other creative obsession and enrolled at Bradford College of Art. He had been making art since his adolescence, and welcomed the chance to become a mature student. Completing his fine art studies at Sheffield Hallam University, in 1992 he was invited back to Bradford to teach, an offer he gladly accepted: ever since his schooldays he was excited by the transformational possibilities of good teaching. After gaining an MA in printmaking, he worked from 2009 at Salford University, where he taught BA and MA students painting, printmaking and multimedia until his retirement in 2016. Colin understood the importance of new media for artists to communicate and show their work, deftly using digital media as a promotion platform for his own practice which, for a radical gay man who had lived through the Aids epidemic, was unsurprisingly concerned with memory, loss and queer sexuality. An inspiring mentor, he energetically contributed to Foldworks artist studios in Todmorden, set up to widen access to art facilities, the Positive Lives photographic exhibition run in collaboration with the Terrence Higgins Trust to document the impact of HIV/Aids, and Café Despard, a radical cabaret group founded in the 1980s with mostly LGBTQ+ members – three examples of creative Bradford ventures that generated international impact via programmes, collaborators and travelling venues. Colin is survived by Alan, by his mother, and by his siblings, Carol, Fred, David, Andrea and Susan. Another sister, Janet, predeceased him.Simon Parkin’s long read (‘I remember the feeling of insult’: when Britain imprisoned its wartime refugees, 1 February) very appropriately reminds us of how easy it is for the popular press to stir up hysteria and hatred against immigrants and to influence government policy. Hitler’s victory in 1933 forced thousands to flee Nazi persecution. It would have been relatively easy to separate the very few imposters from the thousands of Jews, communists and other persecuted minorities who would hardly be working for the Nazis. MI5 itself had files on many of the communists, and most of those of Jewish background could be easily identified. In my book (A Political Family – the Kuczynskis, Fascism, Espionage and the Cold War) about one German-Jewish family that escaped Hitler’s Germany, Jürgen Kuczynski explains how he was interned at Seaton camp in Devon, alongside those who were Nazis, but no distinctions were made. In fact, the Nazis were often given preferential treatment. Other less fortunate internees were shipped to Canada and had to run the gauntlet of Nazi submarines; dozens lost their lives in this way. That period was not only traumatic for the refugees, as Parkin notes, but it also tarnished Britain’s reputation as a haven for those fleeing persecution. We should learn from that experience. John Green London • Simon Parkin’s long read is a timely reminder of what happened to those seeking escape from conflict and death during the second world war. Mr Parkin will know that the difficulties and deprivations suffered by refugees and asylum seekers continued after 1945. Many who had been interned on the Isle of Man and elsewhere were classified postwar as displaced persons (DPs), towards whom the policy of the British and other allied governments was one of “repatriation”, often to the very places of oppression, torture and death people had fled in the first place. For example, the former Belsen concentration camp was used to house 12,500 DPs. Conditions there and elsewhere were miserable and dangerous. Now we see the horrors of Afghanistan, just to name one of the many humanitarian tragedies (an overused phrase, maybe, but distressingly poignant here) with us around the world, with millions and millions of displaced persons who won’t receive any kind of help or relief. Do we live in a better world than in 1945? For some of us, yes; for many of our fellow beings, certainly not. Bruce Ross-Smith Headington, Oxford • My parents were interned too early to benefit from the married couples’ internment camp on the Isle of Man. My mother, a political refugee but not Jewish, was first arrested in September 1939 and spent nearly four months in Holloway prison, some in solitary confinement. She was never charged or tried and was only released because her fiance, my Jewish dad, enlisted the help of Fenner Brockway, an MP who, unlike their local MP, did not reject all Germans without finding out more about them. On her release, in March 1940, my parents married, but in May both were interned in segregated camps on the Isle of Man. They did not meet again for another year. They made the most of their time there and my mother even started a school in Port Erin. Of course, their gratitude on release and relief at having survived, unlike many friends and family, overtook any feelings of anger that they could not fight the Nazis, and the fear they felt at being perfect targets for any potential invasion. The dangers of propaganda highlighted in Simon Parkin’s article are clear and do long-term damage. Julia Nelki Prenton, Merseyside • My father, Josef, was one of those Germans who was interned on the Isle of Man in 1940 having come to Britain in the 1930s. By all accounts, though he had lost his liberty, he had a better time than most, working in the fields producing food. My mother, on the other hand, a Bradford lass, was not so lucky. Having married a German, she was regarded as “an enemy alien” and shortly after giving birth to my brother Dennis was marched to the police station with her two other children – Peter, aged four, and Geoffrey, aged two – and made to sign a declaration of “naturalisation”. It did not help when it came to the hatred and vilification from her fellow Bradfordians. John Duttine Worthing, West Sussex • Simon Parkin’s excellent piece summarised the terrible treatment of innocent immigrants from Italy and Germany in the early days of the second world war. He might have mentioned, in addition, the tragedy in July 1940 when the SS Arandora Star set sail from Liverpool, taking with it over 1,200 Italian and German internees for deportation to camps in Canada. The ship was torpedoed by a German U-boat off the Irish coast, and sank, with over 800 casualties. This tragedy is commemorated today in memorials in many British and Italian cities. Mark Flinn Chester • The use of internment can be said to have started earlier, during the first world war, with the imprisonment during the Easter Rising of 1916 of 18,000 Irishmen in the wilds of north Wales, at Frongoch near Bala. An old whisky distillery site was chosen to house them. Notable among their number was Michael Collins. It has been argued that the IRA was born there under his tutelage and the camp was dubbed “Ollscoil na Réabhlóide” – the “University of Revolution” – by its inmates. Similar internment camps for American Japanese citizens were set up by the federal government – for their own protection rather than for active combatants – following the Pearl Harbor attack on the US Pacific fleet in Hawaii. John Bentley Ledbury, Herefordshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Time to wrap up... The governor of the Bank of England has come under fire from unions and earned a rebuke from 10 Downing Street for suggesting workers should not ask for big pay rises to help control inflation. Andrew Bailey said he wanted to see “quite clear restraint” in the annual wage-bargaining process between staff and their employers to help prevent an upward spiral taking hold. However, his comments drew a furious response from union leaders, as households face the worst hit to their living standards in three decades as soaring energy prices cause inflation to outstrip wage growth. Sharon Graham, the general secretary of Unite, said workers did not cause Britain’s cost of living crisis and should not be asked to pay for it. “Why is it that every time there is a crisis, rich men ask ordinary people to pay for it?” she said. “Enough is enough, we will be demanding that employers who can pay, do pay. Let’s be clear, pay restraint is nothing more than a call for a national pay cut.” Bailey was paid £575,538, including pension, in his first year as the Bank’s governor from March 2020, more than 18 times the UK average for a full-time employee. In a sign of a rift between the government and the Bank, the prime minister’s official spokesperson said pay restraint was not something he was calling for. “We obviously want a high-wage, high-growth economy, and we want people’s wages to increase,” he said. “We recognise the challenge of the economic picture which Andrew Bailey set out; but obviously it’s not up for government to set wages or advise on the strategic direction or management of private companies.” As the Bank raised interest rates to 0.5% on Thursday to tackle inflation, it warned household disposable incomes were on track to shrink by 2% this year, the biggest fall since comparable records began in 1990. It comes after the worst decade for average pay growth since the Napoleonic wars, with inflation-adjusted pay still below the pre-2008 financial crisis peak. In other news today... Oil has hit a seven-year high, with Brent crude and West Texas Intermediate both pushing further above the $90/barrel mark. The move pushed up Shell and BP’s share prices, but threatens further pain for motorists and companies, pushing up transport costs and some heating bills. The US economy has appeared to shake off the Omicron variant in January as employers added 467,000 new jobs, much more than economists had feared. Great Britain’s energy regulator is proposing to update the energy price cap as often as every three months as it braces for further volatility across global markets. Households can expect their water bills to rise to an average of almost £420 a year from April, compounding a record rise in energy costs and an increase in national insurance contributions that are due in the same month. MPs have called for a national road pricing scheme in which motorists will have to pay by the mile to make up a £35bn tax shortfall that will arise from the shift to electric vehicles. The carbon dioxide emissions of new cars sold in the UK dropped to the lowest level ever in 2021 thanks to the unprecedented surge in electric vehicle sales, industry data suggests. Average new car CO2 emissions fell by 11.2%, to 119.7g for every kilometre driven, according to the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders (SMMT), a lobby group. The owner of the Upper Crust sandwich chain has reported a drop in sales as concerns about the Omicron coronavirus variant kept customers at home but said it was hopeful of better performance as commuters return to offices. The UK film and TV industry has bounced back spectacularly from the pandemic with a record £5.6bn spent making blockbusters such as Mission: Impossible 7 and big-budget dramas including Bridgerton in the UK last year. Shaftesbury, which owns swathes of Chinatown, Soho and Covent Garden, said West End crowds were returning despite the Omicron variant, with the prospect of an extended period of uninterrupted trading. Goodnight. GW The Daily Telegraph are reporting that the Bank of England is going to face demands for a ‘very substantial’ pay increase for its own workers later this year, or risk losing them. They say: Trade union Unite, which represents almost 600 of the Bank’s staff, recently accepted a 1.5% pay increase this year that is due to take effect from April. But Mr Bailey now faces a pay revolt on his own doorstep after the union’s regional officer, Steve O’Donnell, said: “Unite will be seeking a very substantial increase for workers at the Bank of England when pay talks resume later this year. [They] are suffering the same cost of living crisis as everyone else and Andrew Bailey can’t ignore the needs of his own staff. “A failure to address pay will result in workers voting with their feet and seeking alternative employment where they are properly appreciated and remunerated.” In the City, shares in oil giants Shell (+3.9%) and BP (+3.4%) have ended the day at the top of the FTSE 100 leaderboard. The companies jumped as the oil price continued to climb, with Brent crude hitting new seven-year highs of $93.70 per barrel today. Oil has now heading for its seventh weekly rise in a row, as bitter winter storms in the US threaten to disrupt production, adding to worries about Russia’s energy supplies as the Ukraine crisis rumbles on. Higher oil is going to lead to more expensive petrol and diesel, raising transport costs, and adding to the inflationary pressure on households and businesses. It will also push up oil giant’s profits, with Shell fresh from quadrupling earnings last year. BP and Shell’s buoyant share prices meant the FTSE 100 index has only closed 12 points lower at 7516, down 0.17%. But three-quarters of the companies on the blue-chip index fell today, with private equity firm Intermediate Capital (-4.15%), DIY chain Kingfisher (-3.9%) and Lloyds Bank (-3.6%) leading the fallers. European markets had a rougher day, with Germany’s DAX sliding 1.75%. TUC Analysis and Research Officer Alex Collinson has shown how real wages have stagnated for over a decade -- illustrating why calls for pay restraint have caused such anger today: Shaftesbury, which owns swathes of Chinatown, Soho and Covent Garden, said West End crowds were returning despite the Omicron variant, with the prospect of an extended period of uninterrupted trading. The landlord, which owns a 16-acre (6-hectare) portfolio in the heart of London, said its vacancy rate had fallen below 5% for the first time since the pandemic started, to 4.9% in recent weeks – just above the 4.8% recorded in March 2020. Brian Bickell, the chief executive, said the strong rebound in confidence and activity since last summer had continued into the key pre-Christmas period and the recovery was on track, despite short-term disruption from Omicron. Households can expect their water bills to rise to an average of almost £420 a year from April, compounding a record rise in energy costs and an increase in national insurance contributions that are due in the same month. Bills will rise by 1.7% in England and Wales from April, according to the industry body Water UK, pushing up the typical annual bill by roughly £7 to £419 a year. The increase will come as further unwelcome news to hard-pressed households after Thursday’s announcement of the imminent £693 increase in home energy bills, which will drive the cost of gas and electricity to an average of £1,977 a year and plunge millions of homes into fuel poverty. Christine McGourty, the chief executive of Water UK, said customers would pay “little more than £1 a day for their water and sewerage service” and there was “a wide range of support available for those in need”. “But we know this is a difficult time for many, and no one should have to worry about their household essentials,” Jess Cook, who leads the water poverty programme for National Energy Action, a fuel poverty charity, said research had shown that more than 40% of those struggling to pay their water bills would bathe less to reduce their water bills. Almost a quarter would cut back on food or personal hygiene products in order to save money. Here’s the full story: Meanwhile in the US, 476,000 new jobs were created last month as the economy appears to recover from the Omicron disruption. That’s far more than the 150,000 expected, with some economists fearing employment would have shrunk in January. November and December’s data was revised up too, to show another 700,000 more jobs than originally measured. Earnings growth also rose, which should help America families facing their own inflation pressures (US inflation hit 7% in December) It looks to be an encouraging sign for the US economy. But it could also spur America’s central bank to hike interest rates several times this year. Here’s the full story: This chart, from Bloomberg, shows how the Bank of England expects real wages (pay after inflation) to fall this year, hurting households: The Bank is worried about a ‘wage-price spiral’, they explain: The BOE expects underlying pay settlements to peak at close to 5% this year. But high inflation will mean real pay shrinks by 2%. Bailey said his job was to prevent those price rises becoming “ingrained” and that he wanted “restraint” in pay, despite the squeeze on household budgets. “If we let that process rip as it were it’s not going to solve the problem, it’s going to get worse, particularly for those people who aren’t able to bargain on their wages, and many people aren’t able to,” he told ITV News on Thursday. But, people are already facing rising prices for food, goods and services, and energy bills are going to surge in April, when national insurance increases also hit. Without pay rises that keep up with inflation, living standards will be hurt, as the Daily Mirror’s Kevin Maguire points out here: The Bank of England is likely to raise interest rate several times this year, predicts Ruth Gregory of Capital Economics: The MPC’s policy statement this week cements our view that interest rates will rise further from 0.50% now to 1.25% by the end of this year and perhaps a bit further in 2023. If anything, the MPC’s hawkishness suggests that rate hikes will come sooner than we anticipate. The City was surprised that four of the nine Monetary Policy members voted for a 50- basis point increase to Bank Rate. They were narrowly outvoted by five who favoured yesterday’s 25bp rate rise (from 0.25% to 0.5%). Professor Costas Milas of Liverpool University’s management school says the Bank is trying to sound tough, in the hope that a stronger pound pushed down inflationary costs. In my view, such a decision (a 50 basis points rise, that is), following a rise of as recent as one month ago, would have been a stark admission of the very fact that MPC members have ended up miles behind the curve. Obviously, they understand this. So by talking tough, four out of nine of them, they create expectations of almost imminently higher interest rates which, in turn, push the sterling exchange rate up. The hope, of course, of all nine members is that sterling will do their job in bringing inflation back to the target therefore reducing the risk of too many hikes.... UK restaurants, bars, hotels and leisure attractions are planning to hike their prices this year, as they pass on rising costs. A survey by industry body UKHospitality of 340 hospitality businesses, representing 8,200 venues, found that 47% expect to increase consumer prices by over 10% this year, with 15% anticipating hikes of over 20%. Overall, prices across the sector are expected to increase by 11% -- which would add to the UK’s cost of living pressures. UKHospitality reports that firms are being hit by soaring operating costs, including: 41% in energy bills 19% in labour costs 17% in food prices 14% drinks prices 21% insurance costs UKHospitality chief executive, Kate Nicholls, warns that many businesses will collapse, having missed out on the usual busy Christmas trading: “Omicron has infected the start of 2022 with lower-than-expected trading levels and higher than expected cancellations in hospitality venues. One in three businesses in our sector have no cash reserves left and are already carrying heavy debt burdens. Many of our community pubs, restaurants, hotels and hospitality venues will therefore fail as the cost-of-living crisis bites, causing demand to faulter. This can only cause the UK’s wider economic recovery to stutter. “This April’s planned increases in VAT, employment costs and business rates are therefore likely to prove one financial burden too many for businesses who only then, as we come out of the quieter winter trading period, can hope to begin to start trading at full capacity once more. Paul Nowak, deputy General Secretary of the TUC, says Andrew Bailey’s call for pay restraint is ‘untenable’ in the current economy climate. Nowak told Radio 4’s World At One that he has upmost respect for governor Bailey and the Bank of England, but “on this issue he’s just 100% plain wrong”. He’s in real danger of appearing disconnected from the real experience of millions of working people up and down the country. Nowak points out that, as chancellor Rishi Sunak explained yesterday, UK inflation is being driven by rising energy prices. Wages haven’t risen in real terms in the last decade, Nowak continues, and the Bank now expects pay to fall in real terms this year - by £50 per month on average, the TUC has calculated. Nowak says: In those circumstances, with people facing those real choices between paying for their heating, or eating, the governor can’t expect working people just to sit on their hands. Calling for them to show pay restraint, I think, is untenable. Nowak also hopes that Bailey’s comments will open up a discussion about how pay is set in the UK. A ‘great dose of collective bargaining’ could help social care, for example, where there are over 100,000 vacancies, endemic low pay and insecure employment, he says. But with millions of workers being hit by rising national insurance payments this year, and rising bills, we’re telling them that the only thing that can’t rise is their pay, Nowak points out. Nowak also predicts that Sunak will need to provide more help later this year for people with rising energy bills. The chancellor should also recognise that something is fundamentally broken with the energy market, if the taxpayer is having to lend money to suppliers (to cut bills by £200 in October), he concludes. City experts aren’t impressed with the Bank of England either. Lawrence Kaplin, chief market strategist at international business payments firm Equals Money, says: Yesterday’s interest rate hike along with details of the much-feared energy price cap rising some 54% prompted the Governor to warn that UK households must brace themselves for the biggest annual fall in their standard of living since records began 30 years ago. On what was a horrendous day for the UK consumer, the optics were definitely not helped in a post-meeting interview where Bailey urged workers not to ask for a big pay rise this year. I think ex Bank of England rate setter Blanchflower put it best when referring to the BoE’s decision saying quite simply “they don’t know what they’re doing”. Here’s more from professor Danny Blanchflower, of Dartmouth College, who served on the Bank’s Monetary Policy Committee from 2006 to 2009 (he was an early voice warning that an economic downturn was coming) Analyst Neil Wilson of Markets.com says Bailey has been ‘sleeping at the controls’, by not moving earlier to slow inflation before it hit 30-year highs. The governor of the Bank of England, Andrew Bailey, says we can do our bit to help to battle rising inflation by not asking for wage increases. Coming from someone who’s been sleeping at the controls for the last 18 months, that is not exactly helpful. How about doing your job? By which I mean getting a grip on inflation before it sets in – which would have been to gently tighten last summer. Too bad that moment was lost. Can’t believe I actually would like Mark Carney back. UNISON general secretary Christina McAnea has also responded to Andrew Bailey’s comments, and called for the government to give public sector workers an above-inflation pay rise to help them through the cost of living crisis. McAnea says: “Holding wages down won’t stop the cost of living soaring. “Staff struggling to keep the lights on and put food on the table are already leaving the NHS, care and other public services in their droves. “The government must deliver the cash so this year’s wage increases are above the rate of inflation. Otherwise, the consequences will be disastrous for everyone.” The prime minister’s spokesman has implicitly rebuked Andrew Bailey, the governor of the Bank of England, for saying that people should show restraint when asking for pay rises to control inflation. Asked if the PM agreed, during today’s Downing Street lobby briefing, the spokesman said: It’s not something that the prime minister is calling for. We obviously want a high-growth economy and we want people’s wages to increase. We recognise the challenge of the economic picture which Andrew Bailey set out but it’s not up for the Government to set wages or advise the strategic direction or management of private companies. Our Politics liveblog has all the details from the briefing: It is not hard to see why Boris Johnson would have found Bailey’s comments alarming; last year, in an interview ahead of the Conservative party conference, Johnson said that for him “wage growth” would be the most important measure of whether his levelling up policies were succeeding. But the Bank of England has said families are about to experience the biggest fall in living standards for at least three decades. Andrew Bailey’s call for people not to push for big pay rises, despite the painful cost of living crisis, is attracting more criticism. The governor is being accused of being out of touch with families facing a squeeze on incomes as inflation rises. Radio station LBC has a good take: Speaking to LBC earlier on Friday, Sir John Gieve, former Deputy Governor of the Bank of England, said he could “imagine people would take issue with the comments but defended the Governor. “What he was trying to say was that in the past when inflation has really got going - as it did 30 years ago - it was because wages changed prices, that led firms to put up their own prices, and then you’ve got a spiral developing,” he told Nick Ferrari at Breakfast. One LBC caller, John from Liverpool, said he was “fed up” and Mr Bailey should live “for one day” on the wages of an average person. “Get them down to the street level, let them come out for one day or a week, let them live with a person that’s trying to bring up kids, they’re trying to feed them... let them live on what they’re earning, let them see. “I’m fed up of this Government, Nick, I’m fed up.” Johnny Runge, principal researcher at NIESR, tweets that it shows economists would benefit from talking more to the wider public: Here’s a clip of Andrew Bailey explaining to the BBC yesterday that the Bank wants to see ‘moderation of wage rises’ to prevent inflation becoming ingrained: The owner of the Upper Crust sandwich chain has reported a drop in sales as concerns about the Omicron coronavirus variant kept customers at home but said it was hopeful of better performance as commuters return to offices. SSP Group operates fast food chains targeted at railway stations and airports, which also includes Camden Food Co, Ritazza and Burger King franchises at travel locations. Hit hard by pandemic restrictions on travel, sales in the eight weeks from 6 December were only 57% of the equivalent in pre-pandemic 2019, the company said in a trading update. That compared with 66% of 2019 levels across October and November. Here’s our news story on Ofgem’s proposal to update Great Britain’s energy price cap more often, with further volatility expected across global markets. More than two-thirds of adults have reported that their cost of living had increased in the last month, with food, energy and fuel all cited. The Office for National Statistics latest survey of Coronavirus and the social impacts on Great Britain, conducted in the second half of January, found that 69% of adults said their cost of living had increased. That’s up from 66% earlier in the month, and 62% in early November when the question was first asked. Of this group, 89% said the price of food shopping had risen, while 68% said the price of fuel had increased -- as the rise in crude oil price fed through to the pumps again. Higher spending on gas or electricity was also cited by many, even before the energy cap rises in April. Around 2 in 10 (19%) of adults reported they had found it very difficult or difficult to pay their usual household bills in the last month, compared with a year ago. The proportion appeared to be highest among those aged 30 to 49 years (27%), the ONS said. Reuters’ Andy Bruce has crunched the data, and shows that regular pay growth already looks pretty stable: Trade unions have blasted the Bank of England governor for calling for pay restraint, at a time when workers are facing a drop in their real incomes. Unite general secretary Sharon Graham says employers who can afford to give their staff a pay rise, should do so. Workers shouldn’t be expected to pay for the energy crisis, or the surge in inflation, she points out, adding that Andrew Bailey is actually calling for a national pay cut. Graham says: “Yet again workers are being asked to pay the price, this time for inflation and the energy crisis. Inflation has not been caused by workers. Why should they be expected to pay for the failures of the energy market and the total shambles of Government policy? “Workers don’t need lectures from the Governor of the Bank of England on exercising pay restraint. Why is it that every time there is a crisis, rich men ask ordinary people to pay for it? “Enough is enough, we will be demanding that employers who can pay, do pay. Let’s be clear, pay restraint is nothing more than a call for a national pay cut.” As covered earlier, Bailey insists he’s not saying ‘nobody gets a pay rise’ - but he is urging workers to hold off on asking for bigger pay raises, even though households face the worst squeeze on record this year, with inflation heading over 7% by April. My colleague Richard Partington reports that Andrew Bailey’s comments have drawn a sharp response from other trade unions too: Kate Bell, the head of economics at the TUC, said inflation was being driven by rising energy costs, not pay demands. “Working people need a pay rise now. And the best way to get one is to join a union. Gary Smith, the general secretary of the GMB trade union, said Bailey’s comments were a “sick joke”. Bailey was paid £575,538, including pension, in his first year as the Bank’s governor from March 2020, more than 18 times higher than the £31,285 median annual pay for full-time employees in the UK. Union density in the private sector has fallen steadily since the 1970s, when high rates of inflation were fuelled by high pay settlements, to about 13%. Official figures show average weekly earnings after taking account of inflation fell in November, and remain below their pre-2008 financial crisis peak. Here’s Richard’s full story: The Bank of England’s chief economist has warned further action may be taken if inflationary pressures, such as higher wages, prove more persistent than expected. Huw Pill has told Bloomberg TV that the Bank expects a further modest tightening to monetary policy in the coming months -- ie, another rise in interest rates, on top of the rise from 0.25% to 0.5% yesterday. Pill said that the Bank would have to act if it saw that the surge in energy costs was pushing up wages and other costs more than forecast: “A key assumption in our forecast... is that we don’t see from the middle of next year, persistence emerging in wage and domestic cost developments, stemming from these second-round effects,” “It’s that lack of that, the fact that policies including monetary policy do enough to avoid that, that is central to bringing our inflation back towards target. If we were to see developments that were not consistent with that assumption, then of course, we would have to think about further action.” (thanks to Reuters for the quotes) Some better news for the UK economy - construction growth has hit a six-month high. Business activity in the UK construction sector increased for the 12th month running in January, and picked up after a lull in December, according to the latest survey of purchasing managers from IHS Markit and CIPS. Their Construction PMI also found that new orders rose at the fastest pace since August 2021. The index rose to 56.3 in January, up from 54.3 in December, showing the fastest growth since last July. Commercial activity was particularly strong, but housebuilding growth slipped to a four-month low. Rapid rises in raw material prices, energy costs and transportation bills continued push up business expenses in the construction sector -- although cost inflation did dip to a 10-month low as supply issues eased. The UK’s competition watchdog has fined Facebook-owner Meta a second time, for breaching an enforcement order related to its purchase of Giphy. The Competition and Markets Authority (CMA) has fined Meta £1.5m, for not reporting that three employees listed as ‘key staff’ had left the company. That, the CMA says, is a breach of its initial enforcement order (IEO) under which Meta must inform the competition authority of any ‘material changes’ to the business. Those IEOs prevent companies from completing a merger while the competition authority examines it. Joel Bamford, senior director of mergers at the CMA, explains: Meta failed to alert us in advance to important changes in their staff, despite knowing they were legally required to do so. This is not the first time this has happened. Initial enforcement orders are an integral part of our mergers toolkit and ensure the CMA is able to take effective action if we find competition concerns. Breaches like this one threaten our ability to maintain the benefits of competition for people using these products and services. The CMA fined Facebook over £50m last October, and has ordered the company to sell Giphy, the gif creation website, due to concerns the deal will hurt competition. Reuters reports that Meta, whose value plunged by a record $230bn+ yesterday, has said it will pay the fine, Over in the eurozone, retail sales have dropped as the omicron variant and rising inflation hit the economy. Retail sales volumes fell by 3% in December, a much weaker reading than expected, with Covid-19 restrictions hitting some shops. Sales of non-food products fell by 5.2% during the month, despite the Christmas shopping season. Food, drinks and tobacco sales volumes fell 0.3%, while online shopping volumes were down 3.9%. UK car sales were sharply below their pre-pandemic levels last month, as shortages of semiconductors continued to hit production, and household budgets are squeezed. There were 115,087 new cars registered in January, the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders (SMMT) reports, which is almost 23% less than in January 2020. It is 27.5% higher than a year earlier, though, when lockdown restrictions kept car showrooms shut. Rising demand for electric cars supported the market, with registrations of battery-powered electric vehicle up 130% year-on-year to 14,433. Plug-in hybrid sales rose 47% to 9,047. Diesel sales slumped by 45% year-on-year, to 6,008. Mike Hawes, SMMT chief executive, said: “Given the lockdown-impacted January 2021, this month’s figures were always going to be an improvement but it is still reassuring to see a strengthening market. Once again it is electrified vehicles that are driving the growth, despite the ongoing headwinds of chip shortages, rising inflation and the cost-of-living squeeze. 2022 is off to a reasonable start, however, and with around 50 new electrified models due for release this year, customers will have an ever greater choice, which can only be good for our shared environmental ambitions.” The shift to electric cars has prompted MPs to call for a national road pricing scheme. The cross-party Commons transport select committee argues that motorists will have to pay by the mile to make up a £35bn tax shortfall that will arise from the shift to electric vehicles, which don’t pay fuel duty (charged on petrol and diesel sales). This chart from Resolution shows how the UK is facing the worst squeeze on incomes on record this year. UK households are facing “recession-era levels of squeezed budgets” this year, the Resolution Foundation thinktank warns. Resolution has calculated that the average family will be £1,000 worse off this year, due to the fall in disposable incomes forecast by the Bank of England yesterday. It also warns that the council tax rebate announced by Rishi Sunak yesterday, to help cushion the surge in energy bills, won’t reach all of the poorest households. Mike Brewer, chief economist at the Resolution Foundation, explains: “Yesterday the Chancellor announced a bold plan to limit the impact of soaring energy bills. But by not targeting families most in need of support, and by trying to minimise the cost of support to the public purse, families will still face significant bill rises from this April, and higher bills for many years to come to pay off the cost of the Chancellor’s new bills loan scheme. “Repurposing the Council Tax system to pay lump-sum grants to most households is another innovative policy from HM Treasury. But Council Tax band is a crude measure of need, and the result is that 640,000 of the poorest households will end up getting less help than some of the richest households in Britain. “The £350 energy bill rebates will soften the cost of living crunch this Spring. But families across Britain are still set for recession-era levels of squeezed budgets this year, with the average family seeing their incomes fall by £1,000 over the course of 2022.” Here are the key points from Resolution’s analysis: A tight squeeze for low-income families. The poorest fifth of households are still set to experience a major rise in energy costs from April, with the average proportion of their spending on energy bills rising from 7 to 10 per cent even after yesterday’s package. Big gaps in support via the Council Tax Rebate. More than one-in-ten of the poorest households in England, 640,000 households in total, live in Band E+ properties and therefore won’t be entitled to the £150 rebate. Levelling up in action? Over a quarter of households across London, the South East and the South West won’t be eligible for the Council Tax rebate (due to living in Band E+ properties), compared to fewer than one-in-ten households across the North. More progressive than cutting NI. By providing flat-rate rebates to households, the Chancellor’s package was much more progressive than a cut to National Insurance (or cutting VAT on energy bills). 2022: the year of the £1,000 living standards squeeze. The bigger picture on the cost of living crunch was outlined by the Bank of England, which forecast that real household disposable income fall by 2 per cent in 2022 – the largest fall on record, and equivalent to an average £1,000 income loss for families across Britain. The oil price has hit its highest level in over seven years, intensifying the energy crunch that is driving up inflation, squeezing households, and boosting oil producers’ earnings. Brent crude has jumped to $92.41 per barrel, its highest level since October 2014. US crude oil (or WTI) has also hit seven-year highs, over $91 per barrel, as a massive winter storm hits America. Edward Moya, senior market analyst at OANDA, explains: “WTI crude surged over the $90 level after an Arctic blast made its way to Texas and disrupted some oil production in the Permian Basin..” Oil had already been pushed higher by the rising tensions between Russia and the West over Ukraine. The Opec+ group is continuing to increase supplies gradually, even as demand increases as economies recover from the pandemic. Shares in Shell have jumped 4%, a day after it reported that annual profits quadrupled last year - intensifying calls for a windfall tax on North Sea producers who are profiting from the energy crunch. On the overall economic picture, Andrew Bailey warns that the UK is returning to a period of ‘much slower growth’, and faces ‘difficult’ times as real wages fall. That recovery will be slower than it would otherwise have been, due to the pressures facing the economy, he told Today. All G7 countries are suffering the same shocks -- the pandemic, and the energy price shock, the BoE governor, warning: It is going to be a difficult period ahead. We are already seeing, and we’re going to see, a reduction in real income. [the latest employment data shows that wages failed to keep up with inflation in November] Bailey predicts that the UK will “start to come out” of this situation in 2023. Two years from now, we expect inflation will be back onto a more stable position. [Yesterday’s forecasts showed household disposable incomes falling 0.5% in 2023, on top of the historic 2% squeeze this year]. [That, of course, is why workers will be looking for pay increases to help them cope with the cost of living squeeze]. Q: Is inflation potentially uncontrollable by the Bank of England? Governor Andrew Bailey says inflation is not out of control. But there are forces, such as energy prices, which the Bank can’t directly alter. Q: Is it frustrating that your ability to make a difference is less? Bailey says the Bank has to deal with the shocks that confront it. It’s been dealing with some very big shocks that it can’t control, such as Covid, and energy prices are a very similar situation. Q: Are you apprehensive about the future, given the difficult choices and real hardships facing families? Bailey pledges he and his colleagues will do everything they can do deal with it. We’ll do everything we can to get inflation back to target. We’ve set out a very plausible profile of how that will happen. BoE governor Andrew Bailey also told Today that the Bank’s forecast shows inflation falling back to its 2% target within two years - calling it a ‘sensible, central case forecast’. But that relies on energy prices not rising further (with the Ukraine crisis threatening to push up gas prices higher). And Bailey added that the UK is not in a normal situation. The ‘normal situation’ is that demand in the economy gets ahead, and there’s too much demand relative to supply. That puts pressure on prices, pressure on wages, and the Bank of England comes in and raises interest rates to calm it all down. We’re not in that world. This is a world of external prices rising, reducing people’s real income. Bailey adds that the Bank faces a “a very difficult balance” as it tries to use its tool to “minimise the damage to households, firms and the economy” to get back onto a stable path. The Bank of England is calling on workers and bosses to show ‘restraint’ on wage rises, even as the country faces its toughest squeeze in decades. Speaking to the Today Programme, governor Andrew Bailey says the Bank wants to see “quite clear restraint” in the bargaining process. Bailey, who is paid around half a million pounds a year, insists that the UK is not experiencing a wage-price spiral, but pressures are building. A day after the Bank raised interest rates to 0.5%, and warned that inflation will hit 7.25% in April, Bailey said controlling wage increases is key to keeping a grip on inflation. We are looking to see quite clear restraint in the bargaining process. Otherwise it will get out of control. It’s not at the moment but it will do.” I’m not saying don’t give your staff a pay rise, Bailey insists, adding that the Bank’s concern is the size of those increases. Q: But won’t wage restraint prevent companies from hiring workers, at a time when many are struggling to fill positions? Bailey says he wants to see wage restraint across the economy. I’m not saying nobody gets a pay rise, don’t get me wrong. But what I am saying it, we do need to see restraint in pay bargaining, otherwise it will get out of control. Yesterday, the Bank of England warned that UK households face the worst squeeze on their disposable incomes for at least 30 years, with real post-tax labour income expected to shrink by 2% this year. With inflation soaring, taxes increasing in April, economic growth slowing and unemployment rising, the economic outlook is darkening.... with Thursday’s rise in UK interest rates adding to pressure on borrowers. Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. With the UK’s cost of living crisis worsening, energy regulator Ofgem is proposing to adjust the price cap on bills twice as frequently, to address the volatility in the market. A day after British households were hit with the news that average bills will rise by nearly £700, Ofgem kicked off a consultation on a proposal to switch from half-yearly to quarterly price cap updates. Currently, the cap on what suppliers can charge only increases every six months. Jonathan Brearley, CEO of Ofgem, told Radio 4’s Today Programme. We have seen an extraordinary event in the energy market over the last few months. Something that’s a one in 30-year event. We’ve seen volatility and change in prices far above what has been expected and what is historical. That volatility led to a flurry of companies collapse since last summer, as they couldn’t pass on the jump in wholesale electricity and gas prices to consumers. Having hiked the price cap by 54% on Thursday, Brearley is now looking to the future, warning that the UK’s regulatory package needs to change. The difficult news for all of us is that this volatile market might be with us for some time. Adjusting the price cap more frequently means when price go up, the cap goes up -- meaning households would be hit earlier by changes in the wholesale market. But when prices come back down again, so would the cap, Brearley argues. And in the long-term, the real way for the country to escape this volatility is to diversify its energy sources and push harder on getting to net zero target. The energy price crunch prompted chancellor Rishi Sunak to announce yesterday that 28 million electricity customers will have £200 knocked off their bills in October. But the money must be repaid in £40 annual instalments over the next five years, and has been criticised as a “ buy now pay later” scheme. Council tax payers in England in bands A to D will receive a rebate of £150 from their bills in April, which will not have to be paid back, while separate sums have been set aside for devolved governments in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. Yesterday, the Bank of England warned that UK households face the worst squeeze on their disposable incomes for at least 30 years, with real post-tax labour income expected to shrink by 2% this year. With inflation rising to 7.5 per cent, taxes increasing in April, economic growth slowing and unemployment rising, the economic outlook is darkening.... with Thursday’s rise in UK interest rates adding to pressure on borrowers. Also coming up today The latest US jobs report is expected to show a sharp slowdown in hiring at America’s firms last month, due to the surge in Omicron cases and a slowdown at businesses. Economists predict employment in January slowed to a crawl, or possible even turned negative. Adam Cole of RBC Capital Markets explains: The median expectation for the headline change in payrolls is +150K, but the real expectation is almost certainly much weaker than this. After a very weak private payroll report this week, and comments from several Federal Reserve officials that the employment report could be an outlier, market expectations may now be centred on a negative headline number, Cole says. European stock markets are set to open higher, after Amazon beat profit expectations last night, and announced it will hike the price of its Prime service in the US as it passes on higher shipping and wage costs. Amazon shares jumped in after-hours trading, shortly after Facebook parent company Meta posted the biggest one-day loss in history for a US company, with more than $230bn wiped off its value after disappointing results The agenda 8.30am GMT: Eurozone construction PMI for January 9am GMT: UK car sales for January 9.30am GMT: UK construction PMI report for January 10am GMT: Eurozone retail sales for December 1.30pm GMT: US non-farm payroll report for JanuaryThe rollout of Greater Manchester’s clean air zone has been delayed until July. The mayor of Greater Manchester, Andy Burnham, had requested more time to allow local authorities to review plans after evidence suggested the city was unlikely to meet legal emissions limits by the original date of 2024. Evidence provided by Greater Manchester authorities suggested the impact of issues such as Covid-19 on supply chains and the price and availability of secondhand vehicles will make it harder for people to upgrade to cleaner vehicles, the government said. In a statement, the government said it had “carefully considered” Burnham’s request and that the environment secretary, George Eustice, had “agreed to allow a short delay”. It said: “This will allow Greater Manchester to provide further evidence and a revised plan by July setting out how it will deliver legal levels of NO2 [nitrogen dioxide] as soon as possible, and no later than 2026. “In making this decision, the environment secretary has made it clear that it is his priority to fulfil the government’s legal obligations to deliver compliance with NO2 limits in the shortest time possible.” The scheme, which would impose daily charges on some high-emission vehicles, excluding private cars, had been due to begin at the end of May. At a press conference, Burnham told reporters the 2024 deadline could not be met due to the pandemic. He said: “The vehicles just simply aren’t available to get the change in that time frame. So the risk with that situation is people can’t get the vehicle so even if they want to change and do the right thing they can’t. So then they’re just left hit with the charge.” Greater Manchester’s clean air zone will require lorries, buses and coaches that breach NO2 emission standards to pay £60 a day, while vans, taxis and minibuses will be charged between £7.50 and £10 a day. About 285,000 private cars licensed in the region that already breach air pollution limits are exempt from the plans. Burnham said his office and the 10 other local councils in the Greater Manchester Combined Authority (GMCA) would now look again at the scheme and present the government with another plan later in the year. On Wednesday, a war of words broke out in parliament over the scheme after Boris Johnson described the clean air zone plans as “completely unworkable” and said they would “do damage to businesses and residents”. Burnham said he had “never been the instigator nor the final decision-maker in this scheme”. The clean air zone was planned after the government ordered all regions to bring down air pollution by 2024. Campaigners have previously warned that pausing the clean air zone “would be a serious blow for people’s health”. There are 152 locations across the 10 local authority areas with illegal NO2 levels. Each year in Greater Manchester, more than 1,000 deaths have air pollution as a contributory cause, Burnham said.Cutting green levies on energy bills, or watering down the UK’s commitment to net-zero carbon emissions, would fail to help households with high energy prices and store up problems for the near future, analysts have warned. Ed Matthew, campaigns director at the E3G thinktank, said: “Cutting green levies to tackle the energy bills crisis would be utterly self-defeating. It would only keep the UK addicted to gas for longer. The only cure is to ramp up clean energy investment and eliminate energy waste. That is the permanent solution to bring down energy bills. Any politician working against that is directly undermining the interests of their constituents and likely to be in the pocket of the fossil fuel lobby.” Green levies work to provide investment for insulation and other energy efficiency measures, and to support incentives for renewable energy. The energy company obligation, at about £1bn a year, provides insulation and other energy efficiency for poor households, and has saved about £11.7bn in total on fuel bills for lower-income households, but has been threatened by the Treasury in an effort to cut bills. Levies on bills that support energy efficiency and renewables are falling, from £172 last year, or 15% of fuel bills, to about £153 on bills, according to recent figures from Ofgem. Jan Rosenow, a director of the Regulatory Assistance Project, said: “Calls for cutting green levies are misplaced and a kneejerk reaction not supported by the evidence. Past levy-funded programmes have in fact reduced energy bills, as analysis has shown time and time again. Cutting levies now would leave customers paying more in the long term.” Reducing green levies has been tried before – the then prime minister David Cameron famously instructed his ministers to “cut the green crap” in 2013. That move, according to research from Carbon Brief, has meant the UK’s domestic energy bills are now £2.5bn a year higher than they would have been if the green incentives had been left intact. Yet even with the poor investment in insulation since Cameron’s decision, analysis shows energy efficiency has cut the UK’s energy bills by about £1,000 a year. Renewable energy is also now much cheaper, with the costs of wind turbines and solar panels plummeting in recent years. This has helped renewable energy companies make a significant net contribution to reducing the UK’s electricity prices, as the cost of gas has soared. Wind and solar paid back £160m in the final quarter of 2021 because they receive an agreed price, called a strike price, for their energy. When the wholesale price is higher than the strike price, generators pay back the difference, and this is reflected in lower bills for consumers in subsequent quarterly periods. The payback could reach £770m by the end of winter, or £27 per customer on the average bill. Blaming high energy prices on renewable generation is “seriously misinformed”, the chief representative of the UK’s wind industry has said. Dan McGrail, chief executive of the trade body RenewableUK, said: “The UK needs to phase out fossil fuels as fast as possible to provide long-term energy security and certainty for consumers. Figures published by Ofgem show that green levies are falling, so any attempt to blame renewables and net zero [for high energy prices] is seriously misinformed. Let’s be clear: this is a crisis caused by the soaring cost of gas.” He added: “The escape route from volatile and uncontrollable gas prices couldn’t be clearer. Investing in our green future secures low-cost reliable power as well as getting the UK to net zero as fast as possible.” Producing more gas in the North Sea, which some have also called for, would do little or nothing to reduce energy prices in the UK, because any additional gas would be sold on international markets to the highest bidder, analysts added.Seventy years after becoming monarch far sooner than she could have anticipated, the Queen will mark the anniversary of her accession on Sunday at Sandringham, where her father George VI died aged 56 in 1952. Though it has long been her custom to mark this milestone at the Norfolk estate, this year has added poignancy. The Duke of Edinburgh, her “strength and stay” during 73 years of marriage, and who broke news to her of the king’s death while they were thousands of miles away at a Kenyan game lodge, is no longer at her side. The times they spent together privately at Wood Farm on the Sandringham estate were, perhaps, the nearest the couple ever got to normality, with a lack of formality, and where the liveried army of staff ever present at other royal residences are absent, allowing for greater privacy. So it is at Sandringham that she will spend the day in private, without him, and with none of the fanfare of June’s planned platinum jubilee bank holiday celebrations. But a platinum jubilee is unprecedented in British history, and rare elsewhere. So, to mark accession day, Buckingham Palace on Friday released images and footage taken two weeks ago of the monarch viewing memorabilia from bygone royal jubilees. Taken in the Oak Room at Windsor Castle, they show the Queen, accompanied by her dorgi, Candy, laughing at cards, including a golden jubilee letter from a nine-year-old boy called Chris, titled “A Recipe for a Perfect Queen”. Its list of ingredients included “500ml of royal blood”, a “dab of jewels and posh gowns” and “a dash of loyalty”. “That’s quite fun, isn’t it,” the 95-year-old monarch remarked. Platinum jubilee cards were also on display, as was a fan presented to Queen Victoria to mark her golden jubilee in 1887 and signed by members of her family including her eldest child, the Princess Royal, known as Vicky to her relatives, and granddaughter Princess Alix, later the Tsarina of Russia, and the then prime minister, the Marquess of Salisbury. The celebrations come at a difficult time for the monarch, who has been seen less in public since being ordered to rest by doctors, and who spent a night in hospital in October undergoing tests. She will soon mark the 20th anniversaries of the deaths of her sister and mother, who died during her golden jubilee year in 2002; Princess Margaret on 9 February, and the Queen Mother on 30 March. The first anniversary of Prince Philip’s death, aged 99, is on 9 April. The Duke of York’s legal travails have also intensified in recent weeks as he fights a civil sexual assault lawsuit in the US, forcing his mother to make the difficult decision to strip her second son of his royal patronages and official use of his HRH style, to distance the monarchy from the court case. Prince Andrew has denied the allegations. The fall out from any trial, should it proceed in the autumn, threatens to tarnish her jubilee year. Another possible cloud on the horizon is the publication of the memoirs of the outspoken Duke of Sussex, also planned for the autumn. “Obviously 70 years is a massive milestone for a British monarch, but for the Queen on a personal level it is still, even after 70 years, a time for reflection, it also being the anniversary of her father’s death,” said Joe Little, managing editor of Majesty magazine. “Clearly, with the passage of time that becomes easier to bear, but nevertheless their bond was close and she has said herself he died far too young.” Her mind will, no doubt, cast back to the dramatic – and traumatic – time when, at the very beginning of an official overseas tour, she famously climbed up the ladder to Treetops Lodge, Nyeri, on the night of 6 February and descended the next morning a Queen, changing into mourning black during the hurried journey home. “The irony was, she was among the last to learn of the death of the king because of how isolated she was and how communications were at that time,” said Little. “This is a year of first for the Queen as a widow, I’m sure adding the poignancy for 6 February.” The extended four-day bank holiday platinum jubilee weekend will begin on 2 June and will include trooping the colour, a service of thanksgiving at St Paul’s cathedral, a day at the Derby, a star-studded concert at Buckingham Palace, and the Big Jubilee Lunch. In the tradition of royal jubilees, following coronation chicken and victoria sponge, a platinum pudding competition is under way to create a dessert fit for royalty. The Queen browsed through images of some early entries during the Windsor display. Her verdict? “Looks like they’re all going to end with crowns on them,” she said.Boris Johnson’s inner circle imploded so spectacularly in recent days that only one close political confidante from the early days of No 10 remains: his wife, Carrie Johnson. The most powerful prime ministerial spouse in recent memory, the 33-year-old Johnson has a job of her own for a wildlife charity, but multiple sources from Downing Street past and present say her influence on the prime minister’s operation is undeniable. In the recent clearout, two of her allies, Henry Newman and Simone Finn, appear – so far – to have kept their jobs. And those who know her say she is determined to keep Johnson in Downing Street, despite the scandals over No 10 parties – some of which she attended – and the funding of No 11 flat refurbishment, which was her project with celebrity designer Lulu Lytle. The flat refurb, involving gold wallpaper and a £112,000 price tag, has seen critics brand her “Carrie Antoinette”, a label she is known to dislike. But one former Downing Street insider says there was a different nickname for her – Ann Boleyn. Her rivals cast her as the much younger wife trying to have too much political say and manipulate an egotistical leader. Former Downing Street insiders report feeling Carrie could make her husband change his mind, sometimes overnight, on an issue they thought was already agreed. The prime minister would also tell aides that if he didn’t take a particular course of action, it would anger his wife. They also reported Johnson himself receiving scores of messages from her during the working day - and Carrie Johnson repeatedly calling his staff, insisting the prime minister be hauled out of meetings to talk to her. Those political aides who have crossed her – former strategist Dominic Cummings, and for a while, election guru Sir Lynton Crosby – have certainly found themselves cast out, while many on the right side of her have prospered politically, including friends such as Nadine Dorries, the culture secretary. But there is more than a whiff of sexism about such descriptions, according to the female Tory MPs she has befriended. It is also acknowledged even by some of her friends, though, that she has tried to have her say on policy issues, texting or WhatsApping ministers directly to share her views. This is mostly about her interest in the environment, which has given her a bond with the prime minister’s father, Stanley, and the wealthy Tory peer, Zac Goldsmith. The most controversial claim is that she was behind the government’s decision to repatriate the animals of Pen Farthing from Afghanistan to the UK, which a Foreign Office email suggests was authorised by the prime minister – something he rejects. A friend says that she strongly denied having anything to do with it, telling them that women and children should be the priority and that it was a complex issue. One person who knows Symonds well says she is more interested in cutting plastic waste than net zero, but that she is “very genuine”. They claim her job for the Aspinall Foundation, a conservation charity behind two safari parks in Kent, is a consuming one, from which she is not taking maternity leave. Her focus at the moment is on the charity’s campaign to get elephants repatriated to Africa, and trying strike a deal with Netflix for a documentary about it. Friends say she is “tremendously fun and entertaining”, with definitive views of her own. They describe her as sending volleys of WhatsApp messages one evening, falling out the next day and then being back in touch as if nothing had happened after that. Another person who knows her from Warwick university days as a theatre and art history student says she has always been the “very definition of capricious”. In this context, the Mirror has described the prime minister’s wife as “addicted to parties” – with three she reportedly attended during lockdown named in the Sue Gray report and now under police investigation. These include a Downing Street garden party on 20 May 2020, a gathering in the Cabinet room for Johnson’s birthday on 19 June 2020 and a party in the No 11 flat in November 2020. This was the night of Cummings’s departure from Downing Street with No 10 staff reportedly hearing music blaring out into the room below, believing it to be a “victory party”. She is known to have a penchant for Abba, with Finn having hosted an Abba-themed 30th birthday party for her. This has led to awkward scenes with the prime minister, with one insider saying he had been “made to dance like a performing monkey to Abba” with her much younger friends. A few journalists have been known to socialise in the Downing Street flat and at Chequers, the prime ministerial country retreat in Buckinghamshire. During the Euros 2020 last year, the Johnsons entertained the Sun editor, Victoria Newton, and a political journalist there to watch the England v Scotland football game. No 10 said the rule of six was followed at all times. Those who know the Johnsons say they prefer to be at Chequers at weekends and, occasionally, Carrie stays on after Boris has returned to London. As well as having a one-year-old and a newborn, her own job, and a husband who is in serious trouble, a major part of her life is also Dilyn the dog. She is said to dote on the Jack Russell cross, despite those who have been around him describing him as a “handful”, who snaps at ankles and was once blamed for urinating in an aide’s handbag. Cummings and several other sources have spoken of her fury at a media story suggesting the Johnsons might want to rehome Dilyn, with some in No 10 discussing the possibility of a complaint to the press regulator. And as for her relationship with Johnson , an adviser who worked on the prime minister’s leadership campaign saw him occasionally frustrated with her, but also at that time having the appearance of a “devoted puppy” towards her. Certainly, he backed her over Cummings, when the pair clashed in November 2020, leading to his departure. Carrie Johnson’s spokeswoman said Mrs Johnson had “for some time been the subject of a targeted briefing campaign to discredit her”. She added that “Carrie had absolutely no involvement in the Pen Farthing evacuation” and that she did not discuss it with the campaigners, the prime minister or his aides. Since his departure from government, Cummings has been open about trying to remove his former boss and wife from No 10, describing her as a “wrong un” and someone who was leading the premiership towards “inevitable disaster”. More recently, Cummings has claimed she was initially a strong supporter of him joining the Downing Street operation as she had a “good sense of PM’s limitations”. But he added: “ I think she thought once the majority was won, she should take over as the main influence on him with her people in key roles below.” With almost all the prime minister’s most longstanding aides now gone, Carrie Johnson has little competition any more. But with Johnson’s premiership most likely entering its end phase, how much is that position of influence worth any more? Anna Soubry, a former Tory minister who has worked with Carrie Johnson in the past, said she thought it was a shame that she would now be forever associated with Boris Johnson’s likely short-lived premiership. “I think she is a remarkably talented, hugely able, lovely person, but she has hitched her wagon to this disaster of a man. And it actually shows you in a way that she is honourable, that she has stood by him.”My father, David Mallinson, who has died aged 95, began his career as an artist in London in the 1950s, at first painting only at weekends and in the evenings, while during the day he worked as a teacher. But his paintings, many of London streets and squares, soon found a ready market at the Quadrant Gallery, then in Trafalgar Square, as well as being shown at the Royal Academy, Royal Society of British Artists, the Royal Institute of Oil Painters and the Royal Society of Portrait Painters. Influenced by Nicolas de Staël, he turned to semi-abstraction and landscape, exhibiting at the Piccadilly gallery. His career prospered, and in 1980, he was made head of the Art School of Isleworth Polytechnic (now West Thames College) in west London, and built up a number of design courses, one of which, a higher national diploma in art and design, had an international reputation, with 90% of graduates obtaining a job with firms such as Saatchi &amp; Saatchi within six months of graduation. David was elected as the West London secretary of the Greater London Arts Association (GLAA). He retired in 1990, and in 2003 had a retrospective exhibition at Sally Hunter Fine Art, where 26 of his 30 exhibited paintings were sold. David was born in Carlisle, the son of William, deputy manager of the Midland Bank in the town, and Mary, a school teacher in the nearby village of Great Salkeld, where the family lived. While at Queen Elizabeth grammar school, Penrith, David was an accomplished rock-climber, runner and tennis-player. But he also realised that he wanted to paint, and in 1943 gained a place at the Slade School in London. His studies were interrupted by wartime service when the following year he was commissioned into the Black Watch. He was seconded to the Frontier Force Regiment, serving in Burma (where he was machine-gunned by the RAF in a friendly fire incident) and then in Kashmir, the Dodecanese islands, Egypt, Palestine (where he survived a terrorist attack) and Germany, where he was in charge of Bielefeld station. In Rhodes, he had briefly met his future (Greek) wife, Tina Tusgioglu, corresponding with her for four years from his postings until he married her in Rome in 1950, having decided to continue his studies at the Slade. The years following his graduation in 1952 were productive. While Tina began her career at the Foreign Office’s information research department, he began teaching art, first at schools in north London, and then at Isleworth Polytechnic. In 2007, David and Tina began dividing their time between London and the south of France. Following an exhibition at the town hall of Cagnes-sur-Mer, simple old age meant that he had to cease painting in his last four years. He is survived by Tina and by two sons, Adrian and me. Our sister, Leila, died in 2017.Our personal style is always evolving – as we get older and our lifestyle changes, so do the clothes that we wear. We would like to hear from people who have radically changed their dress sense later in life. Did you undergo a style revolution in your 30s, 40s, 50s or beyond – from office wear to punk, or from streetwear to suits? What prompted the change and how has it affected your life since? Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists may be in contact to find out more about your submission, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.Police have arrested the suspect in a violent altercation that badly injured a San Francisco 49ers fan after last weekend’s NFC championship game between the 49ers and the Los Angeles Rams at LA’s SoFi stadium. Inglewood police lieutenant Nicole Loudermilk confirmed that the suspect was taken into custody Thursday night, but released no further details. The incident occurred on Sunday during a confrontation in the parking lot of the stadium after the NFC championship game between the Rams and the 49ers, and raised concerns about security at the upcoming Super Bowl to be played at SoFi next week. One man injured in the fight, 40-year-old Daniel Luna, remained in a medically induced coma, California officials had said Thursday. James T Butts Jr, the Inglewood mayor, said that video of the incident showed Luna mingling in a crowd of about 16 people at SoFi stadium, most of them wearing what appeared to be 49ers jerseys, when he pushed a man wearing a Rams jersey from behind, Butts said. Before that, Butts said, “there didn’t seem to be any hostilities”. When Luna turned to walk away, the man pushed Luna back, the mayor said. When Luna turned, the man punched him in the mouth, causing Luna to fall to the ground and hit the back of his head, Butts said, estimating that the encounter lasted less than five seconds. “It looked like a small altercation that went very bad,” he said. “From one punch and someone falling, hitting their head on the ground. It wasn’t like you had people ganging up on somebody and beating them.” Luna’s face was fractured and he was placed in a medically induced coma to prevent internal bleeding from swelling his brain, Butts said. The mayor said the video isn’t clear enough to provide a description of the suspect but he was seen talking to some people in a car. Police want to find the car and talk to the occupants to see if they were involved, Butts said. Security won’t be increased because of the incident, the mayor said. “I’m very comfortable there was sufficient security” in the parking lot, he said. “There is plenty of security in the parking lot. You’re not going to stop every altercation, argument between fans. It’s just not going to happen.“ Next week, the Rams will welcome the Cincinnati Bengals for Super Bowl 56 at the SoFi stadium.The US economy appeared to shake off the Omicron variant in January as employers added 467,000 new jobs, the labor department reported on Friday. Data for the report was collected in mid-January when the Omicron variant was at its peak in the US. While some economists – and the White House – had predicted a dramatic slump in jobs growth, the number of jobs added was far better than expected. The unemployment rate remained low overall at 4%, down from a pandemic high of 14.8% in April 2020 but up from 3.9% in December. The news comes at a sensitive time for the Biden administration and the Federal Reserve. The US economy is wrestling with soaring inflation and signs of an economic slowdown after last year’s strong rebound. Joe Biden celebrated the jobs news in a speech in Washington. “America is back to work,” Biden said. “History’s been made here.” His comments were in stark contrast to those made by White House officials earlier in the week. In a highly unusual move, the White House sought to manage expectations ahead of the latest jobs figure release, cautioning that Friday’s jobs report could be “confusing” because of the timing of the survey and suggesting that the US would add few or even lose jobs in January. Covid infections have fallen sharply across the US since the report was compiled. The government report follows on from a survey conducted by ADP, the US’s largest private payroll supplier, which reported that companies cut jobs in January for the first time in more than a year. Payrolls fell by 301,000 for the month with more than half the losses coming from the pandemic-sensitive leisure and hospitality industries. “The labor market recovery took a step back at the start of 2022 due to the effect of the Omicron variant and its significant, though likely temporary, impact to job growth,” said Nela Richardson, ADP’s chief economist. There were signs that the jobs market is still recovering ahead of Friday’s report. On Thursday, the labor department reported that new unemployment claims fell to 238,000 for the final week in January, dropping 23,000 from the week prior, a second straight week of falls.My father-in-law, Abdul Quddus, who has died aged 80, was for many years a senior education officer at Leeds city council. He and his wife, Parveen, were also social entrepreneurs, setting up secular organisations that focused on enabling all communities to participate fully in the city’s social, cultural and civic life. During the 1980s and 90s, communities in Leeds originating from south-east Asia still had poor educational and work outcomes, with high unemployment and low-skilled jobs. Abdul worked to address that by securing government funding for and setting up Bangladeshi, Pakistani and other centres in the city, run by members of those communities and helping them access adult education, welfare and housing support. The centres were non-religious, with equal rights and responsibilities for women and young people. Abdul and Parveen also helped to set up voluntary and community organisations such as the Bengali cultural society Purobi, a women’s empowerment project, Asha, and a Bengali language school for children. Born in Pabna, Bangladesh, Abdul was the son of Nurul Islam and Halima Nur. After school he gained a BA from the Agriculture College in Dhaka (1964), then a master’s (1968) from Mymensingh Agricultural University (now called Bangladesh Agricultural University). He married Parveen Akhtar in 1972, and they travelled to Leeds that year. He obtained an MA in economics from Leeds University in 1973, with a focus on rural economics of developing countries. While working towards a PhD he volunteered at Leeds Citizens Advice Bureau, leading to a job as an education officer at Leeds city council, from 1983, rising to senior education officer. As well as the usual duties he worked on specific projects to support those newly arrived from south-east Asia. In 1988 he created 40 teaching assistant posts for members of those communities so that parents could better support their children in school. He also helped to appoint a number of black and minority ethnic headteachers in Leeds. Thanks to his work, today many people of Bangladeshi descent living in Leeds are in professional jobs, in academia or successful entrepreneurs. Abdul also ensured more individuals from Bame communities gained the relevant qualifications to take up youth worker and education jobs in the council. After retiring in 1999, he undertook consultancy work on mentoring projects for disadvantaged young people. This was funded through the EU, and he travelled to a number of European countries, including Hungary, Greece and Norway. A humanist, Abdul loved Bengali classical music and poetry, and the writings of Rabindranath Tagore. He and Parveen would appear in Bengali plays through the Purobi cultural society. A role model for young people, Abdul would cite the words of Barack Obama “Don’t wait for good things to happen to you. If you go out and make some good things happen, you will fill the world with hope, you will fill yourself with hope.” Abdul is survived by Parveen, their daughter, Archi, and grandson, Sobitha.The former fiance of the late television presenter Caroline Flack has been jailed for a campaign of harassment against the journalist Dan Wootton. The judge, Jeremy Richardson QC, said Andrew Brady’s claims that the former executive editor of the Sun newspaper was in some way responsible for Flack’s death were “wholly irrational”. Brady, 31, from Sheffield, was jailed for four months after admitting harassment at a hearing this week. Richardson told Brady at Sheffield crown court that his social media attacks on Wootton, a MailOnline columnist and GB News presenter, had “everything to do with your craving for celebrity status and your irritation that the press were not in the least interested in your somewhat uninteresting life”. “This must stop,” the judge added. He said Wootton was a friend of the Love Island presenter, who died in February 2020, aged 40. Richardson noted that, given the time the defendant had served on remand, he would be released in the “very near future”. He imposed a 10-year restraining order banning Brady from contacting Wootton, posting anything about him online or going within 200 yards of his home or workplace. Describing some of the social media posts and messages about Wootton as “utterly outrageous”, Richardson warned Brady he faced a prison sentence measured in years if he breached the order. Last August, an inquest ruled that Flack killed herself after learning she would be prosecuted for allegedly assaulting her boyfriend, Lewis Burton, after a long struggle with “fluctuating mental health” that was exacerbated by the stress of fame. • This article was amended on 4 February 2022. An earlier version incorrectly gave Brady’s age as 51. In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org.Mark Zuckerberg’s virtual reality business is to introduce a mandatory distance between people’s digital avatars after warnings that the social media tycoon’s plans for a metaverse will lead to a new wave of online harassment. Zuckerberg, the founder of Facebook, is making a multibillion-dollar bet on VR as the next source of growth for his empire but his strategy has already been dogged by warnings that virtual worlds are rife with abuse. In December a user testing Horizon Worlds, a VR app owned by Zuckberg’s Meta business, complained of being groped online and called for a protective bubble around their avatar, or digital representation of themselves. “Sexual harassment is no joke on the regular internet but being in VR adds another layer that makes the event more intense,” said the user. Meta announced on Friday that it is introducing personal boundaries on two VR apps: Horizon Worlds, where people can meet fellow VR users and design their own world; and Horizon Venues, which hosts VR events such as comedy shows or music gigs. The company said the distance between people will be the VR equivalent of four feet. “A personal boundary prevents anyone from invading your avatar’s personal space. If someone tries to enter your personal boundary, the system will halt their forward movement as they reach the boundary,” said the company. Meta is introducing the 4ft boundary as a default setting and will consider further changes such as letting people set their own boundaries. “We think this will help to set behavioural norms – and that’s important for a relatively new medium like VR,” said Meta. The UK data watchdog has also said it is seeking clarification from Meta about parental controls on the company’s popular Oculus Quest 2 VR headset, as campaigners warned that it could breach an online children’s safety code. The Information Commissioner’s Office said it would talk to Meta after research by the Center for Countering Digital Hate, a campaign group, flagged multiple instances of abuse on VRChat, a top-selling social app for Oculus headset users. Zuckerberg renamed his company from Facebook Inc to Meta last year in a signal that the future of his business lies in the metaverse, a concept where the physical and digital worlds combine via virtual and augmented reality. Although the notion of a fully fledged metaverse is many years away, Meta already announced a $50m (£37m) investment programme to ensure the concept meets regulatory and legal concerns, distributing the money among organisations and academic institutions such as Seoul National University and Women in Immersive Tech.